Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 301]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 702, Clause XLI.1 (53 P.S. § 65741.1) of the Second
Class Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for
the Township of Upper Providence, County of Montgomery, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters
1 through 182, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Upper
Providence, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of
the Township of Upper Providence," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of legislation in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such legislation and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Upper Providence,
and it is the intention of said Board of Supervisors that each such provision
contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears
in said Code. Only such provisions of former legislation as are omitted from
this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3
below, and only new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below,
shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as
provided in § 1-16 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of Upper Providence and in force on the date of
the adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed
as of the effective date given in § 1-16 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to January 15, 1990.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the township, or other instruments or evidence
of the township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the township.
K. Any ordinance providing for requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance, or part of an ordinance, providing for laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other
public place or property or designating various streets as public
highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; or providing for a
system of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the
construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any
part of a system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new ordinances prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances; new
provisions.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any provisions regulating vehicles and traffic in the Township of Upper
Providence.
R. Any provisions providing for pensions for police officers.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances of the township for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board
of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if
the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, the following changes and revisions of a
substantive nature are hereby made to various ordinances included in
the Code. These changes are made to bring provisions into conformity
with the desired policies of the Board of Supervisors, and it is the intent
of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as part of
the Code as if the legislation so changed have been previously formally
amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be
deemed to be in effect as of the effective date Of the Code specified in
§ 1-15.1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-6B, the following sections were added or amended: §§ 51-1,
51-4, 53-3A(4), 53-12, 58-2A, 58-4, 60-1, 60-2, 60-3, 60-4, 60-6, 62-3, 62-4, 62-5, 62-7,
62-8, 62-9, 85-28D, 85-31, 85-34B, 85-36, 85-37, 89-15, 89-16, 89-17, 89-18, 89-22, 94-6A,
99-2, 99-16C, 107-1, 107-4, 107-5, 107-7, 107-8, 112-4, 122-6, 124-1B(6), 124-10, 126-3,
128-4, 130-1, 130-2, 130-3, 135-2, 143-8, 143-10, 143-11C, 143-17, 143-28, 151-9, 154-4C,
154-10E, 154-55B(3), 160-3, 160-5, 160-13B, 160-14, 160-19, 160-20, 176-2, 176-4A,
176-10, 182-14, 182-20, 182-24, 182-32D, E and F, 182-85, 182-92 and 182-98. In
addition, the following sections were deleted: original Section II of Ord. No. 149; the
definitions of "code of regulations," "common elements," "condominium," "council,"
"declaration," "declaration plan," "declaration of revocation" and "plan" and original
Article VI of Ord. No. 181; and original Section 120 of Ord. No. 180.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Designation of township officer.
As used in the Code, the term "township officer" includes the Township
Manager, Code Enforcement Officer, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector and
Public Works Director, as designated by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 1-10. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Manager/Secretary and shall
remain there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such
copies shall be certified to by the Township Manager/Secretary, as provided
by law, and such certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the
Township Manager/Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the
same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-11. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code, or in supplements made to the Code, are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-7 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 1-11
1:6
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-12. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Manager/Secretary, or someone
authorized and directed by him or her, to keep up-to-date the certified
copies of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office
of the Township Manager/Secretary for the use of the public. All changes
in said Code and all legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors
subsequent to the effective date of this codification which the Board of
Supervisors shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally
adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes or new
legislation are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time
such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-13. Publication of notices.
The Township Manager/Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published in the manner required a notice of the introduction and of the
adoption of the Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the township.
The enactment and application of this ordinance, coupled with the
publication of the notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law,
and the availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall
be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code, or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the township
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600 plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-15. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article or part
thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the intent of
the Board of Supervisors that this ordinance and the Code would have
been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence,
subsection, section, article or part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:7
§ 1-16. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after September 17, 1990.
§ 1-16 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 1-16
1:8
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9

ARTICLE I
Short Title and Definitions
§ 2-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code
of the Township of Upper Providence, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania."
§ 2-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the responsibilities and
authority of the various officers, administrative personnel and units within
the government of the Township of Upper Providence and to set forth
certain authorities, policies and procedures as the basic body of
administrative practice and procedure. This chapter does not supersede any
applicable state or federal authority covering any issue addressed in this
chapter.
§ 2-3. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE — The function of implementing the policies, ordinances
or resolutions of the Board of Supervisors.
ADVISORY — The function of gathering research, compiling facts and
making informed recommendations to the Board of Supervisors, the
Township Manager or as otherwise designated by ordinance or resolution.
BOARD — The elected five-member Board of Supervisors of Upper
Providence Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
CHAIRMAN — The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors.
DEPARTMENT — One of the major organizational divisions of the executive
branch of Township government which is charged with a specific set of
public service activities, duties, or operational responsibilities.
DEPARTMENT HEADS — All senior personnel in those units within the
Township government under the authority of the Township manager.
LAW — All applicable statutes of the United States of America and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ORDINANCE — All local laws or regulations enacted by the Board of
Supervisors.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Providence, County of Montgomery,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Chief Executive Officer of Upper Providence
Township.
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-3
1:11

ARTICLE II
Organization and Rules of Procedure
§ 2-4. General.
The Board shall be comprised of five supervisors elected on staggered terms
as regulated by the Second Class Township Code.2In the case of every
reference in this chapter to a vote of the Board of Supervisors, it shall at
all times be the case that business can only be transacted upon a vote of
the full majority of the Board (minimum three votes to transact business)
regardless of the number of Supervisors present at the meeting in which
the vote occurs.
§ 2-5. Organization meeting and presiding officer.
§ 2-6. Meetings.
A. The Board shall organize during the first week of January at a time and
place to be advertised. Meetings will generally be held at the Township
Municipal Building.
B. At this organization meeting, the Board shall elect by an absolute
majority vote of the total membership of the Board a Chairperson and
Vice Chairperson. Until such election of the Chairperson is
accomplished, the Township Manager shall serve as presiding officer.
The Board may also elect such other officers as it may deem
appropriate.
C. In the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson shall preside at
Board meetings. In the event of the absence of both the Chairperson
and Vice Chairperson, the Chairperson's functions and duties shall be
performed by the Supervisor with the most seniority in office.
A. Public notice. Provisions governing public notice of meetings shall be in
accordance with the Second Class Township Code and the Pennsylvania
Sunshine Law.3
B. Public access. All Supervisor meetings, with the exception of executive
sessions, shall be publicly advertised and open to the public through
various mediums including, but not limited to cablecasting, webcasting,
live streaming or in person.
C. Regular meetings. The Board shall hold regular meetings at least once a
month and set these meetings by resolution as part of the annual
organization meeting.
D. Special meetings. The Chairperson may call a special meeting upon his/
her own motion or upon the request of the Township Manager. The
notice shall be published in a local newspaper and include the
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
3. Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-6
1:13
§ 2-7. Board agenda.
§ 2-8. Conduct of business.
meeting's time, location and a brief statement explaining the nature
of each discussion item. Special meetings require 24 hours of advance
public notice.
E. Emergency meetings. To the extent permitted by the Second Class
Township Code, the Board may hold and take action at an emergency
meeting at any time. The Chairperson may call an emergency meeting
upon his/her own motion by upon the request of the Township Manager,
provided that a quorum is present.
F. Executive sessions. The Board may hold executive session in
accordance to specified parameters outlined in the Second Class
Township Code and all relevant statutes governing confidential
meetings, most notably, the Pennsylvania Sunshine Law.
A. The Township Manager shall prepare a proposed agenda for any
regular or special Board meeting.
B. For any written or special Board agenda, the Township Manager shall
forward a copy to all Board members no later than 24 hours in advance
of said meeting, except where an emergency deems this impracticable.
At the same time, a copy of the proposed agenda shall be made
available to the public by posting it on the Township's website.
C. At a minimum, the title of any ordinance or resolution for Board
consideration (regardless whether a new ordinance, revision of an
existing ordinance, or repeal of an ordinance or part thereof) shall be
included as part of the agenda.
D. The proposed agenda may be amended at the meeting by a majority of
the members present.
A. At the start of any Board meeting, the Chairperson shall take the chair
and call the meeting to order. If a quorum is present, the Chairperson
shall proceed with the order of business as prescribed in the agenda. If
a quorum is not present, the Chairperson shall recess for a maximum 30
minutes, and, if no quorum has developed by that time, he/she shall
declare the meeting adjourned and upon his own motion establish a
new meeting date. Those present may discuss agenda items but may
not take any formal action. For purposes of a five-person board, a
quorum is three. All action voted upon requires a vote of three or
greater in order to carry.
B. Unless a majority of the Board votes otherwise, the order of business
for each regular meeting shall be as follows:
(1) Call to order and pledge of allegiance.
§ 2-6 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 2-8
1:14
§ 2-9. Rules of procedure.
(2) Motion to approve Board Agenda.
(3) Special announcements or ceremonial presentations.
(4) Executive session report.
(5) Approval of bill list.
(6) Approval of minutes from prior meeting and any intervening
special meetings.
(7) Receive public comments on any item not on the posted agenda
(comment on agenda items will be taken separately prior to the
Board taking formal action).
(8) Conduct public hearing, if required by state statutes.
(9) Old business.
(10) New business.
(11) Township Manager and Department Head reports.
(12) Consultant reports.
(13) Supervisors comments.
(14) Adjournment.
A. The Chairperson shall be responsible for the orderly conduct of
business at each Board meeting and shall preserve order and decorum
at such meetings. The Board may designate the Chief of Police or
another attending police officer as the sergeant at arms or any other
individual the Board in its direction may select.
B. The Board, at its organization meeting, shall adopt rules governing its
procedure. This may be Robert's Rules or some other set of rules that
similarly address parliamentary procedure. The Chairperson shall
announce all decisions of the Board and shall decide all questions of
order without debate, subject, however, to an appeal by any Board
member. Any ruling by the Chairperson may be overruled by a majority
of the members present.
C. Every Supervisor desiring to speak shall address the Chairperson and,
upon recognition, shall confine their remarks to the questions under
debate, avoiding all indecorous language or personal attacks. Any
Supervisor, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking,
unless it is for the purpose of calling such person to order. If a member
of the Board, while speaking, is called to order, that person shall cease
speaking until the question of order is determined. When two or more
members request the floor at the same time, the Chairperson shall state
the order in which they will be recognized.
§ 2-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-9
1:15
§ 2-10. Public participation.
D. The roll of members shall be called alphabetically, except that the
Chairperson shall be called last and the Vice Chairperson next to last.
E. All votes of the Board on all proposed ordinances and on any other
matter, when requested by any Supervisor, shall be taken by roll call.
Otherwise, a simple voice vote shall be used.
F. No second shall be required for the Board to consider any proposed
action.
G. The Board may by majority vote adopt a set of by-laws to supplement
the rules of procedure and which would serve to add detail regarding
the Board's day to day functioning and its meeting procedures.
A. Citizens shall be provided the opportunity to address the Board on any
agenda item. Such opportunity to address the Board shall be
immediately prior to the final action of the Board thereon, or at the start
of the meeting at which such action shall be taken, at the preference of
the Board, unless that opportunity to be heard has theretofore been
provided either at a prior public hearing or meeting of the Board.
B. Any person making offensive, insulting, threatening, insolent,
slanderous or obscene remarks or who becomes boisterous or who
makes threats against any person or against public order or security
while in the Board meeting room shall be forthwith barred by the
Chairperson from further audience participation for the remainder of
the meeting.
§ 2-9 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 2-10
1:16
ARTICLE III
Township Officials
§ 2-11. Elected officers.
§ 2-12. Officers appointed by Board.
A. The Township officers elected by the Upper Providence electorate are:
(1) Members of the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Township Tax Collector.
(3) The Board of Auditors (when certified public accountant is used to
perform any of the duties of the Board of Auditors, such accountant
is appointed by the Board, not elected).
B. The terms of office, duties and powers of officers elected by the
Township electorate are covered in the Second Class Township Code.4
A. The Board of Supervisors shall select the following as principal
Township officers:
(1) Chairperson of the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Vice Chairperson of the Board of Supervisors.
(3) Township Manager.
(4) Township Secretary.
(5) Township Solicitor.
(6) Township Engineer.
(7) Township Treasurer.
(8) Certified public accountant (at Board's option).
B. The terms of office, duties and powers of the various officers referred to
in this section are provided for in the Second Class Township Code or by
the Upper Providence Township Code.
C. The Township Engineer and the Township Solicitor shall be appointed
by the Board of Supervisors at its organizational meeting or as soon
thereafter as practical. The terms of office of these two officers shall be
one year, but serve at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors and can
be removed at any time by majority vote.
D. All officers referred to in Subsection A of this section shall be
independently accountable to the Board of Supervisors for the
performance of their respective duties, except that the Board may, in its
discretion, direct by public vote that the Township Secretary, Township
4. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 2-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-12
1:17
§ 2-13. Compensation.
The compensation of the officers referred to in §§ 2-11 and 2-12 of the
chapter shall be provided for in the annual Township budget and adopted
by resolution, and any amendments to such resolution, and as otherwise
provided by law. Compensation shall not exceed the maximum set forth in
the Second Class Township Code.
§ 2-14. Oath of office.
Engineer and/or Township Treasurer report to and be accountable to
the Township Manager for the performance of their duties, as part
thereof.
E. In the event of the temporary absence or disability of any officer, the
Chairperson shall nominate, upon the advice and consent of the full
Board, an acting incumbent, who shall have ad interim power and
authority to perform the duties of that office.
F. In the event of a vacancy in any such office during the term of any such
officer, the Board shall elect and appoint an officer to fill the unexpired
term for such office.
A. Persons elected or appointed to any of the following Township offices,
before entering upon the duties of their office, shall take and subscribe
an oath or affirmation to perform the duties of their respective offices
with fidelity:
(1) Members of the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Township Treasurer, and Board of Auditors.
(3) Township Tax Collector.
(4) Township Manager.
(5) Township Secretary.
(6) Township Solicitor.
(7) Township Engineer.
(8) Police officers. Every member of the Police Department.
(9) Any employee assigned the responsibility for the enforcement of
laws, statutes or ordinances that affect the rights and privileges of
people or property including the Fire Marshal and Zoning and Code
Officers.
B. The form of oath of office may be prescribed by the Township Solicitor,
and the oath shall be taken and signed before a Judge, District Justice
or notary public of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. A copy of such
oath shall be filed with the Township Secretary within 10 days
thereafter.
§ 2-12 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 2-15
1:18
§ 2-15. Bonds.
§ 2-16. Powers of police officers.
§ 2-17. Other Board-appointed officers.
A. The Board may require, by resolution, that any Township officers and
deputies give official bonds in such sum as it may deem proper.
B. The Township shall pay all premiums upon surety bonds when such
bonds are given.
A. In addition to all other powers and prerogative conferred on policemen
by law, policemen shall be ex officio constables of the Township and
may, without warrant and on view, arrest and commit for hearing any
and all persons guilty of a breach of the peace, vagrancy, riotous or
disorderly conduct or drunkenness, or who may be engaged in the
commission of any unlawful act tending to imperil the personal security
or endanger the property of the citizens or violating any of the
ordinances of the Township for the violation of which a fine or penalty is
imposed.
B. Policemen shall have the authority to serve and execute all criminal
processes for the violation of the Township ordinances, which may be
issued by any District Justice of the Township, and shall charge the
same fees and costs as pertain by law to constables for similar services,
but such fees and costs shall be paid to the Township Treasurer for the
use of the Township.
A. The Township Manager shall nominate, and the Board shall appoint, the
Fire Marshal, the Zoning Officer and the Chief of Police. These
personnel shall be under the control of and shall be accountable to the
Township Manager.
B. During the temporary absence or disability of any of said officers, the
Manager, subject to ratification by the Board, may designate, by letter
filed with the Township Secretary, a qualified administrative officer of
the Township to perform such officer's duties during his temporary
absence or disability.
C. The Board of Supervisors will act by majority vote (majority of the full
Board) in appointing citizens to fill vacancies in all Boards where such
authority is provided by law, including the Planning Commission,
Vacancy Board, Municipal Authority, and Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 2-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-17
1:19

ARTICLE IV
Township Manager
§ 2-18. Position created.
The Executive Office of Township Manager is hereby created in Upper
Providence Township.
§ 2-19. Appointment and qualifications.
The Board shall appoint the Manager for a term subject to the limitations
of the Second Class Township Code.5 It shall have the authority to enter
into contracts with the Manager which may stipulate terms of employment
and severance pay; however, such contracts must confirm the right of the
Board to treat the manager as an at-will employee and dismiss him or her
at any time, subject to the severance provisions therein. The Manager shall
be chosen on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications. The
Board, by an affirmative vote of a majority of its members present at any
stated monthly meeting or at any special meeting called for such purpose,
can remove the Manager at any time, with or without cause.
§ 2-20. Powers and duties.
The Manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the
Township. He/she shall be responsible to the Board for the administration
of all municipal affairs placed in his charge. The Manager shall have the
following specific duties and the commensurate powers to carry out those
duties:
A. Serve as the Township Secretary and perform all duties and
responsibilities as specified in the Second Class Township Code.
B. Direct and administer all executive and non-legislative activities of the
Township, except as otherwise provided by statute or ordinance.
C. With the confirmation of the Board, appoint all department heads. Such
appointees shall serve at the pleasure of the Manager, subject to any
terms and conditions negotiated upon hire.
D. Prepare the agenda for all Board meetings and any special Board
committees that may be created from time to time. The Manager shall
attend all such meetings and have the right to participate in discussions
but shall have no voting privileges on any matter.
E. Prescribe such rules and regulations as are deemed necessary or
expedient for the conduct and operation of all departments and may
revoke, suspend or amend any rule or regulations of the Township
departments, as long as such rule or regulation is not an ordinance.
5. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 2-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-20
1:21
F. Appoint competent and qualified officers and employees to the staff and
have the power to assign, transfer, dismiss, suspend and discipline all
officers and employees in the various departments under his/her
control. The Manager shall have the power to authorize a department
head or officer responsible to him/her to appoint and remove
subordinates serving under that department head or officer.
G. Have the power to direct any department, division or bureau to perform
the work for any other department, division or bureau.
H. Promote the public good will and represent the Township before civic
associations, business, professional or governmental groups, the press
and interested citizens concerning the general affairs and
administrative functions of the Township.
I. Have the power to set aside any action by a department head or office
head and to supersede him in the functions of his department or office,
unless prohibited by law.
J. Prepare and present to the Board an annual report of the Township's
affairs, including a summary of reports of department heads and such
other reports as the Board shall require.
K. Assemble estimates of the financial needs and resources of the
Township for each ensuing year and prepare a program of activities
within the financial power of the Township, embodying in it a budget
document with proper supporting schedules and analyses.
L. Exercise control over the administration of the budget of the Township
and supervise the purchasing functions of the Township.
M. Examine or cause to be examined, without notice, the official conduct of
any officer, assistant, deputy, clerk or employee in any of the
departments or offices of the Township government, except that of
members of the Board or of the officers appointed by the Board.
N. Have the authority to designate himself or to assign any other employee
of the Township to perform the duties and exercise the functions of any
office or position under his jurisdiction during a vacancy or in the
absence or disability of an incumbent or where service is required,
appropriate to the personnel classification of the individual so assigned.
O. Act as ex officio member of all boards and commissions, but not have a
vote unless specifically provided by ordinance or resolution, when
permitted by law.
P. Have general supervision over all Township property and equipment
and its use by the public or by Township employees.
Q. Prepare and submit to the Board such reports dealing with financial,
administrative or other matters as the Board may request of him.
§ 2-20 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 2-20
1:22
§ 2-21. Delegation of authority.
R. Make such recommendations to the Board concerning Township policy
as he shall deem desirable or when instructed by the Board to do so. He
shall keep the Board fully informed as to the conduct of municipal
affairs and advise the Board as to the needs of the Township.
S. Be responsible for oversight of the enforcement of all ordinances and
regulations of the Township.
T. See that the provisions of all franchises, leases, contracts, permits and
privileges granted by the Township are fully observed and report to the
Board any violation thereof.
U. Assess both the short- and long-term problems and affairs of the
Township and recommend plans and courses of action to the Board.
V. Participate in the intergovernmental programs, monitor legislative
activities and keep abreast of current advances in management and
technology.
W. Perform such other duties as are required by the Board.
X. To enter into contracts that do not require competitive bidding where:
(1) The contract does not involve professional services;
(2) The contract is for a budgeted item;
(3) The contract involves less than $25,000.
Y. Contemporaneously with the Manager entering into any such contract,
all members of the Board of Supervisors will be advised generally of the
contract, its purpose, and the amount.
A. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the Manager is authorized and
empowered to delegate to any specific administrative officer the right
and power to stamp the name and position of the Township Manager on
the proper class of documents or papers, which shall have the same
force and effect as though the Township Manager had in person and by
his/her own act signed the document or paper.
B. In order to grant an administrative officer the authority set forth in this
section, the Township Manager shall file with the Township secretary
the name and title of the administrative officer so empowered and the
class of documents or papers to which the authority is to apply.
C. Upon a change of the Township Manager or an empowered
administrative officer, the authority theretofore given shall cease until
it shall have been regranted by the new Township Manager or to the
new administrative officer.
§ 2-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-22
1:23
§ 2-22. Temporary absence.
In the absence of the Manager, the Assistant Manager shall assume the
duties of the Manager with all of the rights and responsibilities of the
Manager as set forth herein. In addition, the Manager shall have the right
to delegate his authority to other qualified persons as warranted by a
particular situation. The Board of Supervisors shall be made aware
promptly of the Manager's absence.
§ 2-22 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 2-22
1:24
ARTICLE V
Township Solicitor
§ 2-23. Election; term; vacancy.
At the annual organization meeting, the Board of Supervisors shall elect,
by a vote of the majority of the members, a qualified person to serve as
the Township Solicitor for one year, though subject to termination at the
pleasure of the Board. This individual shall be well-learned in state and
federal law. The Solicitor's hourly rate compensation shall be approved by
resolution at the organization meeting. In the event of a vacancy, the Board
of Supervisors shall appoint a qualified attorney for the unexpired term.
§ 2-24. Duties.
The Township Solicitor shall perform all such duties as authorized by the
Second Class Township Code.6 Requests for the Solicitor's services shall be
made either by the Board through its Chair or Vice Chair or by the Township
Manager or his/her designate.
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 2-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-24
1:25

ARTICLE VI
Township Engineer
§ 2-25. Election; term; vacancy.
At the annual organization meeting, the Board of Supervisors shall elect,
by a vote of the majority of the members, a qualified person to serve
as the Township Engineer for one year, though subject to termination
at the pleasure of the Board. This individual shall be, at a minimum, a
registered civil engineer. The Engineer's hourly rate of compensation shall
be approved by resolution at the organization meeting. In the event of a
vacancy, the Board of Supervisors shall appoint a qualified civil engineer for
the unexpired term.
§ 2-26. Duties.
The Township Engineer shall perform all such duties as authorized by
the Second Class Township Code.7 Requests for the Township Engineer's
services shall be made either by the Board through its Chair or Vice Chair
or by the Township Manager or his/her designate.
7. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 2-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-26
1:27

ARTICLE VII
Administrative Departments
§ 2-27. Table of organization.
§ 2-28. Department heads.
§ 2-29. Duties and authority of department heads.
Department and office heads shall have the duties and the commensurate
authority thereof, as follows:
A. The Township Manager shall prepare and recommend to the Board of
Supervisors an organizational chart listing all the departments and
offices comprising the Township's staff. The Board's approval of this
organizational structure shall be by resolution, which may be amended
from time to time as situations warrant. Once approved, this
organizational resolution shall be published in the Appendix of the
Upper Providence Code. The heads of all departments and offices shall
be under the control of the Township Manager unless otherwise
provided by law or ordinance.
B. Furthermore, the Manager shall include in all appropriate Township
publications, both printed and digital, an organizational flowchart,
outlining the hierarchical structure of each department, including
department head titles and the principal subordinates for the same.
A. With the advice and consent of the Board of Supervisors, the Township
Manager may appoint all department heads, who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Township Manager, subject to any negotiated terms of
employment, as authorized under the Township's personnel
regulations.
B. The Township Manager may nominate, and the Board shall appoint, the
Assistant Township Manager, Emergency Services Director and Zoning
Officer, subject to any negotiated terms of employment or the
Township's personnel regulations. These personnel shall be under the
control of and shall be accountable to the Township Manager. The Chief
of Police is also accountable to the Manager in accordance with the
organizational flow chart; however, the hiring of a new Chief of Police
and the interview process associated therewith shall remain entirely
within the authority and control of the Board of Supervisors.
C. Upon a department head vacancy, the Township Manager may appoint
an acting department or office head until a permanent appointment is
made.
A. To direct personally and through subordinates all functions, duties and
operations assigned to and required of the department or office and its
subordinate units by law, statute, ordinance or budget and such other
activities as may be required by the Township Manager, and in
§ 2-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-29
1:29
accordance with applicable provisions of law, statute or ordinance or
budget.
B. To develop and prescribe the internal organization of the department or
office and its subordinate units, subject to the approval of the Township
Manager, and in accordance with applicable provisions of law, statute
or ordinance.
C. To assign duties and responsibilities to subordinate officers and
employees within the department or office and to modify those
assignments consistent with and in response to the changing exigencies
of service and as permitted by policy.
D. To develop and prescribe, in written form, and administrative manual
for the department or office, subject to the approval of the Township
Manager.
E. To prepare and administer departmental or office budget requests in
accordance with approved policies.
F. To appoint, discipline or remove all subordinate personnel upon the
concurrence of the Township Manager and in accordance with any
applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations.
G. To cooperate with and furnish to any department, office or unit of the
Township any information, service, labor, material and equipment that
may be necessary to perform a municipal function.
H. To keep informed of the activities and latest developments concerning
management techniques, technological advances and
intergovernmental programs as they affect the department, office or
the Township and to make analyses and recommendations regarding
such activities and policies when appropriate.
I. To administer and evaluate intergovernmental contracts and
agreements as these relate to departmental or office functions.
J. To maintain internal administrative and budgetary controls and to
institute productivity and performance standards to assure maximum
levels of quality and quantity of service within budgetary limitations.
K. To keep the Township Manager and, where appropriate, other members
of the staff fully informed of the activities and affairs of the department
or office and of the Township.
L. To establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and
reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for
proper control of departmental or office activities and to form a basis
for periodic reports to the Township Manager.
M. To be responsible for the proper maintenance of all Township property
and equipment used in the department or office.
§ 2-29 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 2-29
1:30
N. To be responsible for manpower planning within the department or
office.
O. To administer the applicable laws, municipal ordinances and
administrative regulations relating to the functions of the department
or office.
P. To serve as a member of any committee or as a staff officer or to provide
staff services to any authority, board or commission to which the
department head or office head may be assigned by the Township
Manager.
Q. To develop personnel planning and employee development policies for
the department or office, including the planning and execution of
appropriate training and education programs.
R. To establish and enforce rules and regulations for the use of municipal
facilities and services and issue such licenses and permits as may be
required by ordinance.
S. To develop and recommend rate structures for those services for which
user fees are charged.
T. To recommend to the Township Manager policies and procedures
designed to improve the quality of municipal functions and services and
to advise as to the needs of the department or office.
U. To direct any division or unit of the department or office to perform
work for another department or office when requested.
V. To promote the public good will and to represent the department or
office before civic associations, business, professional or governmental
groups, the press and interested citizens concerning the general
activities and administrative functions of the department or office.
W. To perform any other duties assigned by the Township Manager.
§ 2-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-29
1:31

ARTICLE VIII
Committees and Liaisons
§ 2-30. Standing committees.
§ 2-31. Board liaisons.
A. Purpose and establishment. The Board may at any time, by resolution,
establish special standing committees to provide advice, guidance and
policy recommendations to the full Board of Supervisors. Such
committees may be of a permanent nature, whereby they advise the
Board on a specific municipal function, or of a temporary nature,
whereby they advise the Board on temporary policy issues. No
committee shall perform administrative duties or have executive
authority.
B. Appointments, vacancies and removal. The Chairperson of the Board of
Supervisors shall nominate, with the advice and consent of the full
Board, members of all standing committees, including the filling of
vacancies, removing of members and the appointing of additional
members. The Board shall also designate the Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson of each committee.
A. Purpose. The Board may assign no more than two Supervisors to serve
as liaisons to the Township Manager on specific departments. There
shall be no preset limit on the number of municipal departments,
divisions or functions to which liaisons may be assigned. The Board
shall consult with the Township Manager on which areas would benefit
from liaisons.
B. All liaison appointments shall be codified in a singular resolution which
may be amended from time to time as warranted. At a minimum, the
resolution shall be updated accordingly at the Board's annual
organization meeting.
§ 2-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-31
1:33

ARTICLE IX
Human Resources
§ 2-32. Classes.
The officials and employees of the Township are hereby divided and
classified as follows:
§ 2-33. Regulations.
The Township Manager shall prescribe the various regulations and
provisions regarding personnel matters for all classes pursuant to § 2-30 of
this chapter and exempt from provisions of collective bargaining statutes.
The Board of Supervisors shall review, approve and amend these
regulations by resolution.
A. Elected officials, comprising the Board of Supervisors.
B. Board-appointed officials, comprising the Township Manager.
C. Management and general FLSA-exempt positions, comprising the
classified positions appointed by the Township Manager or appointed
by the Board and under the control of the Manager and exempt from
provisions of collective bargaining statutes.
D. FLSA-nonexempt positions, comprising all classified positions covered
by a collective bargaining agreement.
E. FLSA-nonexempt positions, comprising all nonunion positions not
covered by a collective bargaining agreement, including full-time, parttime,
and seasonal employees.
§ 2-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-33
1:35

ARTICLE X
Finance
§ 2-34. Fiscal year.
The Township's fiscal year shall commence on the first day of January of
each year, pursuant to the Second Class Township Code.8 Should this Code
change, the fiscal year will automatically change.
§ 2-35. Funds.
Upon the advice and recommendation of the Township Manager and
Finance Director, the Board of Supervisors shall approve by resolution all
necessary funds to finance the Township's operating and capital operations.
This resolution may be amended from time to time as situations warrant.
§ 2-36. Budget adoption procedures.
The Township Manager, in coordination with the Finance Director, shall
prepare an annual budget in compliance with § 3202 of the Second Class
Township Code.
A. On or before the date of December 1 of each year, the Township
Manager shall prepare and submit to the Board a balanced, annual
budget for all funds for the ensuing fiscal year, including a budget
transmittal letter. This letter shall outline the proposed financial
policies for the ensuing year, describe important budget features,
indicate any major changes in spending patterns and make a general
fiscal forecast of at least five years and include such other material as
the Board may require or as the Manager deems desirable.
B. The budget document shall provide a complete financial plan of all
municipal funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year. Except as
required by statute, the plan shall be in such form as the Manager
deems desirable or as the Board may require. The budget document
shall provide that each fund is balanced and that the total of proposed
expenditures shall not exceed the total of the estimated revenue and
available fund balance.
C. The Township Manager shall prepare and include, as a separate
component of the annual budget, a program of capital expenditures,
including a five-year capital improvement program of a nonrecurring
and long-range nature.
D. The Board shall advertise once in one newspaper of general circulation
in the Township that the proposed budget is available for public
inspection at a designated place in the Township. After the proposed
budget has been available for public inspection for 20 calendar days,
the Board of Supervisors shall, after making appropriate revisions,
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 2-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-36
1:37
§ 2-37. Fund depositories.
The Township Manager shall designate, subject to the Board approval by
resolution, the depositories of all Township funds.
§ 2-38. Purchasing procedures.
The Township Manager shall establish a comprehensive purchasing policy,
subject to Board approval by resolutions that will cover the acquisition of
goods and services by all Township departments, subject to the provisions
of the Second Class Township Code.9
§ 2-39. Sale of Township equipment and supplies.
The Township Manager shall establish a policy, subject to Board approval
by resolution, for the disposal of unneeded, obsolete or surplus equipment,
subject to parameters established by the Second Class Township Code.
§ 2-40. Independent audit.
adopt the final budget not later than the 31st day of December. The final
budget must be balanced. The total budgetary appropriation shall not
exceed the estimated revenues for the fiscal year.
E. If the Board decides to amend the budget before adoption and the value
of the amendments exceed 10% in the aggregate or more than 25% in
any major category over the proposed budget, then the budget will
need to be advertised again, following the same procedures outlined in
§ 2-34D.
F. During the month of January following any municipal election, the
Board of Supervisors may amend the budget and the levy and tax rate
to conform with its amended budget. Any amended budget must be
adopted by the Board of Supervisors on or before the 15th day of
February.
A. The Board shall provide for an independent annual audit of all Township
funds by a qualified outside auditor registered in Pennsylvania, as
provided for in the Second Class Township Code.
B. This auditor shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the
fiscal affairs of the Township government or of any of its elected or
appointed officials. Said appointment shall be made prior to the close of
the fiscal year, and such independent auditor shall have and possess all
the powers and perform all the duties provided by law for elected
auditors.
C. The compensation of such independent auditors shall be fixed by
resolution of the Board or by the ordinance adopting the annual budget.
The Board may provide for more frequent audits, as well as special
9. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 2-36 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 2-40
1:38
audits, as it deems necessary. The auditor's report, together with the
auditor's recommendations of the annual report, and a complete
financials statement of the fiscal affairs of the Township, shall be
presented to the Board. A summary of the financial statement and
auditor's recommendations of the general audit shall be published in at
least one newspaper of general circulation in the Township following
receipt of the auditor's report by the Board.
§ 2-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-40
1:39

ARTICLE XI
Township Document System
§ 2-41. Establishment.
There is hereby established a formal system for the issuance and recording
of the official actions, policies and regulations of the Township. This
document/reference system shall be known as the "Township Document
System."
§ 2-42. Organization.
The organization of the Township Document System shall be comprised of
the following volumes, which shall be available, as practicable, for reference
by the public in the office of the Township Manager. Records will be retained
in compliance with regulations promulgated by the Pennsylvania Historical
and Museum Commission.
§ 2-43. Administration.
The Township Manager shall provide for the administration of the Township
Document System.
A. Public volumes.
(1) The Second Class Township Code,10 which is a statute of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, prescribing the form, powers and
certain procedures for the Township government.
(2) The Official Minute Book, which is a record of the official actions of
the Board of Supervisors for all regular, special and emergency
meetings.
(3) The Book of Ordinances and Resolutions, which shall contain all
ordinances and resolutions of a legislative nature that are enacted
by the Board of Supervisors. All filings shall be within one month of
enactment in chronological sequence.
(4) The Code of Township Regulations, which is a reference source of
those regulations and procedures that are binding upon the public
and are issued by administrative authority to carry out of the
intentions of the various laws, statutes, ordinances and resolutions.
B. Administrative volumes. The Township Manager may issue such other
volumes as he deems necessary to be a part of the Township Document
Systems, which shall be for the purpose of setting forth the various
policies, practices and procedures of the executive function of the
Township government.
10.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 2-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-44
1:41
§ 2-44. Failure to file documents.
Failure to record properly or to make available in the Township Document
System any information or document intended for inclusion in said system
shall not invalidate or render ineffective such regulation, procedure, policy
or notice, unless such proper recording or access is stated as a condition of
validity.
§ 2-44 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 2-44
1:42
Chapter 5
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 143. Water — See Ch. 176.
§ 2-44 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 2-44
5:43

ARTICLE I
Sewer and Water Authority
[Adopted 6-25-1963 by Ord. No. 93]
§ 5-1. Intent to organize.
The Board of Township Supervisors of the Township of Upper Providence,
County of Montgomery and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, hereby
signifies its intention to organize a municipality authority under the
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.11
§ 5-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The Supervisors of the Township of Upper Providence are hereby authorized
and directed to execute on behalf of said township the Articles of
Incorporation for such Authority in substantially the following form.12
§ 5-3. Publication of notice.
The Secretary of the Board of Supervisors is hereby directed to cause
a notice of this Article to be published as required by Section 3 of the
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.13
§ 5-4. Filing of Articles.
The Supervisors of the Township of Upper Providence are hereby directed
to file Articles of Incorporation in the form heretofore recited, together
with the necessary proofs of publication, with the Secretary of the
Commonwealth and to do all other acts and things necessary or appropriate
to effect the incorporation of the Upper Providence Township Municipal
Authority.
§ 5-5. Construction of sewage disposal system.
The initial project to be undertaken by the Authority is acquiring,
constructing, improving, maintaining, owning and leasing a system of
sewers and sewage treatment works to serve the Township of Upper
Providence and such other areas as may properly be served thereby, such
facilities to be leased in whole or in part to the Township of Upper
Providence. No contract shall be entered into or obligation incurred by the
Authority without the prior written approval of the township, and any such
contract or obligation in violation hereof shall be in excess of the powers of
the Authority.
11.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
12.Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation are not included herein but are on file in the
office of the Township Secretary as part of Ord. No. 93. Such Articles contain the names,
addresses and terms of the members first appointed.
13.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 303.
§ 5-1 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 5-6
5:45
§ 5-6. Construction of water supply system. [Added 8-5-1968 by
Ord. No. 116]
The Upper Providence Township Municipal Authority is hereby authorized
to undertake the study, planning, construction, improvement, maintenance,
ownership and leasing of a system of water supply and distribution to serve
portions of the Township of Upper Providence and such other areas as may
be properly served thereby, such facilities to be leased in whole or in part to
the Township of Upper Providence.
§ 5-7. Appointment of members.
The persons named and the terms of office set forth in the Sixth Article
of the Articles of Incorporation, the execution of which is authorized and
directed by § 5-2 hereof, are hereby appointed as the first members of the
Board of the Authority, and their terms of office shall commence on the date
of appointment and shall be computed from January 1, 1964.
§ 5-6 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 5-7
5:46
ARTICLE II
Use of Streets
[Adopted 1-3-1967 by Ord. No. 106]
§ 5-8. Use of streets authorized; conditions.
For the purpose of constructing, extending, installing, maintaining,
safeguarding or repairing its sewer facilities, the Upper Providence
Township Municipal Authority is authorized to enter in, under and upon
any and all streets or other ways now or hereafter in public use within this
township; subject, however, to the following conditions:
§ 5-9. Rights and easements granted.
The aforesaid Authority is hereby granted the right and easement to
construct and maintain its sewer facilities under any and all streets or other
ways now or hereafter in public use within this township.
A. The Authority shall cause as little inconvenience to the public in the use
of such streets and ways as may be reasonably possible and shall
comply with the reasonable requirements of the Board of Township
Supervisors in such regard.
B. Upon completion of any work the Authority shall restore such streets
and ways as nearly as may be possible to the condition prevailing before
the work began.
C. The Authority shall indemnify the township and its Board of Supervisors
against all loss and expense by reason of injury to persons or damage to
property resulting from operations of the Authority in such streets and
ways or the maintenance of its facilities thereunder and, upon request
of the Board of Township Supervisors, shall obtain insurance in
reasonable amounts covering such risks.
§ 5-8 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 5-9
5:47

ARTICLE III
Lower Perkiomen Regional Valley Sewer Authority
[Adopted 4-7-1986 by Ord. No. 258]
§ 5-10. Intent to organize.
This township hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an
Authority (the "Authority") jointly in a group consisting of the Boroughs
of Collegeville and Trappe and the Townships of Perkiomen, Skippack and
Upper Providence, under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act
of 1945, as amended.14
§ 5-11. Purpose.
The initial project to be undertaken by the Authority is to acquire, hold,
construct, improve, interconnect, maintain, operate, own and lease, either
in the capacity of lessor or lessee, sanitary sewer treatment facilities and
collection systems for sanitary sewage, in the above-mentioned
participating municipalities or any of them or anywhere else, and for such
participating municipalities or any of them and for such other territory as it
or they may be authorized to serve.
§ 5-12. Articles of Incorporation.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and the Township Secretary
are hereby authorized and directed to execute, on behalf of the Township
of Upper Providence, Articles of Incorporation for the Authority in
substantially the form presented to this meeting which is hereby approved
and is ordered to be filed with this article.15
§ 5-13. Publication of notice.
The township is hereby directed to cause a notice of the substance of
this article to be published, separately or jointly with respect to similar
ordinances adopted by other municipalities, once in the legal periodical for
Montgomery County and once in a newspaper published and of general
circulation in such county pursuant to the Municipality Authorities Act of
1945, as amended.
§ 5-14. Filing of Articles.
The Chairman of the Supervisors and the Township Secretary are directed
to file said Articles of Incorporation, together with the necessary proofs of
publication, with the Secretary of the commonwealth and to do all other
acts and things necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of the
Authority.
14.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
15.Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation are not included herein but are on file in the
office of the Township Secretary with Ord. No. 258.
§ 5-10 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 5-15
5:49
§ 5-15. Number of representatives.
Section 6 of the Authority's Articles of Incorporation shall provide that the
respective municipalities which are incorporating members of the Authority
shall each have one representative on the Board of the Authority.
§ 5-16. Township representatives.
The following named persons are hereby appointed as the first members of
the Board of the Authority to represent this township. Their terms of office
shall commence on the date of appointment and shall be computed from the
January 1 next succeeding the date of incorporation:
Name Address
Term
(years)
Ceasar Gorski Mt. Airy Road
Collegeville,
Pennsylvania
1
Richard A. Landes 231 Park Avenue
Collegeville,
Pennsylvania
2
J. Robert Kershner 1301 Black Rock Road
P.O. Box G
Oaks, Pennsylvania
3
Ernest J. Schmitt 145 Clayhor Avenue
Trappe, Pennsylvania
4
Claire S. Olson 169 Panepinto Drive
Schwenksville,
Pennsylvania
5
§ 5-15 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 5-16
5:50
Chapter 10
FEES
§ 5-16 FEES § 5-16
10:51

ARTICLE I
Attorney's Fees
[Adopted 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 430]
§ 10-1. Statement of policies.
Township hereby approves the statement of collection policies, for
delinquent unpaid taxes, user charges and other items covered by the
Municipal Claims Act ("accounts"), as presented to this meeting, and which
is to be filed with the enacted counterpart of this article.
§ 10-2. Schedule of fees.
A. The Township hereby approves the following schedule of attorney fees
for services in connection with the collection of accounts, which is
hereby determined to be fair and reasonable compensation for the
services set forth below, all in accordance with the principles set forth
in Section 3 (a.1) of the Municipal Claims Law as added by Act No. 1 of
1996 (the "Act"):
Legal Services Fee for Services
Initial review and sending
first demand letter
$60.00 .6
Sending second demand
letter
$40.00 .4
Draft municipal lien $40.00 .4
Prepare writ of scire
facias
$40.00 .4
Prepare and mail letter
under PA R.C.P. § 237.1
$40.00 .4
Prepare motion for
alternate service
$150.00 1.5
Prepare motion for
summary judgment and
related judgment
$100.00 1.0
Prepare writ of execution $40.00 .4
Attendance at sale; review
schedule of distribution
and resolve distribution
issues
$100.00 hourly amount equal to Solicitor's
regular charges to Township.
Services not covered
above
$100.00 hourly amount equal to Solicitor's
regular charges to Township.
B. There shall be added to the above amounts the reasonable out-of-pocket
expenses of counsel in connection with each of these services, as
itemized in the applicable counsel bills, which shall be deemed to be
part of the fees.
§ 10-1 FEES § 10-2
10:53
§ 10-3. Collection procedures.
The following collection procedures are hereby established in accordance
with Act No. 1:
§ 10-4. Related action.
The proper officials of the Township are hereby authorized and empowered
to take such additional action as they may deem necessary or appropriate
to implement this article.
§ 10-5. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any section, sentence,
clause, part or provision hereof shall be held illegal, invalid or
C. The amount of fees determined as set forth above shall be added to the
Township's claim in each account.
A. At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney fees in
connection with the collection of an account, the Township shall mail or
cause to be mailed, by certified mail, return receipt requested, notice of
such intention to the taxpayer or other entity liable for the account (the
"account debtor").
B. If within 30 days after mailing the notice in accordance with Subsection
A, the certified mail to any account debtor is refused or unclaimed or
the return receipt is not received, then, at least 10 days prior to the
assessing or imposing such attorney fees, the Township shall mail or
cause to be mailed, by first class mail, a second notice to such account
debtor.
C. All notices required by this article shall be mailed to the account
debtor's last known post office address as recorded in the records or
other information of the Township, or such other address as it may be
able to obtain from the County Office of Assessment and Revision of
Taxes.
D. Each notice as described above shall include the following:
(1) The type of tax or other charge, the date it became due and the
amount owed, including penalty and interest;
(2) A statement of the Township's intent to impose or assess attorney
fees within 30 days after the mailing of the first notice or within 10
days after the mailing of the second notice;
(3) The manner in which the assessment or imposition of attorney fees
may be avoided by payment of the account; and
(4) The place of payment for accounts and the name and telephone
number of the Township official designated as responsible for
collection masters.
§ 10-2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 10-5
10:54
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the
court shall not affect or impair the remaining sections, sentences, clauses,
parts or provisions of this article. It is hereby declared to be the intent
of the Board of Supervisors that this article would still have been adopted
if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause part or
provision had not been included herein.
§ 10-6. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting or inconsistent with the
provisions of this article hereby adopted are repealed.
§ 10-7. When effective.
This article shall take effect and be in force from and after its approval, as
provided by law.
§ 10-5 FEES § 10-7
10:55
Chapter 17
LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST
§ 17-1. Intergovernmental cooperation authorized.
This municipality shall join with other municipalities in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act16 by becoming a settlor
of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust (the "Trust") and
entering into the Declaration of Trust, which is adopted by reference with
the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a copy
of which shall be filed with the minutes of August 2, 1982.
§ 17-2. Purchase of shares.
This municipality is authorized to purchase shares in the Trust from time
to time with available municipal funds and to redeem some or all of those
shares from time to time as funds are needed for municipal purchases.
These actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose,
pursuant to general or specific instructions by the governing body adopting
this chapter.
§ 17-3. Custody of funds.
The Trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody of this
municipality's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in the
Trust.
§ 17-4. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 17-1.
B. This municipality's participation in the Trust shall be terminable at any
time by ordinance.
C. The Declaration of Trust and the Purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this municipality's funds in obligations which are
otherwise legal investments are part of a pooled arrangement with
other governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other
advantages of pooled investments.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
municipal funds except through the purchase of shares in the Trust.
E. The Trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and by bylaws provided for therein.
16.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 10-7 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 17-4
17:56
Chapter 24
MANAGER, TOWNSHIP
§ 24-1. Position created.
The office of Township Manager is hereby created in Upper Providence
Township.
§ 24-2. Appointment and term.
Said office shall be filled by appointment for an indefinite term by majority
vote of the Board of Supervisors. The Township Manager shall serve at the
pleasure of the Board and may be removed at any time by a majority vote of
the Board.
§ 24-3. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to the duties of his office
as outlined below. He need not be a resident of the township or of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at the time of his appointment, but during
the tenure of his office he may reside outside the township only with the
approval of the Board.
§ 24-4. Bond required.
Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall give a bond to the
township with corporate surety, to be approved by the Board of Supervisors,
in the sum of $10,000, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his
duties, the premium for said bond to be paid by the township.
§ 24-5. Salary. [Amended 4-3-1978 by Ord. No. 198]
The salary of the Township Manager shall be fixed annually by the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 24-6. Powers and duties.
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the township and
shall be responsible to the Board for the proper and efficient administration
of the affairs of the township.
F. Shares may be purchased and redeemed from time to time as this
municipality may determine to be necessary or appropriate to meet its
cash investment requirements.
A. Until modified by amendment to this chapter, the powers and duties of
the Township Manager shall include:
§ 17-4 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 24-6
24:57
(1) Supervision and responsibility for the activities of all township
departments.
(2) Attendance at all meetings of the Board of Supervisors, the
Township Planning Commission, the Zoning Hearing Board and the
Upper Providence Township Municipal Authority, with the right to
take part in discussions. The Manager shall be entitled to receive
notice of all regular and special meetings of the Board and the
other aforementioned bodies.
(3) All complaints by township residents, taxpayers, landowners and
other persons having dealings with the township shall be referred
initially to the Manager. He, or an officer designated by him, shall
investigate and dispose of such complaints. The Manager shall
thereafter report on such matters to the Board.
(4) Administration and enforcement of all applicable statutes and
ordinances within the township.
(5) Preparation and submission to the Board of Supervisors, in
sufficient time to meet the schedule set forth in the Second Class
Township Code,17 a preliminary budget for the next fiscal year.
(6) Administration of the budget after its adoption by the Board of
Supervisors.
(7) Preparation and submission to the Board of an annual report of
township affairs and such special reports as may be necessary.
(8) Conducting the general affairs of the township, including
purchasing, collection of moneys, administration and enforcement
of contracts, leases and franchises, subject to the provisions of
applicable statutes, ordinances and resolutions.
(9) If expressly appointed thereto on an annual basis by the Board,
service as Township Secretary, Township Treasurer or any other
township office.
B. All employees and officers of the township, including the Chief of Police,
Secretary, Treasurer and Engineer but excluding members of the Board
of Supervisors, elected Auditors, the elected Tax Collector and the
Township Solicitor, shall be under the Manager's supervision and
control, and he shall appoint and remove all such employees, with the
exception of elected officials, the Secretary, Treasurer, Solicitor,
Engineer, Chief of Police and members of the Police Department, and
Recreation Director, in accordance with the provisions of such township
personnel rules as may hereafter be adopted by the Board. All
appointments and removals shall be reported to the Board at its next
meeting. The Manager shall have the power to direct the Township
Solicitor to perform any professional duties pertaining to the affairs of
17.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65902.
§ 24-6 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 24-6
24:58
Chapter 28
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 33. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 42.
the township and shall cooperate with the Board, the elected Auditors
and the elected Tax Collector in coordinating his duties with theirs.
[Amended 4-3-1978 by Ord. No. 198; 10-16-2006 by Ord. No.
467]
§ 24-6 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 24-6
24:59

ARTICLE I
Police Plan
[Adopted 5-7-1990 by Ord. No. 298]
§ 28-1. Establishment.
Under the provisions of Act No. 600 of 1956 of the General Assembly
of Pennsylvania18 and any other statutes now or hereafter pertaining or
applicable thereto, there is hereby established the Police Pension Plan of
Upper Providence Township, hereinafter referred to as the "plan."
§ 28-2. Maintenance and regulation.
The plan is to be maintained by a charge against each police officer
employee who holds a full-time position in the Police Department of the
Township and who works an average of not less than 40 hours per week by
payments made to the Township by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for
the purpose of retirement or disability pensions for police employees under
any present or future law providing therefor, by such appropriations thereto
as may be lawfully made by the Township, by gifts, grants and bequests
received by the plan and by receipts from investments of the plan. The plan
shall be under the direction of the Board of Supervisors and applied under
such regulations as it may from time to time, by ordinance or resolution,
prescribe for the benefit of such police employees of the Township who
shall receive honorable discharge therefrom by reason of age and service or
disability and may prescribe for the benefit of widows or children under the
age of 18 years of members of the Police Department or of members retired
on pension.
§ 28-3. Administration.
The management and administration of the Pension Plan of Upper
Providence Township shall be vested in the Board of Supervisors of Upper
Providence Township. The Township may, from time to time by resolution,
have the plan administered by a plan administrator.
§ 28-4. Police Pension Committee; fiduciary responsibility.
A. The Police Pension Committee, hereinafter referred to as "trustees,"
shall act as trustees for the plan. This Committee shall consist of three
persons: one Supervisor, one person appointed by the Board of
Supervisors and one person selected by majority vote of the Police
Department.
B. The Township Treasurer shall forthwith remit to the trustees all funds
received by him for the purposes of the plan or appropriated thereto by
the Board of Supervisors, with memorandum as to the source thereof,
and shall secure its receipt therefor. The trustees shall receive the
18.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 767.
§ 28-1 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 28-4
24:61
§ 28-5. Eligibility.
A member is any person who is employed in active duty status by the police
force or any person who has previously been employed by the police force
or who by reason of age and service or disability has become eligible for
and is receiving benefits of any nature under this article.
§ 28-6. Contributions.
same, and any funds not currently required for disbursement shall be
placed in investments of the types authorized by law for Township
funds.
C. The trustees shall pay benefits out of the plan only at such times, to
such persons and in such amounts as may be certified to them by the
Township. The trustees shall annually submit to the Board of
Supervisors a detailed report of their administration of the plan, which
reports when so submitted shall be open to inspection by any interested
party.
D. The plan is hereby authorized to receive, by gift, grant, devise or
bequest, any money or other property, real, personal or mixed, in trust
for the benefit of the plan, and the care, management, investment and
disposal of such trust funds or property shall be vested in the trustees
having the management of the plan, and said trust funds or property
shall be administered in accordance with the regulations governing the
plan, subject to such directions not inconsistent therewith as the donors
of such funds or property may prescribe.
A. The payments made by the State Treasurer to the Treasurer of the
Township from the moneys received from taxes paid upon premiums by
foreign casualty insurance companies for purposes of pension,
retirement or disability benefits for policemen which shall be used as
follows: to reduce the unfunded liability; or, after such liability has been
funded, to apply against the annual obligation of the Township for
future service and disability reserve costs; or, to the extent that the
payment may be in excess of such obligation, to reduce member
contribution.
B. The participants may pay into the plan. [Amended 4-7-2003 by Ord.
No. 424]
C. The gross monthly compensation of a participant is the amount paid as
a base salary on an anniversary date of the plan, computed on a
monthly basis, plus overtime and longevity pay, but excluding
premiums, bonuses and other nonrecurring compensation.
D. Interest shall be accumulated and credited to participant's
contributions at the rate of 7% or such other rate as is hereinafter set
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 28-4 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 28-6
24:62
§ 28-7. Benefits.
E. Interest shall be computed and credited to the participant's account at
the end of the plan year. The plan year shall be January 1 to December
31 of each year.
F. Any police employee, who for any reason whatsoever shall be ineligible
to receive a pension after having contributed any charges to the plan
established pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be entitled to
a refund of all such moneys paid by him into the plan, plus such interest
as may be credited to the employee's account pursuant to Subsections
D and E of this article, within one month after discontinuance of
employment in the Township. If such discontinuance is due to death,
such moneys shall be paid to his beneficiary or beneficiaries, or in the
absence of such designation, to his personal representative. He shall
have no claim to accumulated assets of the plan.
A. Eligibility for benefits. [Amended 2-1-1999 by Ord. No. 379]
(1) The benefits from the plan shall be payable to the following
persons:
(a) Honorably discharged officers.
[1] A police officer who received an honorable discharge from
the Upper Providence Township Police Department after
having served in the Township for an aggregate of not less
than 25 years and having attained the age of 55 years. The
normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month
following the 55th birthday, provided that the aforesaid
criteria are satisfied. Extension of service beyond normal
retirement age shall be based primarily upon the officer's
health and the good of the service; or
[2] A police officer who received an honorable discharge from
the Upper Providence Township Police Department after
having served in the Township for an aggregate of not less
than 20 years in accordance with Act 24 of 1998,19
provided that the amount of pension benefits shall be
reduced by a ratio of the years of service at retirement
divided by years of service at the superannuation
retirement date and shall be further actuarially reduced
for early payout. The ratio shall be as follows:
[a] Twenty years = 20/25.
[b] Twenty-one years = 21/15.
[c] Twenty-two years = 22/25.
19.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 771.
§ 28-6 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 28-7
24:63
[d] Twenty-three years = 23/25.
[e] Twenty-four years = 23/24.
[f] Twenty-five years: full retirement.
(b) A police officer who has suffered a permanent service-related
disability shall be eligible to receive a monthly service-related
disability benefit of no less than 50% of the officer's salary at
the time of disability. This service-connected disability benefit
shall be reduced only by payment of social security disability
benefits for the same injury. The gross monthly compensation
is to be calculated using the twelve-month average of the gross
monthly compensation of the officer prior to the onset of the
disability. The gross monthly compensation of a participant is
the amount paid as a base salary on an anniversary date of the
plan, computed on a monthly basis, plus overtime and
longevity pay, but excluding premiums, bonuses and other
nonrecurring compensation. [Amended 4-7-2003 by Ord.
No. 424]
(2) Intentionally self-inflicted injuries or death shall not be considered
actions within the scope of an officer's responsibility while on duty
with the police force and any such actions leading to injury or death
on the part of a member shall not be considered service-connected.
B. Normal retirement benefit. [Amended 2-1-1999 by Ord. No. 379]
(1) The normal monthly retirement benefit of a police officer retiring
under § 28-7A(1)(a) shall be 1/2 of the average monthly gross
compensation (as reflected on the W-2 form) received during the
last 36 months of employment.
(2) The first monthly pension benefit shall be paid to the eligible
person on the first day of the month following the month of the
effective date of retirement and shall continue for life in equal
monthly payments, as adjusted by cost of living increases, ceasing
in the month of death.
(3) Monthly benefits.
(a) The monthly benefits determined under this subsection shall
be computed as the sum of:
[1] Any pension benefits from pension plans heretofore
established by a private organization or association for the
members of the police force, but only to the extent that the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any of its municipalities
shall have contributed to such pension plan moneys raised
by taxation.
[2] Benefits from the Police Pension Plan of Upper Providence
Township established pursuant to this article to the extent
§ 28-7 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 28-7
24:64
necessary to bring the total benefits in any month up to
1/2 the aforesaid average monthly gross compensation (as
reflected on the W-2 form).
(b) For the purpose of computing monthly benefits, there shall be
no Social Security offset.
(c) The normal monthly retirement benefit shall be increased each
January 1 by the lesser of 3% per year or the percentage
increase in the consumer price index from the year in which
the police member last worked, subject to a maximum increase
in the normal monthly retirement benefit of 30%. In no event
will the total normal monthly retirement benefit exceed 75% of
the average monthly gross compensation (as reflected on the
W-2 form) received during the last 36 months of employment.
C. Disability retirement benefit. [Amended 2-1-1999 by Ord. No. 379]
(1) The monthly retirement benefit of a police officer retiring under
§ 28-7A(1)(b) shall be 1/2 of the average monthly gross
compensation (as reflected on the W-2 form) received during the
last 36 months of employment.
(2) The first monthly pension benefit shall be paid to the eligible
person effective the first day of the disability, as determined by a
board-certified physician, and shall continue for life in equal
monthly payments, ceasing in the month of death. [Amended
4-7-2003 by Ord. No. 424]
(3) Monthly benefits.
(a) The monthly benefits determined under this subsection shall
be computed as the sum of:
[1] Any pension benefits from pension plans heretofore
established by a private organization or association for the
members of the police force, but only to the extent that the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any of its municipalities
shall have contributed to such pension plan moneys raised
by taxation.
[2] Benefits from the Police Pension Plan of Upper Providence
Township established pursuant to this article to the extent
necessary to bring the total benefits in any month up to 1/2
the aforesaid average monthly gross compensation (as
reflected on the W-2 form).
(b) For the purpose of computing monthly benefits, there shall be
no Social Security offset.
(c) The disability retirement benefit shall be increased each
January 1 by the lesser of 3% per year or the percentage
increase in the consumer price index from the year in which
§ 28-7 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 28-7
24:65
the police member last worked, subject to a maximum increase
in the normal monthly retirement benefit of 30%. In no event
will the total normal monthly retirement benefit exceed 75% of
the average monthly gross compensation (as reflected on the
W-2 form) received during the last 36 months of employment.
D. 20Deferred retirement option provision (DROP). [Added 12-15-2008
by Ord. No. 498]
(1) Establishment of DROP. A DROP shall be available to police officers
who qualify for and apply for such option pursuant to this
Subsection D.
(2) DROP eligibility. A police officer who is eligible for a normal
retirement benefit pursuant to § 28-7B, or will be eligible for a
normal retirement benefit prior to participation in the DROP, is
eligible to participate in the DROP by filing a written application
with the plan administrator at least 30 days before the employee’s
effective date of DROP participation.
(3) Election to participate in DROP. An eligible participant may elect to
participate in the DROP for a period not to exceed five years. Upon
deciding to participate in a DROP, an eligible participant must
submit, on forms provided by the plan administrator, a binding and
irrevocable written election which discloses the participant’s intent
to retire, specifies the effective date of DROP participation,
specifies the participant’s final retirement date (no later than five
years after the effective date of DROP participation), which shall be
the DROP termination date, and designates a beneficiary or
beneficiaries. Such election must detail a DROP participant’s rights
and obligations under the DROP and include an agreement to
forego active membership in the plan, any growth in the salary
base used for calculating the regular retirement benefit, and any
additional benefit accrual for retirement purposes. The DROP
participant shall be required to provide by other information
required by the Township.
(4) Calculation of DROP retirement benefit. Upon receipt of a
participant’s election forms to participate in DROP, the Township
shall calculate the normal retirement benefit pursuant to § 28-7B as
of the employee’s DROP participation date.
(5) Credits to DROP account. A DROP shall be established in the name
of the DROP participant for purposes of accumulating DROP
retirement benefits during DROP participation. Starting with the
calendar month following the DROP participation date, the amount
of the DROP retirement benefit shall be credited to the DROP
participant’s DROP account each month during DROP
participation. The DROP retirement benefit shall be adjusted
20.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Preretirement death benefit, was repealed 2-1-1999
by Ord. No. 379.
§ 28-7 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 28-7
24:66
annually by the lesser of 3% per year or the percentage increase
in the consumer price index from the previous year. In addition,
interest shall be credited to the DROP account. The annual rate
of interest shall be 4.5% and shall be compounded and credited
monthly. A separate accounting of the DROP participant’s
accumulated DROP account shall be calculated annually and
provided to the participant.
(6) DROP participation termination. A DROP participant may change
the DROP termination date to an earlier date, and no penalty shall
be imposed for early termination of DROP participation. Notice
should be provided to the Township at least 60 days prior to any
such early termination, except in the case where the DROP
participant incurs a permanent service-related disability. Upon
either early or regular termination of DROP participation, the
DROP participant shall be separated from employment with the
Township and the retirement plan shall pay the balance in the
DROP participant’s DROP account to the terminating participant as
provided in § 28-7D(7), and the DROP participant shall be ineligible
to reenroll in the DROP thereafter even if the former DROP
participant is reemployed by the Township with renewed active
membership in the plan.
(7) Payment of DROP benefits. On the effective date of a DROP
participant’s termination of employment with the Township,
participation in the DROP shall cease and the plan shall pay to the
participant total accumulated value of the participant’s DROP
account. Such distribution shall be considered an eligible rollover
distribution. The terminating DROP participant shall commence
receipt of the monthly DROP retirement benefit directly, starting
with the calendar month following termination of employment with
the Township.
(8) Death of a DROP participant. If a DROP participant dies, the DROP
participant’s surviving spouse shall be entitled to receive the
benefits accumulated in the participant’s DROP account. In
addition, a monthly benefit shall be paid to the surviving spouse if
the participant previously elected a form of benefit payment for the
participant’s DROP retirement benefit that would provide for
payments after death to a beneficiary or contingent annuitant.
Such monthly benefit payments shall commence the calendar
month following the death of the DROP participant.
E. Survivor benefits. [Amended 2-1-1999 by Ord. No. 379]
(1) The family of any member who is on active duty status and who dies
of any cause and the family of any member who is retired and who
dies of any cause shall receive the following benefits: [Amended
4-7-2003 by Ord. No. 424]
§ 28-7 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 28-7
24:67
(a) The surviving spouse of such member shall receive a monthly
payment equal to 50% of such member's pension benefit,
including benefits received by said surviving spouse under
federal social security laws on account of such member, until
the surviving spouse dies, when such benefits shall terminate.
(b) After the death of the surviving spouse, an officer's surviving
child or children under the age of 18 years, or if attending
college, under the age of 23 years old, shall receive the 50%
amount of the member's monthly pension until that child dies
or attains the age of 18 years old, or if attending college, until
the age of 23 years old. "Attending college" is defined as the
child being enrolled in an institution of higher learning and
carrying a minimum course load of seven credits per
semester.21
F. Should a police officer, before completing superannuation retirement
age and service requirements, but after having completed 12 years of
total service, for any reason other than being terminated for conviction
of a felony or crime of moral turpitude or death, cease to be employed
as a full-time police officer by Upper Providence Township, in whose
pension plan he has been a member, he shall be entitled to a refund of
all moneys paid by him into the fund, plus all interest earned on such
moneys as provided in § 28-6F of this article, or to vest his retirement
benefits by filing with Upper Providence Township within 90 days of the
date he ceases to be a full-time police officer a written notice of his
intention to vest. Upon reaching the date which would have been his
superannuation retirement date if he had continued to be employed as a
full-time officer, he shall be paid a partial superannuation retirement
allowance determined by applying the percentage his years of service
bear to the years of service which he would have rendered had he
continued to work until his superannuation retirement date to the gross
pension, using the monthly average compensation during the
appropriate period prior to his termination of employment. Such
pension or retirement benefits for any month shall be determined in
accordance with § 28-7B, C or E of this article. If an officer dies prior to
vesting in his or her pension, the surviving spouse or, if the spouse is
deceased, any child or children under the age of 18, or age 23 if
attending college, is entitled to 100% of the officer's contributions
together with any interest thereon, unless the officer has designated
another beneficiary. "Attending college" is defined as the child being
enrolled in an institution of higher learning and carrying a minimum
course load of seven credits per semester.22
21.Editor's Note: Former Subsection (E)(2), concerning increase in monthly benefits each
January 1, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 10-6-2003 by Ord.
No. 431.
22.Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, regarding killed-in-service benefit, added 4-7-2003 by
Ord. No. 424, and which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 503.
§ 28-7 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 28-7
24:68
§ 28-8. Construal of provisions.
The establishment of the plan shall not be construed as conferring any
legal rights upon any police employee or other person to a continuation
of employment nor shall it interfere with the rights of the Township to
discharge any police employee or to treat him without regard to the effect
which such treatment might have upon him as a member of the plan.
§ 28-9. Benefits to be protected.
Except insofar as may otherwise be required by law, no benefits under the
plan shall be subject in any manner to anticipation, alienation, sale, transfer,
assignment, pledge, encumbrance or charge, and any attempt so to do shall
be void, except as specifically provided in the plan, nor shall any such
benefits be in any manner liable for or subject to garnishment, attachment,
execution, levy or other legal process for the collection of debts or liable
for or subject to the debts, contract, liabilities, engagements or torts of the
person entitled to such benefit.
§ 28-10. Revisions to and termination of plan; right of participants.
G. Military service. Any member of the police force employed by a
borough, town, township or regional police department, who has been a
regularly appointed employee of any such political subdivision or
regional police department for a period of at least six months and who
thereafter shall enter into the military service of the United States,
shall have credited to his employment record for pension or retirement
benefits all of the time spent by him in such military service, if such
person returns or has heretofore returned to his employment within six
months after his separation from the service. [Added 5-19-2003 by
Ord. No. 428]
A. The Board of Supervisors desires to continue the plan permanently, but
must necessarily reserve the right to change, modify or discontinue it. If
modifications are planned, the Township shall attempt to negotiate such
changes in the collective bargaining process. Any change in the plan
will not affect the values that have been accumulated for each
participant prior to the date of the change. If the plan is ever
terminated, the participants who have retired under its provisions will
be entitled to first claim of the assets of the trust fund, and any balance
of the assets will be distributed among all participants according to a
formula to be developed by the Police Pension Committee and approved
by the Board of Supervisors.
B. No person participating in the plan established pursuant to the
provisions of this article who becomes entitled to receive a benefit
therefrom shall be deprived of his right to an equal share therein upon
the basis upon which he first became entitled thereto.
§ 28-7 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 28-11
24:69
§ 28-11. Availability of documentation.
Notwithstanding any information that is made available by the Township
to members of the plan through the distribution of descriptive booklets,
bulletin board notices, payroll notices or oral announcements, any member
of the plan may examine the plan, any trust agreements and all amendments
thereto at the Township office at such mutually convenient time as is
arranged by the member and representatives of the Township and the Police
Pension Committee.
§ 28-12. Administrative expenses. [Amended 4-7-2003 by Ord. No.
424]
The expenses of administration of the plan established by this article,
including the compensation of the actuary and bond for the trustee of the
plan, exclusive of the payment of bond for the trustee of the plan, exclusive
of the payment of retirement or disability benefits, shall be paid from the
pension plan.
§ 28-13. Compliance with statutes.
Insofar as the provisions of this article are the same as statutory provisions,
they shall be subject to change or repeal to comply with any future statutory
provisions. Other provisions of this article may be amended or repealed
if statutory authority be granted therefor or if statutory restrictions or
mandates are eliminated and discretion vested in the Board of Supervisors.
§ 28-14. Continuation of prior ordinances.
The passage of this article and the repeal by it of any prior enabling
ordinances relating to the establishment and regulation of a Police
Employees' Pension Plan or a Police Pension Plan of Upper Providence
Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, shall not invalidate the Police
Pension Fund of the Township created under such prior resolution or
ordinance, nor shall it invalidate any actions of Upper Providence Township
taken under such ordinances. This article, in such respect, shall be deemed
a continuation and codification of such prior enabling ordinances.
§ 28-15. Codification.
This article represents a codification of the ordinances of Upper Providence
Township relating to Police Employees' Pension Plans or Police Pension
Funds and may be advertised as such.
§ 28-16. Repealer.
All resolutions and/or ordinances relating to Upper Providence Township
Police Employee Retirement Funds and Plans are hereby repealed.
§ 28-11 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 28-16
24:70
Chapter 30
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development - See Ch.
154.
§ 30-1. Commission created.
There is hereby created the Upper Providence Township Planning
Commission.
§ 30-2. Composition; terms [Amended 2-23-1976 by Ord. No. 178]
The Commission shall be composed of five members, to be appointed by
the Board of Supervisors. The term of one member shall expire on the first
Monday in January 1977; one on the first Monday in January 1978; one on
the first Monday in January 1979; one on the first Monday in January 1980;
and one on the first Monday in January 1981; and appointments thereafter
shall be for terms of four years, except for appointments to fill vacancies,
in which case an appointment shall be for the unexpired portion of the
respective term.
§ 30-3. Qualifications, powers and duties.
Qualifications of members of the Commission and their duties and powers
shall be as described in the Municipalities Planning Code,23 provided that
the Board of Supervisors may assign to said Commission such other duties
as it may deem appropriate which are not inconsistent with the powers and
duties provided by said code.
§ 30-4. Restrictions.
The Commission shall not have the power to obligate the township or
expend township funds without the express consent of the Board of
Supervisors.
Chapter 33
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 28.
23.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10201 et seq.
§ 28-16 PLANNING COMMISSION § 30-4
30:71

ARTICLE I
Intergovernmental Police Assistance
[Adopted 9-6-1977 by Ord. No. 192]
§ 33-1. Purpose.
§ 33-2. Uniform procedures established.
A. This article is adopted for the purpose of establishing uniform
procedures for participating municipalities in Montgomery County in
requesting aid and assistance during emergency situations involving
civil disobedience and/or natural disasters.
B. It is the intention of Upper Providence Township to enter into an
intergovernmental agreement in accordance with the Joint Municipal
Activity Act of 1972, July 12, No. 180,24 to receive and supply police
protection, in conformity with the guidelines set forth in the
Montgomery County Mutual Aid Plan, and available county emergency
services or supplies.
A. The Chief of Police or the commanding officer in his absence shall have
authority to request assistance from other municipalities in the event of
emergency.
B. Only the Chief of Police or, in his absence, the officer in command of the
municipality in which the emergency occurs may request assistance
under this plan.
C. The employing Chief shall initiate the request for assistance through
the Montgomery County Communication Center in accord with the
procedure agreed upon by the participating municipalities.
D. The Chief of Police of the requesting municipality shall be the
Commander in Chief of all personnel sent into an emergency.
E. Responding departments shall provide up to 10% of their departmental
strength when possible.
F. The responding police shall have the same authority as that of the
requesting department when acting in response to a request for
assistance pursuant to this agreement.
G. The District Attorney shall assign an Assistant District Attorney to the
requesting Chief, to act as legal supervisor.
H. The Sheriff shall immediately dispatch vans for transport of prisoners, if
requested by the supervising Chief, and shall determine the availability
of adult and juvenile detention facilities.
24.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 33-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 33-2
33:73
§ 33-3. Financing.
§ 33-4. Term of agreement.
This agreement shall continue in effect until terminated by subsequent
ordinance of the municipality. This agreement is binding on all
municipalities adopting it.
I. In every instance where aid is requested, personnel supplied will be
relieved of duty not more than eight hours after reporting.
J. The participating Police Chiefs together with Montgomery County
authorities may establish procedures under which to implement this
agreement.
A. Montgomery County shall provide insurance to cover liability of the
mutual aid squad and its individual members. Each municipality shall
pay the cost of its own personnel when on duty in an emergency
covered by this agreement.
B. Montgomery County shall supply equipment required by the Mutual Aid
Squad other than the regular issued equipment of each member.
§ 33-2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 33-4
33:74
ARTICLE II
Municipal Drug Task Force
[Adopted 4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 337]
§ 33-5. Intent to participate.
The Township of Upper Providence has evidenced its intent to participate
in the Municipal Drug Task Force activities in cooperation with the
commonwealth's office of Attorney General designed to interdict the illegal
use and trafficking of narcotics and other illegal drugs within its municipal
boundaries as well as within the boundaries of nearby communities.
§ 33-6. Inclusion of intergovernmental cooperative activities.
This agreement may include intergovernmental cooperative activities with
adjacent and nearby municipal governments as part of a regional effort to
interdict illegal drug activities.
§ 33-7. Use of township police.
The Township of Upper Providence shall utilize the services of its police
force, both full-time and part-time, under the conditions set forth in the
agreement and in compliance with the Municipal Police Jurisdiction Act, 42
Pa.C.S.A. § 8953.
§ 33-8. Establishment of procedures.
The Township of Upper Providence shall establish, pursuant to the terms of
the agreement which is attached hereto and incorporated as a part of this
Article, appropriate procedures to comply with all relevant provisions of the
agreement and relevant regulations, direction and guidance from the Office
of the Attorney General.
§ 33-9. Duration of agreement.
The term of the agreement shall commence on April 18, 1995, and may be
terminated at any time upon 30 days' written notice.
§ 33-10. Purpose.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement include region-wide
coordination of municipal police activities in an effort to combat illegal
narcotics and drug trafficking.
§ 33-11. Financing.
The agreement shall be financed with the assistance of funds supplied by
the Office of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 33-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 33-12
33:75
§ 33-12. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure necessary to implement the terms of this
agreement shall be covered by directives, procedures and guidance from
the Office of the Attorney General and other area police departments.
§ 33-13. Acquisition, management and disposal of property.
All property, real or personal, acquired, managed or disposed of pursuant to
this agreement shall be in accordance with both the terms of the agreement
as well as directives, procedures and guidance of the office of the Attorney
General.
§ 33-14. Responsibility for township employees.
The township shall retain responsibility for the management, control and
direction of its employees with assistance, financial or otherwise, from the
Office of the Attorney General.
§ 33-15. Effective date.
The effective date of this Article shall be the 18th day of April, 1995.
§ 33-12 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 33-15
33:76
Chapter 37
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
§ 37-1. Board created.
There is hereby created the Upper Providence Township Parks and
Recreation Board.
§ 37-2. Composition.
The Parks and Recreation Board shall consist of a maximum of seven
members.
§ 37-3. Terms.
The members shall be appointed for terms of five years commencing on the
first Monday of January of each year.
§ 37-4. Powers and duties.
§ 37-5. Compensation.
The members of the Parks and Recreation Board shall serve without
compensation.
§ 37-6. Vacancies.
§ 37-7. Meetings; officers.
The Parks and Recreation Board shall meet at least six times a year and
shall elect its own officers, which shall include a Chairman, Vice Chairman
and a Secretary.
A. The Parks and Recreation Board shall serve in an advisory capacity to
the Board of Supervisors and shall operate in accordance with the
provisions contained in § 2204 of the Second Class Township Code.
B. The Parks and Recreation Board shall also act as Shade Tree
Commission, to the extent specified by the Board of Supervisors,
pursuant to Article XXIX of the Second Class Township Code, as
amended.
A. In case of a vacancy in any membership for any reason, said vacancy
shall be filled by the Board of Supervisors for the balance of the
unexpired term.
B. The Board of Supervisors may, in its sole discretion, declare the office of
any member vacant should said member be absent from four
consecutive meetings.
§ 33-15 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 37-7
33:77
Chapter 42
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Compensation of Township Manager — See
Ch. 24.
Compensation of Planning Commission — See
Ch. 30.
Compensation of Recreation
Committee — See Ch. 37.
§ 37-7 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 37-7
42:78
ARTICLE I
Board of Supervisors25
[Adopted 2-18-1986 by Ord. No. 256]
§ 42-1. Annual compensation.
§ 42-2. Manner of payment.
Such compensation shall be paid in monthly installments.
A. Each Supervisor of Upper Providence Township elected to office on or
after November 5, 1985, shall receive compensation as a Supervisor in
the annual amount of $2,000.
B. Each Supervisor of Upper Providence Township elected or appointed to
office on or after the effective date of this subsection shall receive
compensation as a Supervisor in the annual amount of two thousand
$2,500. [Added 12-4-1995 by Ord. No. 347]
C. Each Supervisor of Upper Providence Township elected or appointed to
office on or after November 6, 2001, shall receive compensation as a
Supervisor in the annual amount of $4,125, in accordance with Section
606 of the Second Class Township Code, as amended.26 [Added
4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 403]
25.Editor's Note: The salaries and compensation of other township officials and employees
are set periodically by the Board of Supervisors. Current information is available from the
Township Secretary.
26.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65606.
§ 42-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 42-2
42:79
Chapter 43
LIMITATIONS ON POLITICAL CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS
§ 43-1. Exclusion.
This chapter does not apply to materials or services which are subjected to
the public bidding process as set forth in the Second Class Township Code.27
§ 43-2. General rule.
With respect to any provision of materials, services, professional advice,
consulting advice, or any other matter not covered by the submission of
sealed bids, the Township will not enter into any such relationship for goods
and services with any person or entity which has, within the present or
immediately preceding calendar year, made or solicited a contribution(s) to
any candidate for the office of Upper Providence Township Supervisor, nor
to the committee of a candidate, nor any committee supporting multiple
candidates where any supported candidate is seeking the office of Township
Supervisor, in an amount exceeding $300. In determining whether a
particular payment constitutes a contribution to a candidate or campaign
of a candidate, the Township will be guided by the definitions in, and
court interpretations of, the Pennsylvania Election Code.28 A person shall be
considered a candidate on the date on which they file candidacy papers with
the Montgomery County Board of Elections, or the first date on which they
publicly announce an intention to run for the office of Supervisor, whichever
first occurs. This provision applies equally to any contribution to a political
committee that does not have the stated purpose of supporting a candidate
for Township Supervisor but which subsequently makes a contribution to
a candidate for Township Supervisor. The terms of this chapter may not
be avoided by having the work that is the subject of the agreement done
through a subcontractor or business entity that owns, is owned by, or is
related by business dealings with, the vendor or consultant.
§ 43-3. Ongoing obligation.
Beginning on the date of first contact with a potential vendor or consultant,
and continuing through the conclusion of negotiations or, if applicable,
the conclusion of a business relationship with Township, no vendor or
consultant shall make a contribution to a candidate for office as above
described.
§ 43-4. Interpretation.
This chapter applies to all nonbid consulting and professional relationships
entered after the date of this chapter, including any renewals of existing
relationships.
27.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
28.Editor's Note: See 25 P.S. § 2600 et seq.
§ 42-2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 43-5
42:80
§ 43-5. Affidavit.
Each person or entity which enters into an agreement for the provision
of services or goods not covered by the open bidding process as above
described shall sign an affidavit stating that he/she/it is aware of the
provisions of this chapter and has not made a contribution in violation of
it. The form for such affidavit will be prepared by staff in conjunction with
the Solicitor. A copy of this chapter and the affidavit will be distributed with
any Township letter which solicits nonbid proposals or which is responding
to an inquiry from a person or entity interested in providing materials or
services not subject to competitive bidding, and will also be distributed to
all persons or entities who are currently providing services or materials that
were not subject to competitive bidding.
§ 43-6. Provisions not exclusive.
The terms of this chapter are intended to be in addition to, and not in
place of, all existing laws and regulations that govern political contributions
or the conduct of elected officials, including any applicable provisions of
the Pennsylvania Crimes Code29 and the Pennsylvania Public Official and
Employee Ethics Act.30
§ 43-7. Violations.
Persons who make contributions contrary to the provisions of this chapter
will not be eligible for consideration, and, if the person violating the
provisions of this chapter is then serving as a consultant or professional
to the Township, a violation of this chapter will disqualify them from
continuing to provide services to the Township.
§ 43-8. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is found invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, then, to the extent possible, the invalid portion of the chapter
shall be severed from the remainder, and the remainder will continue in full
force and effect.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 51
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 122.
29.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
30.Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 1101 et seq.
§ 43-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 43-8
51:81
§ 51-1. Definitions. [Added 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 301]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes but is not limited to malt or brewed
beverages and liquor, as defined in the Pennsylvania Liquor Code (47 P.S.
§ 1-101 et seq.); also potable distilled spirits and ethyl alcohol and wine,
being used in the broadest sense, irrespective of percentage of alcohol by
volume.
§ 51-2. Public consumption prohibited.
No person in or on any public street, alley, sidewalk, walkway or property of
Upper Providence Township, whether in or upon a vehicle or conveyance or
as a pedestrian, shall drink, imbibe or ingest any alcoholic beverage.
§ 51-3. Open containers.
No person in or on any public street, alley, sidewalk, walkway or property of
Upper Providence Township, whether in or upon a vehicle or conveyance or
as a pedestrian, shall carry or have control over any opened bottle or other
container containing any alcoholic beverage.
§ 51-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
Any person found guilty of violating this chapter or any portion thereof
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 53
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hunting — See Ch. 107.
Piggeries — See Ch. 128.
Zoning — See Ch. 182.
§ 53-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Any and all types of animals, both domesticated and wild, male
and female and singular and plural, provided that nothing herein shall apply
§ 43-8 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 53-1
53:82
to dogs, cats, fish or other animals commonly considered domestic pets if
they are principally sheltered and kept inside a human dwelling unit.
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner or custodian of the animal or
fowl and not under the immediate control of the owner or custodian.
FOWL — Any and all fowl, domesticated and wild, male and female and
singular and plural, provided that nothing herein shall apply to birds kept
principally as pets and principally fed and sheltered inside a human
dwelling unit.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Township Manager, Code Enforcement Officer or
their authorized agent.
KEEPER — Refers to any person, firm or corporation owning or actually
keeping, having, using or maintaining any of the animals referred to on a
tract of five acres or less.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm or corporation.
RATPROOF — A state of being constructed so as to effectively prevent the
entry of rats.
SANITARY — Any condition of good order and cleanliness which precludes
the probability of disease transmission.
§ 53-2. Creation of foul odors prohibited.
No person owning or having in his custody animals or fowl shall so maintain
said animals or fowl in such a manner as to create any obnoxious or foul
odor therefrom, except to the minimum practical extent inherent in the
nature of said animal or fowl.
§ 53-3. Shelter requirements.
A. Any person owning or having in his custody animals or fowl on a tract of
less than five acres shall meet the following standards:
(1) Animals and fowl shall be provided with a shelter having a roof and
at least three enclosed sides and be contained within a fenced area
with:
(a) Seventy-five square feet of shelter area for each horse, pony,
mule, donkey, cow or other animal of similar size.
(b) Twelve square feet of shelter area for each dog, cat or other
animal of similar size.
(c) Three square feet of shelter area for each fowl.
(2) The following fenced area outside the shelter for each animal:
(a) Three thousand square feet for each horse, pony, mule, donkey,
cow or other animal of similar size.
§ 53-1 ANIMALS § 53-3
53:83
§ 53-4. Running at large prohibited.
No person owning or having in his custody animals or fowl shall permit the
same to go at large to the injury or annoyance of others, nor shall such
animals or fowl be permitted at large upon the streets or other public ways
of the township. Such action is declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to
the public health and safety.
§ 53-5. Impoundment by property owner.
Any person finding any animal or fowl upon his property to his injury or
annoyance may take up the same and remove it to any private or other
animal shelter that will take possession of it. If no such shelter is available,
he may hold the animal or fowl in his own possession and as soon as possible
(b) Three hundred square feet for each dog, cat or other animal of
similar size.
(c) Ten square feet for each fowl.
(3) Lot coverage.
(a) The total fenced and shelter area shall not cover more than
10% of the total lot area for the keeping of horses, ponies,
mules, donkeys, cows or other animals of similar size.
(b) The total fenced and shelter area shall not cover more than 3%
of the total lot area for dogs, cats or other animals of similar
size.
(c) The total fenced area and shelter area shall not cover more
than 1/2 of 1% of the total lot area for fowl.
(4) The boundaries of the fenced and shelter area shall be at least 15
feet from any property line and 50 feet from any ultimate right-ofway
line established by Article IV of Chapter 151, Streets and
Sidewalks. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 301]
B. Every keeper shall provide a shelter and area of a size sufficient for
good sanitation practices and adequate and sanitary drainage therefor.
C. Every keeper shall cause the litter and droppings therefrom to be
collected daily in a container or receptacle of such type that, when
closed, it is ratproof and flytight and after each such collection shall
cause such container or receptacle to be kept closed. At least twice a
week, each keeper shall cause all litter and droppings so collected to be
disposed of in a way as not to permit the presence of fly larvae.
D. Every keeper shall cause all feed provided therefor to be stored and
kept in a ratproof and flytight building, box, container or receptacle.
E. The premises shall be subject to inspection by the health officer or any
of his representatives at any reasonable hour of the day.
§ 53-3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 53-5
53:84
notify a township police officer of this custody, giving a description of the
animal or fowl and the name of the owner, if known.
§ 53-6. Return of animal to owner.
If the officer has or with reasonable dispatch can obtain the name of the
owner or custodian of the animal, he will return it to the residence address.
He will then secure or cause to be secured and serve or cause to be served
a complaint on the owner or custodian for violation of this chapter.
§ 53-7. Disposition of unclaimed animals.
Any officer or designated person picking up an animal or fowl, who, after
reasonable diligence, is unable to find who owns or has custody of it, may
take it to the nearest animal hospital or shelter and leave it.
§ 53-8. Seizure and impoundment by officials.
Any police officer or other person designated by the township for such
purposes is authorized to capture and impound any animal or fowl found at
large, the impounding to be in accordance with the procedure authorized
by this chapter. In the event that capture cannot be effected promptly, the
officer or person is authorized to destroy the animal or fowl.
§ 53-9. Disposition of unredeemed animals.
Any animal or fowl not redeemed within 24 hours will be disposed of in such
manner as previously agreed upon between the township and owner of the
animal shelter or hospital. The owner of the hospital or shelter is made an
agent of the township for this purpose, and his actions in this regard are
declared to be for a governmental purpose.
§ 53-10. Disposition of large animals.
Should any officer or designated person, upon call or upon his own
initiative, pick up a large animal such as a horse, cow or mule or any other
animal not acceptable by any animal hospital or shelter, he is authorized to
convey the animal to a farm having a working agreement with the township
to handle such cases. The disposition of the animal in this case shall be
handled in the same manner as though it were in an animal hospital or
shelter.
§ 53-11. Authorization to provide shelters.
The Township Secretary is empowered to enter into the necessary
arrangements with animal hospitals, shelters and farms to carry out the
terms of this chapter.
§ 53-5 ANIMALS § 53-12
53:85
§ 53-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs
of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 58
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 135.
§ 58-1. Height of grass or weeds restricted.
No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any property within
Upper Providence Township, except in areas zoned agricultural pursuant
to the currently effective Upper Providence Township Zoning Ordinance, as
amended,31 shall permit any grass or weeds or vegetation whatsoever, not
edible or planted for some useful or ornamental purpose, to grow or remain
upon any land 100 feet or less from any structure or from any street, alley or
sidewalk used by the public so as to exceed a height of 12 inches or to throw
off any unpleasant or noxious odor or to conceal any unsanitary deposit or
to create or produce pollen.
§ 58-2. Notice of violation.
A. Whenever a township officer or other officer designated by the Board of
Supervisors determines that the growth or accumulation of vegetation,
as aforesaid, is in violation of § 58-1, he shall notify the owner or
occupant of said premises to remedy such condition within five days of
the date of service of such notice. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
B. Notice pursuant to this chapter may be given personally or by
delivering the same to any adult person in charge of the premises or, in
case no person is found upon the premises, by certified mail addressed
to the owner at the address shown on township tax records or the last
known mailing address.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 182, Zoning. For provisions relating to visibility at intersections,
see § 182-10.
§ 53-12 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 58-3
58:86
§ 58-3. Failure to comply; work done by township.
Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified to
cut, destroy and/or to remove such grass, weeds or other vegetation within
five days after receipt of the written notice provided for in § 58-2 above or
within 10 days after the date of such notice, in the event that the same is
returned to the post office because of its inability to make delivery thereof,
provided that the same was properly addressed to the last known address
of such owner or agent, the Township Manager is hereby authorized and
empowered to pay for the cutting, destroying and/or removal of such grass,
weeds or other vegetation or to order the removal by the township. The
owner of property on which work is done pursuant to this section shall
be liable to the township in a civil action or by the filing of a municipal
claim for the cost thereof, together with 15% thereof for attorney's fees and
administration.
§ 58-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate or fail, neglect
or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and
costs of prosecution, in addition to any sums payable under § 58-3, provided
that each five-day period during which a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 60
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading, excavation and filling — See Ch. 99.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 151.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
154.
Zoning — See Ch. 182.
§ 60-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Upper Providence
Township Building Code" and/or the Pennsylvania "Uniform Construction
Code."
§ 60-2. Adoption of standards.
In accordance with the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999,
Chapter 5, Section 501(a)(1), the Township of Upper Providence situate in
Montgomery County Pennsylvania hereby elects to administer and enforce
the Uniform Construction Code as their municipal building code and the
§ 58-3 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-2
58:87
International Fuel Gas Code for purposes described in Section 302(A) of
said Act 45.
§ 60-3. Scope.
This adoption shall include all relative codes specifically provided for under
said Act 45 to include but not limited to the International Building Code,
the International Residential Code, the International Fire Code and all
other referenced codes. As provided for under Act 45, Section 304, all
subsequent editions or successor codes are hereby adopted. In addition, the
following appendices to the International Residential Code 2003 are hereby
adopted: A, B, C, F, G and H. The following appendices of the International
Fire Code are hereby adopted: B, C, D, E and F. Upon adoption by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of successor codes, those codes and the
appendices corresponding to those listed are hereby adopted.
§ 60-4. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within the Township shall be
undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the governing
body of the Township from time to time by resolution:
§ 60-5. Modification to standards.
A. By the designation of an employee of the Township to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of the Township.
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Township.
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement.
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of the Township.
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
A. Administrative: modification of the administrative regulations, chapter
403.
(1) Section 401.2a(a) add: "Fees for building permits shall be in
accordance with a schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors."
(2) All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the Township on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal
or exceed the requirements of the Code shall continue in full force
§ 60-2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 60-5
58:88
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed
the minimum requirements of the Code, as amended from time to
time.
2d. Pursuant to and in accordance with State Act 92 Section
104 (B), the Township will require permits for residential
alterations and repairs pursuant to the International
Residential Code 2003 Chapter 1 Section 105 or any
subsequent edition thereof. [Added 10-4-2004 by Ord. No.
445; amended 11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 446]
2e. Pursuant to and in accordance with State Act 92 Section 104
(B), the Township will require zoning permits for all utility
and miscellaneous use structures. Utility and miscellaneous
use structures in excess of two hundred (200) square feet will
require building permits. [Added 11-15-2004 by Ord. No.
446]
(3) All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose
requirements are less than the minimum requirements of the Code
are hereby amended to conform with the comparable provisions of
the Code.
(4) All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Township
not governed by the Code shall remain in full force and effect.
(5) Section 403-62(c) shall have the following items amended or
deleted from the list of permit exempt items as indicated.
(a) (1)(xiv) add: after... located above the porch or stoop and is not
over 30 inches above grade.
(b) (1)(xvii): delete.
(c) (2)(vi): delete.
(d) (5)(viii): delete.
(e) (5)(ix): delete.
(f) (6)(vi): delete.
B. Technical modifications of the International Building Code 2003.
(1) Section 705.3 shall be enforced as written in the 2003 International
Building Code. [Amended 2-6-2006 by Ord. No. 457]
(2) Section 1003.2.10.1 add: "Two exit signs shall be located at all exit
doors or exit access area so as to be readily visible. One sign shall
be located in the wall so that the bottom of the sign is eight inches
from the floor on the latch side of the door and the second sign shall
be located in a standard position above the exit doorway."
§ 60-5 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-5
58:89
(3) Sections 903.2.1.1, 903.2.1.2, 903.2.1.3, 903.2.1.4, 903.2.3,
903.2.6 and 903.2.10, amend as follows: All references to square
footage in these sections shall read "2500 square feet per floor."
C. Technical modifications of the International Residential Code 2003.
(1) The Design Data in Table R301.2(1) shall read as follows: snow load
30 pounds per square foot; wind speed 90 miles per hour, Seismic
Design Category C; weathering severe; frost depth 36 inches;
termite probability moderate to severe; decay slight to moderate;
winter design temp 10° F.; ice shield no; air freezing index 1500;
mean annual temp. 52° F.
(2) Section R321.2 (Section 317.2 of the 2003 International Residential
Code) shall be enforced as written in the 2003 International
Residential Code. [Amended 2-6-2006 by Ord. No. 457]
D. Administrative modifications of Chapter One of the International Fire
Code 2003.
(1) Section F-101.1 insert: "Upper Providence Township, Montgomery
County."
(2) Section F-103.1 General shall be modified and read as follows: The
Department of Fire Prevention is established within the jurisdiction
and under the direction of the Planning and Zoning Administrator/
Code Official. The Fire Marshal/Code official shall be in charge of
the operation of this Department and its function shall be the
implementation, administration, and enforcement of the provisions
of this Code.
(3) Section F-103.2 Appointment shall be deleted and the following
language substituted: The Fire Marshall position shall be filled as
prescribed in the Code of the Township of Upper Providence.
(4) Add Section F-105.1.4 Fees: "Fees for fire permits shall be in
accordance with a schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors."
(5) Sections F-105.6 and F-105.7 Required Permits shall read as
follows: "The Fire Code Official is authorized to issue permits and
collect fees as enumerated in Sections 105.6.1 through 105.6.47
and Sections 105.7.1 through 105.7.12 in accordance with a
schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
E. Technical modifications of the International Fire Code 2003.
[Amended 11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 446; 7-5-2011 by Ord. No.
515]
(1) Section F-505, Premises identification, shall be added to read as
follows:
§ 60-5 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 60-5
58:90
F-505.3 Identification of Truss Construction.
Except as provided in subparagraph (e) below, the owner of a
building or structure containing truss construction in any form
or manner shall install and maintain a truss emblem to the left
of the main entrance and at a height of not less than five feet
above grade. The truss emblem required under this section shall
be purchased from the Township at a cost determined from time
to time by resolution of the Township Board of Supervisors.
The owner and/or developer of a residential subdivision or
residential condominium shall install and maintain a truss emblem
within the public right-of-way or upon the common elements/area
(in the case of a private street or condominium) at each entrance
to such subdivision or condominium.
F-505.3.1. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to install
identification emblems on certain properties, buildings or
structures containing truss construction for the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of emergency responders.
F-505.3.2. Definitions. (A) As used in this chapter, the following
terms have the meanings indicated, unless a different meaning
clearly appears from the context.
(1) Truss Construction: A combination of members, such as beams,
bars and ties, usually arranged in triangular units to form a rigid
framework for supporting loads over a span of structural members
that connect together to span the space between the walls of the
building to support a vertical load.
(2) Truss Emblem: A sign consisting of an isosceles triangle not
less than 12 inches horizontally by six inches vertically made of
reflective material with white as the background and red lettering,
containing the following: "F" to signify a building or structure
having a floor with truss construction; "R" to signify a building or
structure having a roof with truss construction; or "FR" to signify
a building or structure having both a floor and roof with truss
construction.
F-505.3.3. Exemption. Except for nonresidential buildings or
structures, the owner of a building or accessory structure within
a residential subdivision or residential condominium referred to
in subparagraph (b)(2) above shall be exempt from installing and
maintaining a truss emblem. The owner of any other single-family
dwelling unit or semidetached dwelling containing not more than
two dwelling units shall also be exempt from installing and
maintaining a truss emblem.
F-505.3.4. Fire Marshal Approval. The owner and/or developer of
any building or structure required to have a truss emblem under
this section shall submit a plan for such truss emblem as to design
and location for the prior review and approval of the Township Fire
Marshal or Building Inspector.
§ 60-5 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-5
58:91
§ 60-6. Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing body
of this Municipality in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the Code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes
set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is
undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, the Board of
Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
Chapter 62
(RESERVED)
Chapter 64
(RESERVED)
Chapter 71
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 112. Peace and good order — See Ch. 122.
§ 71-1. Curfew established.
A curfew is hereby established in Upper Providence Township. The hours of
this curfew shall begin at 10:00 p.m. prevailing local time on each day and
end at 5:00 am. prevailing local time on the day next succeeding.32
§ 71-2. Restrictions on minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person who has not reached the 18th
anniversary of his or her birth date to be on any public street or in any
public way within the township within the hours of the said curfew as herein
defined, unless such person is proceeding expeditiously in the most direct
route to his home in cases where such person is detained so that he cannot
arrive at his home before the effective curfew hour.
F-505.3.5. Retroactive Compliance Required. The provisions of
this section shall apply to the owners of existing buildings or
structures having truss construction, but such owners shall have
one year from the effective date of this section to comply.
32.Editor's Note: Original Section II, which followed this section, was deleted 9-17-1990 by
Ord. No. 301.
§ 60-5 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 71-3
62:92
§ 71-3. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person standing in
loco parentis, knowingly or with reason to know, to permit any such person
to remain in or upon any public street or way or otherwise to be in violation
of this chapter.
§ 71-4. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 80
FIRE CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 33.
Department of Fire and Emergency
Services — See Ch. 85.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 60.
§ 80-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and maybe cited as the "Upper Providence
Township Fire Code."
§ 80-2. Adoption of standards.
In accordance with the Second Class Township Code, the Township of Upper
Providence situate in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania hereby adopts the
International Fire Code 2009 edition as the Upper Providence Township
Fire Code. This adoption shall include all relative reference standards.
A. Any person under the age of 18 years found in violation of the terms of
this chapter shall be forthwith remanded to the Juvenile Probation
Officer or to any authorized deputy of such officer to be dealt with in the
same manner as a minor violating any other township ordinance or
Pennsylvania statute.
B. A parent, guardian or other person standing in loco parentis of a child
subject to the curfew provisions of this chapter who knowingly, or with
reason to know, allows or permits such person to violate the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay for
the first offense a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $25, for the
second offense a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50 and for the
third or subsequent offenses a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$100 or, in default thereof, to be imprisoned for not in excess of 30 days.
§ 71-3 CURFEW § 80-3
71:93
§ 80-3. Scope.
The intent of this Code is to regulate those health, safety and welfare issues
in legally existing buildings that are critical to the safe occupancy of said
buildings and issues that are critical to the safety of the community. This
chapter shall not apply to new construction that is otherwise regulated
or under construction under permits issued under the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act (Act 45 of 1999).33 All provisions of the International
Fire Code referenced herein regulating new construction, additions,
alterations or repairs under the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act are
hereby excluded from enforcement under this chapter. This chapter shall
regulate and govern the safeguarding of property from fire and explosion
hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life
or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said Fire Code on file in the office of the Director of Fire and Emergency
Services of Upper Providence Township are hereby referred to, adopted
and made part hereof, as fully set out in this chapter with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein.
§ 80-4. Definitions.
Section 202 of the International Fire Code 2009 edition shall have the
following definitions added:
AUDIBLE WARNING DEVICE — A device, bell, horn or siren attached to the
interior or exterior of a building which emits a warning sound loud enough
to be heard outside of the building and which, when activated, can cause
the police or Fire Department to respond.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal activated by an emergency alarm or device,
any audible alarm or any other kind of direct or indirect signal or message
given to the local Police or Fire Department or the Montgomery County
Communications Center to which the Fire or Police Department responds
which is not the result of a burglary, robbery, fire or similar emergency.
(This definition supplements the definition already contained in the IFC
2009.)
FIRE DEPARTMENT — Any of the fire companies which service Upper
Providence Township.
FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTION (FDC) — Any hose connection installed
on a structure for the use of the Fire Department to supply water to the fire
sprinkler system(s) and/or standpipe system for the intention of controlling
a fire.
FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTION (FDC) EMBLEM — A sign consisting
of a 12-inch-by-12-inch square made of reflective material with a solid
33.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 80-3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 80-4
71:94
red background with white symbols. Such symbols shall comply with the
current NFPA standard.
FIRE MARSHAL — The Upper Providence Township Fire Marshal/fire code
official with direct responsibility for enforcement of the fire code.
LEGALLY OCCUPIED — A structure that has received a legally issued
certificate of occupancy from the State of Pennsylvania or the local
authority having jurisdiction.
OUTDOOR FURNACE (also known as "outdoor wood-fired boiler") — A selfcontained
unit designed to provide heating or hot water to a building or
structure which unit is located outside of that building or structure. This
unit typically burns (but is not limited to) wood, coal or other carbon-based
fuel resources.
PHASE 2 OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILER — An outdoor wood-fired boiler
or furnace that has been certified or qualified by the EPA as meeting a
particulate matter emission limit of 0.32 pounds per million British Thermal
Units output and is labeled accordingly. Phase 2 outdoor wood- fired boiler
models will be identified with a white hang tag.
§ 80-5. Administration and enforcement.
The following modifications to standards of the International Fire Code
2009 edition are hereby adopted as follows:
A. In Section 101.1, insert "Upper Providence Township" as the name of
the jurisdiction.
B. In Section 103, all references to the "Department of Fire Prevention"
shall be understood to mean the Upper Providence Township
Department of Fire and Emergency Services as established under
Chapter 85 of the Code of the Township of Upper Providence.
C. In Section 103.1, the term "fire code official" shall be understood to
mean the duly appointed Fire Marshal of Upper Providence Township.
D. Section 103.2, Appointment, shall be deleted and the following
language substituted: "The fire code official position shall be filled as
prescribed in the Code of the Township of Upper Providence."
E. Section 106.5, Periodic inspections, shall be added as follows.
106.5 Periodic inspections. The fire code official shall conduct
periodic inspections on properties other than those properties erected
under the provisions of the International Residential Code. Frequency
of said inspections shall be determined by the fire code official based
on his determination of fire risk regarding the use and level of
maintenance of life safety systems in the structure.
F. Section 109.3.2 shall be added as follows:
§ 80-4 CURFEW § 80-5
71:95
§ 80-6. Technical amendments.
Technical amendments to the International Fire Code 2009 edition shall be
as follows:
109.3.2 Existing building inspection violations. Any person who
violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs; provided,
however, that it shall be the duty of the fire code official to report to the
Director of Fire and Emergency Services all violations of any provision
of this chapter, indicating, in each case, the section violated, the name
of the owner or lessee involved in the violation, the location where the
violation took place and any other facts that might be necessary in
order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances attending
the violation. The fire code official or other person making the report
shall serve upon the individual responsible the notice indicating the
violation of this chapter. The notice shall contain instructions to the
responsible person indicating a reasonable amount of time to correct
named violations. Failure to correct named deficiencies within the
specified time in the notice will result in a violation assessment in
the amount indicated in the Township Fee Schedule. Further, if the
responsible party should report to the office of the Director of Fire and
Emergency Services and pay the sum indicated within 48 hours after
the time of the notice, that act will save the violator from prosecution
and from payment of the fine and costs prescribed in the first sentence
of this section.
G. In Section 111.4, replace the last seven words as follows, "shall be
liable to a fine of not more than $1,000."
H. In Section 113.1, add "Fees for fire permits shall be in accordance with
a schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors."
I. Section 907.9.6 shall be added as follows: [Added 7-5-2011 by Ord.
No. 515]
907.9.6 All owners or lessees of emergency alarms are responsible for
the costs involved in the Fire or Police Department responding to false
alarms in accordance with the following schedule: for the first alarm: a
warning; for the second alarm: $100; for the third alarm: $300; for the
fourth alarm: $400; for the fifth and each additional alarm: $500. The
owner or lessee of a property with an alarm system shall notify the Fire
Marshal of any alarm system under repair that may cause false alarms.
Upon proper notification, the Fire Marshal shall allow reasonable time,
not to exceed 14 calendar days from the date of notification, for repairs
to be effected before imposing costs.
A. Section 307 shall be amended as follows:
SECTION 307 REGULATION OF OPEN BURNING
§ 80-5 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 80-6
71:96
307.1. Prohibition of burning for disposal purposes.
1. In accordance with the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling, and
Waste Reduction Act of July 28, 1988, (P.L. 528, No. 101)
("Pennsylvania Act 101") and as amended by Act 140 of 2006, it
shall be unlawful for any person to openly burn any material,
including the following, at any time in any zone within the
municipality: household trash, books, magazines, newspapers,
cardboard and/or any items that are required to be recycled in the
municipality under Pennsylvania Act 101, including yard waste,
leaves and scrap lumber or any vegetation, plywood, drywall,
plastic products, insulation materials, upholstered furniture, solid
waste and/or construction waste as defined by the Pennsylvania
Solid Waste Management Act and 25 PA Code 271.1, garbage, dead
animals, human and animal excrement, human and animal hair,
rubber products, including tires, hydrocarbon products or
flammable liquids, asphalt or tar shingles or roofing materials,
bedding, foam rubber, nylon, rayon, cotton, wool, polyester or other
synthetic material, insulation from copper or other wiring.
307.1.1. Exclusions
2. The prohibition of open burning shall be in effect except when the
burning results from:
(a) An open burning set to prevent or abate a fire hazard when
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection's
regional office and set by or under the supervision of a public
officer.
(b) A fire set for the purpose of instructing personnel in
firefighting, when approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection's regional office.
(c) A fire set for the prevention and control of disease or pests,
when approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection's regional office.
(d) A fire set for the purpose of burning, clearing and grubbing
waste; if within an air basin, an air curtain destructor must be
used and must be approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection's regional office.
(e) A fire set in conjunction with the production of agricultural
commodities in their unmanufactured state on the premises of
the farm operation.
(f) A fire set solely for cooking food.
(g) A fire set solely for recreational or ceremonial purposes.
§ 80-6 CURFEW § 80-6
71:97
307.1.2. Regulations pertaining to permitted instances
of open burning.
3. Any such open burning as permitted in Section 2 shall be located at
least fifty feet or more from any building, structure or combustible
materials, and at least 50 feet from any public street or right-ofway.
4. A permit from the Township is required for any instances of open
burning as permitted in 307.1.1 items (a) through (g). A fee maybe
charged for said permit by resolution of the Board of Supervisors,
as may be modified from time to time. However, any Township or
Fire Official may suspend open burning at any time when it is
determined by any of them that, in their opinion, any of the
following conditions exist:
(a) Smoke, embers and/or ash emission cause damage to property
or vegetation of adjacent properties.
(b) Smoke, embers and/or ash emission are, or maybe, offensive,
objectionable, a public nuisance or deleterious to human or
animal health.
(c) Dry conditions or drought warrant a ban on all open burning,
in which case the Board of Supervisors of the municipality shall
be so advised in writing.
5. All fires in open burning must be guarded or attended to by one or
more responsible adult persons, being individuals eighteen or over,
at all times until such fire and open burning has been extinguished.
6. Yard waste that is permitted to be burned on agricultural land must
originate from the same parcel of land on which it is burned.
7. Nonorganic or recyclable materials, or any other combustibles
which may create large amounts of smoke, may not be openly
burned.
8. Any such open burning shall be permitted between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. No burning or smoldering shall occur
outside the above time period, unless prior permission is requested
of and expressly granted by the Township.
307.1.3. Outdoor fireplaces, outdoor cooking grills, outdoor
patio stoves, chimeneas and factory-built metal novelty
stoves.
9. Outdoor fireplaces, outdoor cooking grills, outdoor patio stoves,
chimeneas and factory-built metal novelty stoves shall be permitted
upon private property within all zones of the Township solely for
their intended purpose.
§ 80-6 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 80-6
71:98
10. No person shall use outdoor fireplaces, outdoor cooking grills,
outdoor patio stoves, chimneys and factory-built metal novelty
stoves for the burning of material as outlined in Section 1.
11. Outdoor fireplaces, outdoor cooking grills, outdoor patio stoves,
chimneys and factory-built metal novelty stoves shall not be used
indoors or in any enclosed areas that are not properly ventilated.
307.1.4. Indoor fireplaces; woodburning and coal stoves;
solid-fuel heaters.
12. Fireplaces or woodburning or coal stoves shall be permitted inside
residential private prop erty within all zones of the Township solely
for the purpose of heating the dwelling unit.
13. Only seasoned firewood, coal or solid fuels recommended by the
manufacturer maybe burned in such fireplaces, woodburning or
coal stoves or solid-fuel heaters.
14. No person may use such fireplaces, woodburning or coal stoves or
solid-fuel heaters for the burning of any material as outlined in
Section 1.
15. Such fireplaces, woodburning or coal stoves or solid-fuel heaters
shall not be used for such purpose when, in the judgment of a
Township or fire official, a fire hazard is created by such use and
operation and/or any danger is posed to the occupants therein or
the neighboring buildings and/or occupants.
16. If the smoke, ashes and/or smell emitting to the outside
atmosphere from the chimney, stove pipe or flue are objectionable
or offensive to the general public, the operation of such fireplace,
woodburning or coal stove or solid-fuel heater shall be suspended
by any Township or fire official.
307.1.5. Handling of ashes and rubbish.
17. Ashes, smoldering coals, wood and embers or other material liable
to spontaneously ignite shall not be deposited or allowed to remain
within 10 feet of any combustible materials but shall be deposited
in noncombustible containers. Rubbish of any kind shall not be
allowed to accumulate.
B. In Section 307.4.3, delete the exception.
C. Section 307.4.4 shall be added and read as follows:
307.4.4 Portable outdoor and fixed outdoor fireplaces: shall be
operated in accordance with §§ 307, 307.4 and 307.5.
D. Section 507.4.3 Shall be added and read as follows:
§ 80-6 CURFEW § 80-6
71:99
507.4.3 Private hydrants: All private fire hydrants shall be painted
silver in a manner approved by the fire code official.
E. Section 603.10 shall be added and read as follows:
603.10 Outdoor wood - fired boilers and furnaces: No person shall
install an outdoor wood-fired boiler or furnace that is not Phase 2
certified by the EPA. The use of such furnaces must follow all operating
instructions supplied by the manufacturer. Any outdoor furnace must
also comply with any other county, state or federal guidelines for the
same. The only fuels allowed shall be those listed fuels recommended
by the manufacturer. The following are prohibited: trash, plastics,
gasoline, rubber, naphtha, household garbage, material treated with
petroleum products (particle board, railroad ties and pressure-treated
wood), leaves, paper products and cardboard. Users must follow the
manufacturer's written instructions for recommended loading times
and amounts. Lighter fluids, gasoline or chemicals to start the furnace
are prohibited. The unit must be located with due consideration to the
prevailing wind direction.
603.10.1 Stack location: With respect to any outdoor furnaces
installed, such outdoor furnaces must be set back a minimum of 150
feet from any property line. If located more than 150 feet to any
residence not served by the furnace, the stack must be at least to feet
of the height above the ground and at least two feet above the peak of
any residence less than 150 feet from said furnace.
602.10.2 Operation: No person shall use or operate new or existing
outdoor wood-fired boilers between the dates of May 15 and
September 15.
603.10.2 Permit required: Any resident wishing to install/operate
an outdoor furnace must secure a permit from the Township of Upper
Providence. The permit fees will be established from time to time by
resolution of the Township Board of Supervisors.
F. Section 907 shall be amended as follows:
(1) Section 907.9.6 shall read as follows:
907.9.6 Owner - lessee responsibility: All owners or lessees
of emergency alarms are responsible for the costs involved in
the Fire or Police Department responding to false alarms in
accordance with the fee schedule duly adopted by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
(2) Section F-907.9.7 shall be supplemented as follows:
§ 80-6 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 80-6
71:100
Chapter 85
FIRE AND EMERGENCY SERVICES, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 60.
Fire Code — See Ch. 80.
Fire and insurance claims — See Ch. 90.
§ 85-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is as follows:
§ 85-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
given in this section, as follows:
CONTRACT EMERGENCY SERVICE PROVIDER — All fire and EMS
organizations servicing the Township of Upper Providence with a primary
response district within the municipal boundaries of the Township and; who
are situated outside of said boundaries. These agencies shall be authorized
through written agreements that specify general operating parameters for
services, primary response district to be serviced, reporting requirements
and other reasonable conditions needed to effectuate such operations.
DEPARTMENT — The Township of Upper Providence Department of Fire
and Emergency Services.
§ 85-3. Department of Fire and Emergency Services.
907.9.7 Disconnection: Upon receipt of information from the
Fire or Police Department that any emergency alarm does not
meet the requirements of this chapter and has been the source
of false alarm activation, the Fire Marshal or Police Chief may
determine that the emergency alarm shall be disconnected if not
repaired within 30 days in order to relieve those Departments of
the burden of responding to false alarms.
A. To maintain an effective emergency response capability to natural and
man-made emergencies through planning and the efficient use of
manpower and equipment.
B. To establish the Upper Providence Township Department of Fire and
Emergency Services and to create the position of Chief of Fire and
Emergency Services for the management and oversight of the
department.
§ 80-6 CURFEW § 85-3
71:101
§ 85-4. Authorized activities of Department and contract emergency
services providers.
§ 85-5. Contract emergency services providers.
A. The Department is hereby established to provide a basic and consistent
approach to the protection of lives and property in Upper Providence
Township, and to provide for and oversee consistent policies regarding
staffing, training, funding, capital purchases, response procedures,
operations and related items for all providers having primary response
districts within the municipal boundaries of the Township.
B. The Department shall consist of the Chief of Fire and Emergency
Services, the Chief Fire Marshal, Deputy Fire Marshal(s), Assistant Fire
Marshal(s), the Emergency Management Coordinator, volunteer
firefighters, full- and part-time firefighters employed by Upper
Providence Township, other full-time Township employees who may be
assigned to firefighting duties as a secondary responsibility and other
personnel designated by the Board of Supervisors.
(1) The Department shall also include all volunteer members of
agencies who provide fire, rescue or EMS services and; who are
based within the municipal boundaries of Upper Providence
Township.
A. The Department, and contract emergency service providers, are hereby
authorized to provide such services as determined by the Board of
Supervisors and outlined in their respective service agreements. These
services include, but are not limited to, fire prevention activities, fire
suppression activities, rescue services, emergency medical services,
hazardous materials incident responses, responses to natural or manmade
phenomena and other dangerous situations as called upon.
B. The Department may respond to calls and provide services to
municipalities outside of the Township when requested as mutual or
automatic aid through the Montgomery County Emergency Dispatch
Services.
(1) No apparatus owned by the Township shall at any time be taken
beyond the municipal boundaries without the consent of the Chief
of Fire and Emergency Services for activities other than those
dispatched as mutual or automatic aid through the Montgomery
County Emergency Dispatch Services.
C. The Department, and contract emergency service providers, may also
conduct and participate in training activities and drills either within or
outside the Township, as may be deemed necessary to maintain
proficiency in providing services as outlined in § 85-4A and B.
A. Each contract emergency service provider shall operate under its own
organizational bylaws, which shall be in accordance with generally
§ 85-3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 85-5
71:102
§ 85-6. Chief of Fire and Emergency Services, duties of.
accepted standards for similar organizations, with accounting
procedures recommended by the Department and approved by the
Board of Supervisors through the Township's auditors.
B. The contract emergency service provider's chief officer, or alternate, of
each organization shall continue to be responsible for the maintenance,
efficiency, and conduct of their respective company's personnel and
equipment with respect to services provided within Upper Providence
Township.
A. The Chief of Fire and Emergency Services shall be a duly sworn officer
of the Township, hired by the Township and as fully equipped as
circumstances permit.
B. The Chief of Fire and Emergency Services shall have the authority to
establish policies and procedures for the Department, and contract
emergency service providers, such policies and procedures to be
consistent with this chapter.
C. The Chief of Fire and Emergency Services, after consulting with the
Township Manager, shall be authorized to recommend disciplinary
actions for any volunteer member of the Department or contract
emergency service provider in violation of implemented policies and
procedures. Said discipline may include but not be limited to verbal or
written reprimand and/or suspension and/or permanent removal from
responding to and operating at fires and emergencies within the
municipal boundaries of Upper Providence Township.
D. The Chief of Fire and Emergency Services shall be responsible for
determining proper dispatching of emergency units to any fire or
emergency and shall coordinate communications to and from
Montgomery County Emergency Dispatch Services regarding
emergency assignments, and similar matters.
E. The Chief of Fire and Emergency Services shall be the designated
liaison between the Township elected officials, the Department, and all
contract emergency service providers.
F. The Chief of Fire and Emergency Services, when on scene, shall have
the authority to assume the role of Incident Commander and shall have
direct oversight of the Department, the Office of the Fire Marshal, the
Office of Emergency Management and any and all related employees.
G. The Chief of Fire and Emergency Services shall prepare at the request
of the Township Manager a budget for the annual operation of the
Department for approval by the Board of Supervisors.
H. The Chief of Fire and Emergency Services shall, annually, render a
report to the Township Manager.
§ 85-5 CURFEW § 85-6
71:103
§ 85-7. Office of Fire Marshal.
I. The Chief of Fire and Emergency Services shall have earned a
bachelor's degree of art or science in fire department administration,
fire science, public policy or similar discipline. Additionally, the Chief of
Fire and Emergency Services shall meet the implemented training and
certification standards for the position of Fire Chief.
J. The Chief of Fire and Emergency Services may be a standalone position
or a dual role position involving simultaneous employment such as the
Chief Fire Marshal or Deputy Fire Marshal as deemed appropriate by
the Township Manager.
A. The Chief Fire Marshal shall be a duly sworn officer of the Township,
hired by the Township Manager and as fully equipped as circumstances
permit.
B. The Office of the Fire Marshal shall consist of the Chief Fire Marshal,
Deputy Fire Marshal(s) and Assistant Fire Marshal(s), as appointed and
assigned.
C. The Chief Fire Marshal, Deputy Fire Marshal(s) and Assistant Fire
Marshal(s) shall function as Fire Code Officials as provided for in the
adopted Township Fire Code, and shall enforce all laws, ordinances,
codes and regulations with respect to:
(1) The Code of the Township of Upper Providence, as amended;
(2) The Township's Fire Code, as amended;
(3) The Township's Building Code, as amended.
D. Duties and responsibilities.
(1) The Chief Fire Marshal, Deputy Fire Marshal(s) and Assistant Fire
Marshal(s) shall be duly sworn officers of the Township.
(2) The Office of the Fire Marshal shall work in cooperation with the
Department of Planning and Zoning, and shall perform the
following duties:
(a) Permitting of Fire-Code-related items in new construction;
(b) Plan review of new construction and alterations and
renovations of existing systems;
(c) Inspections of permitted commercial construction as it relates
to fire/life safety components;
(d) Annual inspections of commercial properties;
(e) Permitting of special events;
(f) Service request processing of fire-related items; and
§ 85-6 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 85-7
71:104
§ 85-8. Office of Emergency Management.
(g) Review and comment on proposed developments.
(3) The Fire Marshal's Office shall be responsible for the investigation
of the origin, cause and circumstances of fires and explosions that
occur within the Township's borders, in support of and in
cooperation with law enforcement.
(4) The Fire Marshal's Office shall be responsible for overseeing the
collection and reporting of all statistical data as it relates to the
National Fire Incident Reporting System (NFIRS). The Chief Fire
Marshal shall be the sole distribution officer for any and all
requested information as it relates to emergency incidents in the
Township.
(5) Training required. The Chief Fire Marshal and Deputy Fire
Marshal(s) shall obtain, and maintain as current and in force, the
following certifications:
(a) Pennsylvania Labor and Industry certification as a Building
Construction Code Official;
(b) ICC Fire Inspector I and II;
(c) ICC Fire Plans Examiner;
(d) ICC Accessibility Inspector/Plans Examiner;
(e) ICC Building Plans Examiner;
(f) ICC Commercial Building Inspector;
(g) ICC Commercial Mechanical Inspector;
(h) NFPA 1021 certification as Fire Officer II;
(i) NFPA 1033 certification as a Fire Investigator.
(6) All Office of the Fire Marshal personnel, regardless of rank, shall
routinely respond to and operate at fires and emergencies as
directed by the Chief of Fire and Emergency Services.
A. The Emergency Management Coordinator (the "Coordinator") shall be
appointed by the Township Board of Supervisors and confirmed by the
Governor upon the recommendation of the Chief of Fire and Emergency
Services. The Coordinator shall report to and work for the Chief of Fire
and Emergency Services as assigned by the Township Manager.
B. The Coordinator shall be professionally competent and capable of
planning, effecting coordination among operating agencies of
government and controlling coordinated operations by local emergency
preparedness forces.
§ 85-7 CURFEW § 85-8
71:105
§ 85-9. Incident command.
The incident command structure to be used by the Department and contract
emergency service providers shall be the National Incident Management
System.
§ 85-10. Member qualifications of Department and contract
emergency service providers.
Each member within the Department, and contract emergency service
providers, shall be qualified to their position as outlined through policy
established by the Chief of Fire and Emergency Services.
§ 85-11. Appropriations and audits.
C. The Office of Emergency Management shall consist of the Coordinator
and Deputy Coordinator, if assigned.
D. Each appointed coordinator shall:
(1) Attend and successfully complete the first phase of the career
development program as prescribed by the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency within one year after
appointment; and
(2) Attend and successfully complete the second phase of the career
development program as prescribed by the agency within three
years after appointment; and
(3) Attend basic and advanced seminars, workshops and training
conferences called by the state director and/or official having
responsibility for providing the coordinator with in-service
training; and
(4) All Office of Emergency Management personnel, regardless of
rank, shall routinely respond to and operate at fires and
emergencies as directed by the Chief of Fire and Emergency
Services.
E. Failure to attend the instruction described in Subsection D or failure to
attend a prescribed training conference for a period of two consecutive
years shall be cause for replacement.
F. The Coordinator and Deputy Coordinator shall operate under the
authority of Title 35, Health and Safety, as amended.
A. Appropriations may be made by the Board of Supervisors to any
emergency service organization as the Board of Supervisors may see
fit.
B. Any fire or emergency service agency, regardless of how defined in this
chapter, receiving annual funding from the Township shall enter into a
written agreement with the Township.
§ 85-8 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 85-11
71:106
Chapter 89
(RESERVED)
Chapter 90
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
§ 90-1. Certification required.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insurer")
doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim
of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within Upper
Providence Township (hereinafter "Township") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$7,500, unless the insurer is furnished by the Township Manager with a
certificate pursuant to Section 508(b) of the Insurance Company Law of
1921, as amended by Act 98 of 1992 and Act 93 of 1994 (collectively,
the "Act") and unless there is compliance with the procedure set forth in
Section 508(c) and (d) of the Act.
§ 90-2. Township Manager's duties.
The Township Manager is hereby appointed as the designated officer who is
authorized to carry out all the responsibilities and duties as stated herein.
It shall be the duty of the Township Manager to issue the certifications
required under this chapter. However, the Township Manager shall only be
responsible for ascertaining the amount of any and all real estate taxes due,
assessment penalties or user charges against real property.
§ 90-3. Procedure when no municipal claims outstanding;
procedure for excessive loss.
Where, pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(i) of Act 98 of 1992, the Township
Manager issues a certificate or, at the discretion of Upper Providence
Township, a verbal notification, which shall be confirmed in writing by
the insurer, indicating that there are no delinquent taxes, assessments,
penalties or user charges against real property, the insuring agent shall
pay the claim of the named insured; provided, however, that, if the loss
as agreed upon by the named insurer and the insuring agent equals or
exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire polices covering
the building or other structure, the following procedure must be followed:
(1) Failure to provide the required reporting and documentation in
accordance with these reporting requirements and other
regulations of the Department as outlined in any written
agreement(s) will result in the forfeiture of the allocated funding
for that year.
§ 85-11 (RESERVED) § 90-3
89:107
A. The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
Township Manager in the aggregate of $2,000 for each $15,000 of a
claim, this section to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or less,
the amount transferred to the Township shall be $2,000.
B. If at the time of a loss report, the named insured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing, or
securing the building or other structure in an amount less than the
amount calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the insuring
agent shall transfer to the Township from the insurance proceeds the
amount specified in the estimate.
C. The transfer proceeds shall be on a pro-rata basis by all companies,
associations or exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
Policy proceeds remaining after the transfer to Upper Providence
Township shall be disbursed in accordance with policy terms.
D. After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the cost of the removing, repairing or securing the building
or other structure and the Township Manager shall return the amount
of the funds transferred to the Township in excess of the estimate to the
named insured if the Township has not commenced to remove, repair or
secure the building or other structure.
E. When transferring funds under this section, an insurance company,
association or exchange shall provide the Township with the name and
address of the named insured.
F. Upon receipt of the information set forth in Subsection E of this section,
the Township shall contact the named insured to certify that the
proceeds have been received by the Township and notify the named
insured that the procedure under this section be followed.
G. Upon receipt of the proceeds under this section, the Township shall do
the following:
(1) The Township Manager shall place the proceeds in a separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total cost of removing,
repairing or securing the building or structure which are incurred
by the Township. Such costs shall include, without limitation, any
engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the Township
in connection with such removal, repair or securing of the building
or any proceedings related thereto.
(2) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the Township, and the required proof of
such completion is received by the Township Manager, and if the
Township has not incurred any cost for repairs, removal or
securing, the funds shall be returned to the named insured. If the
Township has incurred cost for repairs, removal or securing of the
building or other structure, the cost shall be paid from the fund
§ 90-3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 90-3
89:108
§ 90-4. Procedure when Township claims outstanding.
Where, pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(ii), Act 98 of 1992, the Township
Manager issues a certificate and bill showing the amount of delinquent
taxes, assessments, penalties and user charges against the real property
that have not been paid as of the date of the certificate and also showing, as
of the date of the certificate, the amount of the total costs, if any, certified
to the Township Manager that have been incurred by the Township for
removal, repair or securing of the building or other structure on the real
property, the insuring agent shall return the bill to the Township Manager
and transfer to the Township Manager an amount from the insurance
proceeds necessary to pay the taxes, assessment, penalties, charges and
costs as shown on the bill. The Township, upon receipt of the amount, shall
apply or credit it to the payment of the items shown on the bill. A tax
assessment, penalty or user charge becomes delinquent at the time and/or
on the date a lien could have otherwise been filed against the property by
Upper Providence Township under applicable law.
§ 90-5. Adoption of procedures, regulations and fees.
The Township Supervisors may, by resolution, adopt procedures and
regulations to implement Act 98 of 1992 and this chapter, and may, by
resolution, fix reasonable fees to be charged for Township activities or
services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992 and this chapter, including,
but not limited to, the issuance of certifications and bills, the performance
of inspections, and the opening of separate fund accounts.
§ 90-6. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured, any insurer, person, firm or
corporation who violates the provisions of this section or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements herein stated shall be liable, upon summary
conviction, to fines and penalties not exceeding $1,000, which fines and
penalties may be collected by suit or summary proceedings brought in the
and, if excess funds remain, the Township shall transfer the
remaining funds to the named insured.
(3) To the extent that interest is earned on the proceeds held by the
Township pursuant to this section and not returned to the named
insured, such interest shall belong to the Township. To the extent
that proceeds are returned to the named insured, interest earned
on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named insured at the
time the proceeds are returned.
H. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Township to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prohibit the Township and the named
insured from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of
funds to the named insured or from negotiating some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property.
§ 90-3 (RESERVED) § 90-6
89:109
name of the Township before any Magisterial District Judge or recovered as
debts of the like amount are now by law recoverable.
Chapter 94
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 124.
§ 94-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Yard Sale and Garage Sale Ordinance."
§ 94-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter, consistent with the Second Class Township
Code, Act of May 1, 1933, P.L. 103, as amended,34 is to license, regulate and
control yard sales or garage sales within residential and industrial districts
within Upper Providence Township.
§ 94-3. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings herein set forth:
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors.
PERSON — Includes natural persons, individuals, corporations,
eleemosynary, philanthropic, charitable or religious institutions or nonprofit
corporations, homeowners' associations, unincorporated associations,
partnerships and joint ventures, who or which are owners of real estate
within the township, their equitable owners or any agents, servants,
workmen or employees thereof or independent contractors thereof.
SALE — Includes yard sale, garage sale, sidewalk sale, auction, rummage
sale, attic sale or any other activity by which a person or persons not
engaged in such sales as a commercial activity shall display items of
personalty to other persons and invite the bidding or purchase thereof by
said persons.
§ 94-4. Signs and handbills.
A. Posting of handbills or signs. In the event that any person proposes to
post signs or handbills within the township to advertise a sale, said
person shall post with the Township Treasurer cash or other surety in
the sum of $50, which sum shall be returned as soon as the township,
34.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 90-6 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 94-4
94:110
§ 94-5. Limit on number of sales.
No person shall conduct more than two sales on a specific property within
residentially zoned districts in the township during any calendar year.
§ 94-6. Violations and penalties.
through its duly directed agent, is satisfied that the handbills or signs
have been removed from the place or places where posted.
B. Restrictions on handbills or signs. Any signs or handbills placed within
the township relating to a sale shall be subject to the following
restrictions:
(1) Time of placement. The handbills or signs shall not be publicly
placed within the township any earlier than two weeks prior to the
date scheduled for sale.
(2) Location. No handbills or signs shall be placed upon the private
property of another without written consent having first been had
or secured, and no sign or handbill may be posted upon the private
property of another on more than one occasion per year.
(3) List of locations. In the event that signs or handbills are employed,
the person conducting the sale shall provide a list of all locations
within the township where the handbills or signs were placed.
(4) Manner of affixing. No handbills or signs shall be permitted which:
(a) Are nailed to utility poles.
(b) Are secured by glue or other substance making their removal
impossible or impractical.
(5) Size. No handbill or sign may be larger than one square foot.
A. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof by summary proceedings, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and the costs of
prosecution; provided, however, that each day's violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
[Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 301]
B. Equity. In addition to the penalty provisions aforesaid, nothing herein
contained shall preclude the Board of Supervisors of Upper Providence
Township, in an action within the Court of Common Pleas of
Montgomery County or such other court as may be deemed
appropriate, seeking to enjoin any person from violating the terms of
this chapter or any portion thereof or seeking to abate a nuisance.
§ 94-4 GARAGE SALES § 94-7
94:111
§ 94-7. Interpretation of provisions.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to enlarge the uses permitted
within Chapter 182, Zoning, as it may be amended.
Chapter 99
GRADING, EXCAVATING AND FILLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 89. Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
154.
§ 99-1. Title and purpose.
§ 99-2. Definitions.
Wherever used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING PERMIT — Any permit issued by the township officer pursuant
to the provisions of the Upper Providence Building Code35 for the
construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building.[Amended
9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 301]
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new location,
and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
GRADE — The elevation of the existing ground surface at the location of any
proposed excavation or fill.
GRADING — Excavation or fill or any combination thereof, and shall include
the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GRADING PERMIT — Any permit required under § 99-3 hereof.
A. Title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Upper
Providence Township Grading Ordinance."
B. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards
to safeguard persons, to protect property and to promote the public
welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality
of materials, use, location and maintenance of grading, excavation and
fill.
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 60, Building Construction, Art. I.
§ 94-7 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 99-2
99:112
PERSON — A natural person, but shall also include a partnership or
corporation.
SITE — A lot, tract or parcel of land or a series of lots, tracts or parcels of
land joined together, where grading work is continuous and performed at
the same time.
§ 99-3. Permit required.
A. No person shall commence or perform any grading, excavation or fill
without first having obtained a grading permit from the Township
Engineer. A separate grading permit shall be required for each site.
One permit may cover both an excavation and any fill made on the same
site.
B. A grading permit will not be required, however, in the following
situations, but in all other respects the provisions of this chapter shall
apply:
(1) An excavation which does not exceed three feet in vertical depth at
its deepest point measured from the natural ground surface nor
cover an area of more than 1,000 square feet. This exception shall
not affect the applicability of this chapter to or the requirement of a
grading permit for any fill made with the material from such
excavation.
(2) A fill which does not exceed 10 cubic yards of material on any one
site or a fill which does not exceed three feet in vertical depth at its
deepest point measured from the natural ground surface nor cover
an area of more than 1,000 square feet, provided that the surfaces
of such fills do not have a slope at any point steeper than five
horizontal to one vertical.
(3) An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a
building, swimming pool or underground structure authorized by a
building permit and excavation for a driveway between a building
site and the street. This exception shall not affect the applicability
of this chapter to or the requirement of a grading permit for any fill
made with the material from such excavation. A grading point shall
not be required for the temporary stockpiling on the same site of
the material from such excavation.
(4) A single-family house site where the maximum gradient between
property lines or the maximum excavation or fill [exclusive of the
situations referred to in Subsection B(3) hereof] do not exceed the
grades or quantities set forth in the following table:
§ 99-2 GRADING, EXCAVATING AND FILLING § 99-3
99:113
§ 99-4. Application for permit.
Single-Family
House Site
(square feet)
Maximum
Gradient Without
Permit
Maximum Excavation
or Fill Without Permit
(cubic yards)
Less than 6,000 12 in 100 feet 75
From 6,000 to
10,000
15 in 100 feet 100
From 10,000 to
18,000
15 in 100 feet 200
From 18,000 to
30,000
15 in 100 feet 250
Over 30,000 20 in 100 feet 250
A. Every applicant for a grading permit shall file a written application
therefor with the Township Engineer. Such application shall:
(1) Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block, tract or street address or similar description which will
readily identify and definitely locate the proposed work.
(2) Be accompanied by plans and specifications prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor, including a contour map showing
the present contours of the land and the proposed contours of the
land after completion of the proposed grading; a plot plan showing
the location of the grading, boundaries, lot lines, neighboring
streets and alleys, buildings, trees over 10 inches in diameter two
feet above the ground and sufficient dimensions and other data to
show the location of all work; a description of the type and
classification of the soil; details and the location of any proposed
drainage structures and pipes, walls and cribbing; and the nature
of fill material and such other information as the Township
Engineer may require to carry out the purposes of this chapter. All
plans shall be dated and bear the name of the person who prepared
the same, the applicant and the owner of the land. Plans shall be
submitted in triplicate.
(3) State the estimated dates for the starting and completion of the
grading work.
(4) State the purpose for which the grading application is filed.
B. The Township Engineer may waive the requirement for any or all plans
and specifications listed above if he finds that the information on the
application is sufficient to show that the work will conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 99-3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 99-5
99:114
§ 99-5. Permit fees.
The for granting permits shall be fixed by the Board of Supervisors by
resolution from time to time.36
§ 99-6. Expiration of permit.
Every grading permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void
if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within six
months or is not completed within one year from the date of issue, provided
that the Township Engineer may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory
evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work being started or
completed within the specific time limits, grant a reasonable extension of
time, and provided further that the application for the extension of time is
made before the date of expiration of the permit.
§ 99-7. Denial of permit; appeal.
§ 99-8. Inspections.
A. Where, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, the work as proposed
by the applicant is likely to endanger any property or any street or alley,
he shall deny the grading permit. In determining whether the proposed
work is likely to endanger property or streets or alleys or create
hazardous conditions, the Township Engineer shall give due
consideration to possible saturation by rains, earth movements, runoff
of surface waters and subsurface conditions such as the stratification
and faulting of rock and the nature and type of the soil or rock.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall consider promptly appeals from the
provisions of this chapter or from the determination of the Township
Engineer, and the Board shall make determinations of alternate
methods, standards or materials when, in its opinion, strict compliance
with the provisions of this chapter is unnecessary. Any applicant or
permit holder shall have the right to appeal to any court of competent
jurisdiction from any decision of determination of the Board of
Supervisors.
A. The Township Engineer shall, when requested, make inspections
hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work
which has been completed or notify the permit holder wherein the same
fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Where it is found by
inspection that the soil or other conditions are not as stated or shown in
the application, the Township Engineer may refuse to approve further
work until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan conforming to
existing conditions.
36.Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 99-5 GRADING, EXCAVATING AND FILLING § 99-8
99:115
§ 99-9. Standards for excavations.
B. Plans for grading work bearing the stamp of approval of the Township
Engineer shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the
grading work and until the work has been approved.
C. The permit holder shall notify the Township Engineer in order to obtain
inspections in accordance with the following schedule and at least 24
hours before the inspection is to be made:
(1) Initial inspection: when work on the excavation or fill is about to be
commenced.
(2) Rough grading: when all rough grading has been completed.
(3) Drainage facilities: when drainage facilities are to be installed.
(4) Special structures: when excavations are complete for retaining
and crib walls and when reinforcing steel is in place and before
concrete is poured.
(5) Final inspection: when all work, including the installation of all
drainage and other structures, has been completed.
D. If at any stage of the work the Township Engineer shall determine by
inspection that the nature of the formation is such that further work as
authorized by an existing permit is likely to endanger property or
streets or alleys or create hazardous conditions, the Township Engineer
may require as a condition to allowing the work to be done that such
reasonable safety precautions be taken as the Township Engineer
considers advisable to avoid such likelihood of danger. Safety
precautions may include but shall not be limited to specifying a flatter
exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities, berms or
terracing, compaction or cribbing.
A. No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in slope than one
horizontal to one vertical, except under one or more of the following
conditions:
(1) The excavation is located so that a line having a slope of one
horizontal to one vertical and passing through any portion of the
cut face will be entirely inside the property lines of the property on
which the excavation is made.
(2) The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently stable
to sustain a slope of steeper than one horizontal to one vertical and
a written statement of a civil engineer, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion
control, to that effect is submitted to the Township Engineer and
approved by him. The statement shall state that the site has been
inspected and that the deviation from the slope specified above will
not result in injury of persons or damage to property.
§ 99-8 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 99-9
99:116
§ 99-10. Standards for fills.
(3) A retaining wall or other approved support is provided to support
the face of the excavation.
B. The Township Engineer may require an excavation to be made with a
cut face flatter in slope than one horizontal to one vertical if he finds
that the material in which the excavation is to be made unusually
subject to erosion or if other conditions exist which make such flatter
cut slope necessary for stability and safety.
C. Excavation shall not extend below the angle of repose or natural slope
of the soil under the nearest point of any footing or foundation of any
building or structure unless such footing or foundation is first properly
underpinned or protected against settlement.
D. Before commencing any excavation which will in any way affect an
adjoining property or structures thereon, the person making or causing
the excavation to be made shall notify, in writing, the owners of
adjoining buildings not less than 30 days before such excavation is to be
made that the excavation is to be made.
A. No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface steeper in slope
than 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical, except under one or more of the
following conditions:
(1) The fill, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, is located so that
settlement, sliding or erosion of the fill material will not result in
property damage or be a hazard to adjoining property, streets,
alleys or buildings.
(2) A written statement from a civil engineer licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion
control, certifying that he has inspected the site and that the
proposed deviation from the slope specified above will not
endanger any property or result in property damage, is submitted
to and approved by the Township Engineer.
B. The Township Engineer may require that the fill be constructed with an
exposed surface flatter than 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical if he finds
that under the particular conditions such flatter surface is necessary for
stability and safety.
C. Whenever a fill is to be made of materials other than clean soil or earth,
the grading permit shall be subject to the following additional
limitations and requirements:
(1) The fill shall be completed within a reasonable length of time, said
time limit to be determined by the Township Engineer and to be
specified on the grading permit.
§ 99-9 GRADING, EXCAVATING AND FILLING § 99-10
99:117
§ 99-11. Compaction of fills.
All fills shall be compacted to provide stability of material and to prevent
undesirable settlement. The fill shall be spread in a series of layers, each not
exceeding 12 inches in thickness, and shall be compacted by a sheepsfoot
roller or other approved method after each layer is spread. The Township
Engineer may require tests or other information if, in his opinion, the
conditions of materials are such that additional information is necessary.
§ 99-12. Drainage.
Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent any surface waters from
damaging the cut face of an excavation or the sloping surface of a fill.
Slopes of more than 10 feet in vertical height shall be separated by level
berms of at least four feet in width. Berm ditches shall be constructed where
necessary to prevent erosion. All drainage provisions shall be of such design
as to carry surface waters to the nearest practical street, storm drain or
natural watercourse approved by the Township Engineer as a safe place to
deposit and receive such waters. The Township Engineer may require such
drainage structures or pipes to be constructed or installed which, in his
opinion, are necessary to prevent erosion damage and to satisfactorily carry
off surface waters.
(2) Clean soil or earth shall be placed over the top and exposed
surfaces of the fill to a depth sufficient to effectively conceal all
materials other than clean soil or earth within the fill. Where the
nature of the fill requires, the Township Engineer may require
clean soil or earth to be placed over the top and exposed surfaces of
the fill to a depth sufficient to conceal all materials at the end of
each day's operation.
(3) No grading permit shall be issued for the filling of materials other
than clean soil or earth until a faithful performance bond in the
amount of at least 10% more than the Township Engineer's
estimated cost of adequately covering such fill with clean soil or
earth has been furnished to the township. Such bond shall be
executed by a corporate surety, as well as by the principal, and
shall be subject to the approval of the Township Solicitor as to form.
The bond shall inure to the benefit of the township and be
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the work required
under the terms and conditions of the grading permit to the
satisfaction of the Township Engineer. In lieu of said bond, a cash
deposit in said amount may be made with the Township Treasurer
or with a bank or trust company approved by the Township Solicitor
which shall act as escrow agent.
§ 99-10 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 99-13
99:118
§ 99-13. Maintenance of protective devices.
The owner of any property on which an excavation or fill has been made
shall maintain in good condition and repair all retaining walls, cribbing,
drainage structures, fences and other protective devices.
§ 99-14. General requirements.
§ 99-15. Grading certificate.
§ 99-16. Violations and penalties.
A. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be at least three feet from
property or right-of-way lines of streets in order to permit the normal
rounding of the edge without encroaching on the abutting property. At
property lines where walls or slopes are steeper than 1:1 and six feet or
more in height, they shall be protected by a substantial fence three feet
or more in height. Before a grading permit is issued, a bond may be
required to guarantee the protection of steep slopes.
B. The owner of a property shall be responsible to protect and clean up
lower properties of silt and debris washing from his property as a result
of the regrading of his property.
C. In order to prevent the denuding of the landscape, wherever
practicable, large trees and other natural features constituting
important physical, aesthetic and economic assets of existing or
impending suburban development shall be preserved.
A. If, upon final inspection of an excavation or fill, it is found that the work
authorized by the grading permit has been satisfactorily completed in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, and any other
requirements imposed, a grading certificate covering such work and
stating that the work is approved shall be issued to the permit holder by
the Township Engineer.
B. The Township Engineer shall have the power to revoke any grading
certificate whenever he finds that the work covered by the certificate
has been materially extended or altered without a permit so to do or
that any retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures, fences or other
protective devices shown on the approved plans and specifications
submitted with the application for a permit have not been maintained in
good order and repair.
C. Before such renovation, the Township Engineer shall first give written
notice to the permit holder and to the owner of the property involved,
specifying the defective condition and stating that unless such defective
condition is remedied satisfactorily, the grading certificate may be
revoked. If the defective condition is remedied, the certificate shall not
be revoked.
§ 99-13 GRADING, EXCAVATING AND FILLING § 99-16
99:119
§ 99-17. Additional remedies.
In case any work is performed by any person in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, the proper officer of the township, in addition to
other remedies, may institute in the name of the township any appropriate
action or proceeding, whether by legal process or otherwise, to prevent
such unlawful work and to restrain or abate such violation.
Chapter 103
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 85.
§ 103-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
ABATE — The cleanup or removal of deposited hazardous substances,
including such actions as may be necessary to monitor, assess and evaluate
the potential threat of hazardous substance to the public health, safety and
welfare, actions to prevent, minimize and mitigate damage to the public
health and the disposal of removed materials.
DEPOSIT — Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying, discharging,
injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing.
A. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any
grading, excavation or fill or cause the same to be done contrary to or in
violation of any provision of this chapter.
B. When written notice of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter has been served by the Township Engineer on any person, such
violation shall be discontinued immediately.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable,
on conviction thereof, to a penalty not exceeding $1,000 for each and
every offense, and whenever such person shall have been notified by
any township officer by service of a summons in a prosecution or in any
other way that he is committing such violation of this chapter, each day
that he shall continue such violation after such notification shall
constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine or penalty. Such
fines or penalties shall be collected as like fines or penalties are now by
law collected. [Amended 7-5-1988 by Ord. No. 283; 9-17-1990 by
Ord. No. 301]
§ 99-16 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 103-1
99:120
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Includes all the substances listed as
hazardous substances by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry and the
United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the various
regulations in place at the time of the adoption of this chapter.[Amended
6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, joint
venture or other private or commercial entity.
§ 103-2. Designation of public nuisances.
The existence of hazardous substances deposited negligently or
intentionally upon public roadways, public lands or private property within
the township shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be abated
immediately by the person responsible for such deposit of hazardous
substances.
§ 103-3. Notice.
The Board of Supervisors of the township, by its employees or agents, shall
serve notice upon the person responsible for the public nuisance. The notice
shall sufficiently describe the condition complained of and shall require the
nuisance to be abated within 10 days of the mailing of the notice.
§ 103-4. Abatement by township.
Should any person responsible for a public nuisance as described herein
fail, neglect or refuse to abate such condition to the satisfaction of the Board
of Supervisors or if the Board of Supervisors shall determine that the nature
of the hazardous substance negligently or intentionally deposited is of such
nature as to pose an immediate threat to the public health, safety and
welfare, the township shall act to abate said public nuisance, and any cost
of abatement by the township shall be paid by the person who negligently
or intentionally deposited the hazardous substance.
§ 103-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who
should fail to comply with any notice of violation described herein, upon
conviction before a District Justice within the magisterial district of which
the Township of Upper Providence is part, shall be fined not less than $100
and not more than $1,000 after a summary proceeding brought in the name
of the township before the said District Justice. A new and separate offense
shall be deemed to be committed for each day that such violation exists. In
default of the payment of any fine or penalty imposed and the costs, under
the provisions of this chapter, the person or persons that are charged may
be sentenced to be committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding
30 days.
Chapter 107
§ 103-1 HUNTING AND FIREARMS § 103-5
107:121
HUNTING AND FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 122.
§ 103-5 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 103-5
107:122
ARTICLE I
Discharge of Firearms
[Adopted 10-7-1955 by Ord. No. 64]
§ 107-1. Discharge of firearms or single-projectile weapons
prohibited. [Amended 12-7-1962 by Ord. No. 91; 9-17-1990 by Ord.
No. 301; 10-5-1992 by Ord. No. 316A]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged or permit to be
discharged a rifle, handgun, pellet gun or other mechanism which propels
a single projectile with force capable of inflicting bodily harm at any time
within the borders of Upper Providence Township.
§ 107-2. Exceptions.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent the
legitimate use of firearms by police officers or trap- or skeet shooting where
shotguns are used and where, from the point of discharge, there is a clear
semicircular range in the direction of fire of not less than 800 feet.
§ 107-3. Seizure of firearms.
The discharge or the causing to be discharged or the permitting to be
discharged of any firearms, air gun, weapons or other devices or
mechanisms which propel a projectile with force contrary to the provisions
of §§ 107-1 and 107-2 of this article are hereby declared to be public
or common nuisances dangerous to life, limb and property and may be
summarily abated by any police officer of the township by confiscating the
same. Each abatement may be in addition to fines and penalties hereinafter
provided for.
§ 107-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and
pay a fine or penalty of not more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution
and, in default of the payment of such fine and costs, shall be liable to be
imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
§ 107-1 HUNTING AND FIREARMS § 107-4
107:123

ARTICLE II
Hunting
[Adopted 1-4-1960 by Ord. No. 81]
§ 107-5. Permission required. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 301]
Hereafter it shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or gun on premises not
owned or leased by said person, unless said person has written permission
from the owner or lessee of the premises.
§ 107-6. Exceptions.
This article shall not prohibit the owner, tenant or lessee or members of the
household of such owner, tenant or lessee from hunting or gunning upon
land occupied by such owner, tenant or lessee within this township and on
which he or they reside.
§ 107-7. Display and validity of permission. [Amended 9-17-1990 by
Ord. No. 301]
Any person having obtained written permission from the owner of a
premises to hunt or gun thereon must carry said written permission on his
person and promptly display such permission on request. Such permission
shall be valid only during the year in which it was dated.
§ 107-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
Any person or persons violating this article shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution
and, in default of the payment of the fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days.
§ 107-5 HUNTING AND FIREARMS § 107-8
107:125
Chapter 112
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 71.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 122.
Picketing — See Ch. 126.
§ 112-1. Loitering restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sit or stand around in an aimless
manner in or on any place at a time and in a way not usual for lawabiding
individuals under circumstances which warrant alarm for the safety
of persons or property in the vicinity; subject, however, to the following
provisions:
A. Among the circumstances which may be considered as tending to
warrant such alarm are when a person, upon the appearance of a police
officer, takes flight, attempts to conceal himself or any object or refuses
to identify himself and explain his presence and conduction after
request.
B. Among the circumstances which may be considered as tending not to
warrant such alarm are when a person is strolling down a street,
window-shopping or sightseeing, in a manner usual for law-abiding
individuals.
C. Unless flight by the person or other circumstance make it impractical, a
police officer shall, prior to making an arrest for an offense under this
section, give the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would
otherwise be warranted, by requesting him to identify himself and
explain his presence and conduct.
D. If the person refuses to answer or gives an explanation that does not
dispel such alarm, the police officer may, but need not, direct the person
to move on prior to making an arrest.
E. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if:
(1) The police officer did not comply with Subsection C of this section;
or
(2) At the trial, it appears that the explanation given by the person was
true and if believed by the police officer at the time would have
dispelled the alarm.
§ 107-8 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 112-2
112:126
§ 112-2. Obstruction of public places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the free, full or safe access to
any public place or to obstruct the free, full or safe passage through or upon
any public sidewalk, street, alley or place, whether by one's single presence
or by his congregation with others or otherwise, after having been directed
to move on by a police officer. Any person who shall return to the same place
or to the immediate vicinity of the same place within one hour of the time he
has been directed to move on therefrom by a police officer under the same
or similar circumstances to those prevailing when receiving said directive
to move on shall be guilty of a violation of this section without receiving
another directive to move on.
§ 112-3. Congregating restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the free, full or safe passage
to, through, over or upon any vacant lot, unfenced parking lot or unattended
parking lot, whether by one's single presence or by his congregation with
others or otherwise, after having been directed to move on by a police
officer. Any person who shall return to the same place or to the immediate
vicinity of the same place within one hour of the time he has been directed
to move on therefrom by a police officer under the same or similar
circumstances to those prevailing when receiving said direction to move
on shall be guilty of a violation of this section without receiving another
directive to move on. Nothing contained in this section shall infringe upon
the rights of the owner or tenant of said privately owned real property
to lawfully use said privately owned real property or to permit others to
lawfully use said privately owned real property.
§ 112-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
Any person who shall violate § 112-1, 112-2 or 112-3 of this chapter shall
be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined by the
District Justice not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default
of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30
days.
§ 112-2 LOITERING § 112-4
112:127
Chapter 120
PARKS AND OPEN SPACE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 51.
Animals — See Ch. 53.
Curfew — See Ch. 71.
Firearms — See Ch. 107, Art. I.
Loitering — See Ch. 112.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 122.
Solid waste — See Ch. 148.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 169.
Zoning — See Ch. 182.
§ 112-4 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 112-4
112:128
ARTICLE I
General Park Rules and Regulations
§ 120-1. Legislative purpose.
To promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare, the Upper
Providence Township Board of Supervisors finds that it is in the best
interest of the Township to enact rules and regulations governing its parks
located within Upper Providence Township.
§ 120-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK — Any park, playground, tot lot, bicycle and/or walking trail, nature
preserve or sanctuary, picnic area, athletic field, undeveloped public
property and open space, and the grounds surrounding any public building
owned, leased, maintained by or dedicated to Upper Providence Township.
VEHICLE — Any motorized device for carrying passengers or goods,
including all-terrain vehicles.
§ 120-3. Duties of Recreation Director.
The Recreation Director shall have immediate charge of the use of all parks,
park equipment and facilities; shall develop recreational programs under
Township sponsorship; and shall regulate and issue permits for the use
of parks by community groups. The Recreation Director may promulgate
general regulations for the use of parks subject to the approval of the Board
of Supervisors.
§ 120-4. Unlawful acts.
A. It shall be unlawful to wash or make other than emergency repairs to
any motor or other vehicle in any Township park.
B. Except for those holding group permits, it shall be unlawful to engage
in any organized group game, activity or instruction in any Township
park, except in such places specifically provided and set apart for such
use.
C. It shall be unlawful for private individuals or groups to engage in fundraising,
profitmaking or commercial activities in any Township park
without a permit, which permits will only be issued to community-based
organizations for an activity cosponsored by the Township and subject
to restrictions and conditions which may be imposed by the Recreation
Director.
D. It shall be unlawful to trespass on adjacent lands of residents or to
harass the owners thereof.
§ 120-1 LOITERING § 120-4
112:129
§ 120-5. Group permits.
§ 120-6. Damage to park property; fires in parks.
§ 120-7. Animals; trees.
No person shall annoy, injure or kill any animal or bird in a park; disturb
any fish or waterfowl in streams, pools or ponds; or remove or carry away
any bird's nest or egg, nor shall any person injure or damage any tree,
plant, shrub, fern, blossom, flower or turf. The picking of violets, buttercups,
daisies and dandelions in parks, however, is permitted.
E. No person shall be present in any Township park while under the
influence of intoxicating beverages, drugs or any other controlled
substances.
A. Permits for the use of parks by groups of five persons or more desiring
to engage in organized games, for the use of picnic tables or for any
other special purpose shall be issued by the Recreation Director upon
application therefor, which application shall be submitted to the
Recreation Director at least 48 hours before the applicant intends to
use the park.
B. The Township may allow certain park facilities to be used by permit and
may provide that a fee be charged for making such reservations.
Reservation fees shall be as set forth in the Township schedule of fees,
as adopted from time to time by the Board of Supervisors.
C. Time slots for using parks and open space can be reserved by permit
and will take precedence over other public uses of the area.
D. Additional regulations governing group permits may be promulgated by
the Recreation Director.
A. No person in a park shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure,
tamper with, displace or remove any building, table, bench, railing,
paving, water line or other public utility or any part thereof, sign, notice
or placard, whether temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post or
other boundary marker or other structure or equipment, facility or
appurtenance, whether real or personal.
B. No person shall light or permit a fire to burn in a park, except in
designated areas.
C. When the Township institutes a ban on all burning within Upper
Providence Township, then lighting or permitting all fires in parks shall
be prohibited.
D. Nothing in the section shall be construed to prohibit Upper Providence
Township from conducting any burning in a Township park.
§ 120-4 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 120-8
112:130
§ 120-8. Restrooms.
No person in a park shall fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and
washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of five
years shall use a restroom or washroom designated for use by persons of
the opposite sex.
§ 120-9. Pollution of waters; disposal of refuse or trash.
§ 120-10. Motor vehicles.
§ 120-11. Bringing animals into parks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any animal into a park, except
as set forth in Article II of this chapter.
A. No person shall throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be
placed in the waters of any pond, lake or stream in any park, or in any
tributary, storm sewer or drain flowing into a park, any substance,
matter or thing, liquid or solid, which may result in the pollution of said
waters.
B. Refuse and trash shall be placed in proper receptacles, where they are
provided. Where receptacles are not so provided, all such refuse and
trash shall be removed from the park by the person responsible for its
presence and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in any
Township park, unless such person is a park patron who is using such
park for park purposes during such time as such patron's motor vehicle
is parked in such park.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in any
Township park at any time other than during park hours.
C. No person shall park any motor vehicle in any portion of a park except
in spaces set aside and marked for parking purposes, and no person
shall occupy a parked motor vehicle after dark except with the interior
lights turned on.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive recklessly in a park, and no
person shall drive in a park in excess of the posted speed limit.
E. No person shall enter or leave a park except by entrances and exits
provided for such purposes, and no person shall drive a motor vehicle in
a park except on a road or driveway. No motorized vehicles shall be
operated upon seeded or natural areas of any Township park, except
emergency vehicles and park maintenance vehicles.
F. In no way shall this section operate to prohibit electronic aid devices
such as motorized wheelchairs used by persons with disabilities.
§ 120-8 LOITERING § 120-12
112:131
§ 120-12. Gambling; indecent acts.
No gambling; obscene or indecent act; abusive, threatening, indecent or
profane language; or conduct that annoys other persons shall be allowed in
any Township park.
§ 120-13. Fireworks. [Amended 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 544]
The use of fireworks is prohibited in a park, except for displays organized
by the Township or any of its instrumentalities.
§ 120-14. Bicycles; skateboards; model airplanes.
The use of bicycles, skateboards, vehicles powered by motor or motorpowered
model airplanes in a park is prohibited except at locations
specifically designated for such purposes.
§ 120-15. Signs.
§ 120-16. Park hours.
All Township parks shall be open from dawn to dusk. Notwithstanding the
preceding sentence, the Recreation Director may establish alternate park
hours for Township events.
§ 120-17. Applicability.
The rules and regulations set forth in this chapter shall not be applicable to
Upper Providence Township or to its employees or agents acting within the
scope of their official duties.
§ 120-18. Penalties.
Any person violating any provision set forth in this Chapter 120 or any
section hereof shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction
before a District Justice, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $1,000, or, in default thereof, to imprisonment not to exceed 30
days.
A. The Township is empowered and authorized to purchase and post such
signage as necessary to effect the provisions of this chapter.
B. Removal of signs prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
obscure, remove, deface, mutilate or destroy any signage posted
pursuant to subsection § 120-15A above.
§ 120-12 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 120-18
112:132
ARTICLE II
Reynolds Dog Park Rules
§ 120-19. Legislative purpose.
To promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare, the Upper
Providence Township Board of Supervisors finds that it is in the best
interest of the Township to establish certain rules and regulations
pertaining to the use of the Reynolds Dog Park.
§ 120-20. Prohibited conduct.
A. In general. For purposes of this Article II only, all references to "park"
shall mean the Reynolds Dog Park. Owners and handlers of dogs within
the park must remain within the fenced area at all times and must clean
up any dog waste immediately. Owners and handlers of dogs must
remain within visual sight and voice control of their dogs at all times.
Each owner and handler may have a maximum of three dogs in the park
at any given time. All dogs in the park must be healthy, properly
licensed and have current inoculations. All dogs in the park must wear
collars with license, rabies tags and rescue information.
B. Prohibited items. All food, whether for consumption by humans or dogs,
is prohibited in the park. All prong, pinch or spiked collars are
prohibited in the park. Dogs in heat and dogs under the age of six
months are prohibited in the park. All vehicles and all children's toys
are prohibited in the park.
C. Children. Children under age six years must remain within arm's reach
of a responsible adult at all times. Children ages six to 13 years must
remain under the strict supervision of a responsible adult at all times.
D. Assumption of risk. All persons using the park, and all owners and
handlers of dogs within the park, assume all risks related to the use of
the Reynolds Dog Park.
§ 120-19 LOITERING § 120-20
112:133
Chapter 122
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 71.
Hunting and firearms — See Ch. 107.
Loitering — See Ch. 112.
Picketing — See Ch. 126.
§ 122-1. Authority.
This chapter is enacted under the Authority of the Act of 1933, May 1,
P.L. 103, Art VIII, Section 702, Clause XLVII, as amended (53 P.S. § 65747);
Clause XX, as amended (53 P.S. § 65720); and Clause XLI, as amended (53
P.S. § 65741).
§ 122-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Conduct Ordinance of
Upper Providence Township."
§ 122-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
TOWNSHIP — Upper Providence Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 122-4. Offenses against public peace enumerated.
No person in the township shall:
A. Tumultuous conduct. Disturb, tend to disturb or aid in disturbing the
peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous
conduct, and no person shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any
premises owned or possessed by him or under his control.
B. Assault. Beat, strike, wound, imprison or inflict violence on another
where the circumstances show malice or assault another with intent to
commit murder, rape, mayhem, robbery or larceny; nor shall any person
assault another with a lethal weapon, instrument or thing with intent to
commit upon the person of another any bodily injury where no
§ 120-20 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 122-4
112:134
considerable provocation appears or where the circumstances of the
assault show malice.
C. Fighting. Fight another person, except in boxing exhibitions duly
authorized and licensed under law.
D. Vagrancy. Have the status or condition of a vagrant. The following
persons shall be deemed vagrants:
(1) No lawful means of support. Any person having no lawful means of
employment and having no lawful means of support realized solely
from lawful occupations or sources or any person who lives idly and
without visible means of support.
(2) Loitering. Any person found loitering or strolling in, about or upon
any street, alley or other public way or public place or at any public
gathering or assembly or in or around any store, shop or business
or commercial establishment or on any private property or place,
without lawful business and conducting himself in a lewd, wanton
or lascivious manner in speech or behavior.37
(3) Burglars' tools. Any person upon whose person or in whose
possession shall be found any instrument, tool or other implement
for picking locks or pockets or any implement that is usually
employed or that reasonably may be inferred to have been
designed to be employed in the commission of any felony,
misdemeanor or the violation of any ordinance, and who shall fail to
account satisfactorily for the possession of the same.
(4) Unlawful occupancy. Any person wandering abroad and occupying,
lodging or sleeping in any vacant or unoccupied barn, garage,
shed, shop or other building or structure or in any automobile,
truck, railroad car or other vehicle, without owning the same or
without permission of the owner or person entitled to the
possession of the same, or sleeping in any vacant lot during the
hours of darkness and not giving a satisfactory account of himself.
(5) Begging. Any person wandering abroad and begging or any person
who goes about from door to door of private homes or commercial
and business establishments or places himself in or upon any public
way or public place to beg or receive alms for himself.
(6) Abroad at unusual hours. Any person who wanders about the
streets, alleys or other public ways or places or who is found
abroad at late or unusual hours in the night without any visible or
lawful business and not giving a satisfactory account of himself.
(7) Illegal association. Any person who keeps, operates, frequents,
lives in or is employed in any house or other establishment of ill
37.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 112, Loitering.
§ 122-4 LOITERING § 122-4
112:135
fame or who, whether married or single, engages in or commits
acts of fornication or perversion for hire.
(8) Fraudulent schemes. Any person who shall engage in any
fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or other
valuable thing from others or any person who aids or assists such
trick, device or scheme.
(9) Concealing stolen property. Any person who keeps a place where
lost or stolen property is concealed.
(10) All persons who by the common law are vagrants, whether
embraced in any of the foregoing classifications or not.
E. Unlawful disturbance of religious worship. Disquiet or disturb a
congregation or assembly for religious worship by making a noise or by
rude or indecent behavior or profane discourse within their place of
worship or so near the same as to disturb the order or solemnity of the
meeting.
F. Throwing of missiles. Throw any stone, snowball or any other missile
upon or at any vehicle, building, tree or other public or private property
or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place or
enclosed or unenclosed ground.
G. Ballplaying. Throw, kick or knock any ball or play ball in any other
manner upon any public street, alley or sidewalk.
H. (Reserved)38
I. Indecent exposure. Swim or bathe in water in the township where such
conduct is allowed unless wearing a bathing suit or other suitable
garment to protect his person from exposure.
J. Bonfires. Make or assist in making any bonfires in or upon any public
street or place within the township without the permission of the
Supervisors.
K. False alarm of fire or need for police or ambulance assistance.
Intentionally make, turn in or give a false alarm of fire or of need for
police or ambulance assistance or aid or abet in the commission of such
act.
L. False report of crime. Make to or file with any police officer of the
township any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report
concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime
occurring within the township.
M. Interference with police officer.
38.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection H, regarding fireworks, was repealed 3-4-2019 by Ord.
No. 574.
§ 122-4 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 122-4
112:136
§ 122-5. Noise.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace
or safety of others, within the limits of the township. The following acts,
among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises
in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive, namely:
(1) Resisting officer. Resist any police officer or any person duly
empowered with police authority while in the discharge or
apparent discharge of his duty or in any way interfere with or
hinder him in the discharge of his duty.
(2) Assisting in escape. Offer or endeavor to assist any person in the
custody of a police officer or any person duly empowered with
police authority to escape or to attempt to escape from such
custody.
(3) Impersonating an officer. No person, other than an official police
officer of the township, shall wear or carry the uniform, apparel,
badge, identification card or any other insignia of office like or
similar to or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn or
carried by the official police officers of the township.
A. Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or
public place of the township, except as a danger warning; the creation
by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or
harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for any unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one
operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other
device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling
device when traffic is for any reason held up.
B. Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be
played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any louder volume than is
necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in
the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is
operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any
such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. prevailing local time in such a
manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the
building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section.
§ 122-4 LOITERING § 122-5
112:137
C. Loudspeakers and amplifiers for advertising. The using or operating of
or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is
cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising
or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure.
D. Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on
the public streets at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the
quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity.
E. Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing
frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of
any persons in the vicinity.
F. Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle, except to give notice
of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or
upon the request of proper township authorities.
G. Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal-combustion engine, motor boat or motor
vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
H. Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud
and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
I. Loading, unloading and opening boxes. The creation of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or
the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
J. Hawkers and peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers
and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
K. Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention, by creating noise, to any performance,
show or sale.
L. Transportation of metal rails, pillars and columns. The transportation of
rails, pillars or columns or iron, steel or other material over and along
streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any
other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the
peace and quiet of such streets or other public places.
M. Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or
any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise
due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from
such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a
muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise.
§ 122-5 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 122-6
112:138
§ 122-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $25.
Chapter 124
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage sales — See Ch. 94. Noise by peddlers — See Ch. 122.
§ 124-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person who shall engage in peddling as hereinabove
defined.
PEDDLING — The selling or offering for sale of any goods, wares,
services or merchandise for immediate delivery which the person
selling or offering for sale carries with him in traveling or has in his
possession or control upon any of the streets or sidewalks or from house
to house or by visitation to private residences or by entering into or
upon private property within said Township.
PERSON — Any person, association, partnership, firm, organization or
corporation.
SOLICITING — The seeking or taking of contracts or orders for any
goods, wares, services or merchandise for future delivery or for
subscriptions or contributions upon any of the streets or sidewalks
or from house to house or by visitation to private residences or by
entering into or upon private property; further, the seeking or taking of
contracts or orders for home or other building repairs, improvements
and alterations or orders or contracts for any mechanical, electrical,
plumbing or heating devices or equipment for houses by the same
means.
SOLICITOR — Any person who shall engage in soliciting as hereinabove
defined.
B. The words "soliciting" and "peddling" shall not apply to:
(1) Farmers seeking or taking orders for the sale of their own products.
§ 122-6 LOITERING § 124-1
112:139
§ 124-2. License required.
No person shall engage in soliciting or peddling in the Township of Upper
Providence without first having taken out a license as herein provided.
§ 124-3. Application for license.
Every person desiring to engage in soliciting or peddling in Upper
Providence Township shall first make application to the Township for a
license. Said application shall be upon a blank provided by the Township
and shall contain at least the following information verified by oath or
affirmation:
(2) The seeking or taking of orders by any manufacturer or producer
for the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat products
or milk and milk products.
(3) The sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose.
(4) Any honorably discharged soldier, sailor or marine of the military
service who complies with the Act of April 8, 1867, P.L. 50, 60 P.S.
§ 61, as amended, and who procures from the prothonotary of the
proper county a certificate pursuant to said Act.
(5) The seeking or taking of orders for insurance by insurance agents
or brokers or others licensed under the insurance laws of the
commonwealth.
(6) Persons, corporations, partnerships and associations, their agents
or employees, who have complied with the provisions of 10 P.S.
§ 161.1 et seq., as amended, governing solicitations for charitable,
benevolent, patriotic or other purposes. [Amended 9-17-1990 by
Ord. No. 301]
(7) Any person taking orders for merchandise from dealers or
merchants for resale to an ultimate consumer.
(8) Persons engaged in political or religious advocacy. [Added
6-2-2003 by Ord. No. 429]
A. The full name of the applicant and local address, if any.
B. The applicant's permanent address.
C. The name of the applicant's employer or a statement that such
applicant is self-employed.
D. The nature of the goods, wares, services or merchandise offered for
sale.
§ 124-1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 124-3
112:140
§ 124-4. License fees.
§ 124-5. License term.
The license granted pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for 30 days after
the date of such license. Upon the expiration of any license, if the person
holding the same shall desire to continue or renew soliciting or peddling, he
shall be required to file a new application for a permit and pay a new license
fee.
§ 124-6. License limitations.
Such license when issued shall state, inter alia, the products to be sold or
services to be rendered by the licensee. Every solicitor or peddler shall, at
all times when engaged in soliciting or peddling, carry such license upon
his person and shall exhibit it upon request to all police officers, officials
and citizens. No solicitor or peddler shall engage in selling any product or
service not mentioned on such license.
§ 124-7. Use of vehicles.
No person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this chapter shall park
any vehicle upon any of the streets, highways or alleys of said Township
in order to sort, rearrange or clean any of his goods, wares, services or
merchandise; nor shall any such person place or deposit any refuse on any
E. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted
of any crime and, if the answer is in the affirmative, the nature of the
offense or offenses and the punishment imposed.
F. The type of vehicle to be used, if any.
G. Upon request, the applicant shall also submit to fingerprinting and
furnish a photograph, provided that:
(1) Where a person makes application for himself and one or more
helpers, all applicable personal information specified above shall
be given for each helper and verified or affirmed by oath or
affirmation by him, and an individual license shall be required for
each helper. No license under this chapter shall be transferable
from one person to another.
(2) The application shall be filed at least 15 days prior to the date the
solicitation or peddling is to commence.
A. Licenses shall be valid only for the specific dates shown thereon, and
the fees for said licenses shall be set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors. [Amended 10-5-2015 by Ord. No. 549]
B. A separate application shall be filed and a separate permit fee shall be
paid by each person who shall actually conduct the soliciting or
peddling.
§ 124-3 LOITERING § 124-7
112:141
streets, highways or, alleys; nor shall any person maintain or keep a street
or curbstone market by parking any vehicle upon any street or alley in said
Township for longer than necessary in order to sell therefrom to persons
residing in the immediate vicinity.
§ 124-8. Hours. [Amended 5-6-2019 by Ord. No. 576]
A person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this chapter may engage in
the licensed activity beginning at 9:00 a.m. and ending at 30 minutes past
dusk, or 8:00 p.m., whichever first occurs.
§ 124-9. Suspension or revocation of licenses.
Any license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked at any time
upon proof being furnished to the Township that the application contained
false information or that the applicant or licensee was convicted of a crime
involving moral turpitude after the issuance of the license or that the
licensee was convicted of disorderly conduct under any law of the
commonwealth or any municipal ordinance.
§ 124-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate or fail, neglect
or refuse to comply with any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs of
prosecution and, in default thereof, imprisonment for not in excess of 30
days.
Chapter 126
PICKETING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 112. Peace and good order — See Ch. 122.
§ 126-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PICKETING — The act of standing upon or patrolling any public street,
sidewalk or any other public place where persons may lawfully assemble, by
one or more persons, for the purpose of:
Persuading other persons to cease patronizing, contracting with,
employing or leaving the employ of any person or persons; or
A.
§ 124-7 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 126-1
126:142
§ 126-2. Picketing restricted.
It shall be unlawful to:
§ 126-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in
an amount not to exceed $600 and, in default thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 128
PIGGERIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 53. Zoning — See Ch. 182.
§ 128-1. Piggeries restricted.
No person, corporation or other legal entity shall set up, establish or
conduct any piggery in said Township of Upper Providence where garbage
is fed to the pigs in any manner whatsoever.
§ 128-2. Accumulations of garbage or manure prohibited.
No person, corporation or other legal entity shall set up or permit any
accumulation of garbage, manure or refuse from a piggery where garbage is
fed, either upon private or public property within the limits of said Township
of Upper Providence.
Giving publicity to or communicating information regarding the
existence, facts or merits of a labor dispute or other controversy.
B.
A. Engage in picketing by force, violence, duress, breach of the peace or
threat of any of the foregoing.
B. Engage in picketing in such a manner as to prevent ingress and egress
to or from any premises.
C. Engage in picketing in such a manner as to obstruct, prevent or
interfere with the free or unobstructed use of any public street or
sidewalk by other persons.
D. Engage in picketing other than in a reasonable and peaceful manner.
§ 126-1 PIGGERIES § 128-3
128:143
§ 128-3. Discontinuation of existing operations.
Any piggery where garbage is fed which is in existence and operation at
the time of the passage of this chapter, when discontinued for a period of
one year, may not be resumed, nor may the volume or capacity of any such
existing piggery be increased after the passage of this chapter.
§ 128-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
Any violation of the above provisions shall make the offender subject to a
fine not exceeding $600 plus costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 130
(RESERVED)
Chapter 135
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 58.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 62.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 85.
Piggeries — See Ch. 128.
§ 135-1. Prohibited activities. [Amended 3-7-1977 by Ord. No. 183]
The following acts are hereby declared to be unlawful and shall be
prohibited:
A. The creation of a public nuisance.
(1) No building may be erected, altered or used and no lot or premises
may be used for any trade, industry or business that is noxious or
offensive by reason of dust, smoke, gas, vibration, illumination or
noise.
(2) No lot or premises shall be used for the storage, deposit or disposal
of rubbish, junk, scrap metal, machinery parts, garbage, litter,
wastepaper, unlicensed, uninspected or junked or abandoned
vehicles or any noxious, offensive or otherwise objectionable
material, except in closed buildings or containers for temporary
storage pending removal in the immediate future.
B. The operation of a dump or junkyard, whether for personal or
commercial purposes. An area of land with or without buildings, used
for the storage, outside a completely enclosed building, of used and
§ 128-3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 135-1
130:144
§ 135-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30
days. A new and separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed
each day that a condition in violation of this chapter exists.
Chapter 143
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal authorities — See Ch. 5.
Building construction — See Ch. 60.
Sewage disposal in flood hazard areas — See
Ch. 89.
Plumbing — See Ch. 130.
Street excavations — See Ch. 151, Art. II.
Water — See Ch. 176.
discarded materials, including but not limited to wastepaper, rats,
garbage, metal, building materials, house furnishings or appliances,
machinery or parts thereof or vehicles or parts thereof, with or without
the dismantling, processing, salvage, sale or other use or disposition of
the same or the deposit or storage on a lot of one or more unlicensed,
uninspected, wrecked, disabled or junked vehicles or the major parts
thereof shall be deemed to constitute a dump or junkyard.
C. The use of trash, garbage, rubbish, ashes or waste material of any
description for purposes of changing the contour of the land.39
39.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 99, Grading, Excavating and Filling.
§ 135-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 135-2
135:145

ARTICLE I
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 1-3-1967 by Ord. No. 107]
§ 143-1. Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings stated:
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Each structure for continuous or periodical
human occupancy from which sanitary sewage is or may be discharged and
includes, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, dwellings, flats,
apartments, stores, shops, offices and business or industrial establishments.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, partnership
or corporation.
PROPERTY ACCESSIBLE TO A PUBLIC SEWER — Property which adjoins,
abuts on or is adjacent to a public sewer or a street or highway in which
a public sewer is located, but shall not include any property on which the
principal occupied building is located more than 150 feet from a public
sewer.
PUBLIC SEWER — Facilities (including any part of but not necessarily the
entirety of a system of such facilities) operated by a sewer authority for
the collection of sanitary sewage within this Township. Such term includes
lateral lines from a main street sewer to the curb or right-of-way line where
such lateral lines are constructed by a sewer authority.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal, water-carried household and toilet
wastes resulting from human occupancy.
SEWER AUTHORITY — The Township of Upper Providence or any sewer
committee or department of the Township or of the Board of Township
Supervisors or any other agency operating public sewers for or at the
request of the Board of Township Supervisors.40
§ 143-2. Notice of completion. [Amended 9-18-2006 by Ord. No.
466; 12-11-2011 by Ord. No. 521]
Upon the completion of any public sewer, the sewer authority charged with
the operation thereof shall cause notice of that fact to be published once
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township, such notice to state
that the owners of property accessible to such sewer upon which there is
an occupied building are permitted to make connection therewith, pursuant
to this article. A copy of such notice, together with a copy of this article
and any ordinance then in effect imposing sewer connection fees and sewer
rents, shall be mailed to each person known to the sewer authority to own
property accessible to such sewer by personal service or registered mail.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Authorities, Municipal.
§ 143-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-3
135:147
§ 143-3. Installation of sanitary facilities. [Amended 10-3-1977 by
Ord. No. 194; 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 466; 7-6-2010 by Ord. No. 509;
12-11-2011 by Ord. No. 521]
§ 143-4. Private facilities prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying a property on which
there is a building required to be connected to a public sewer under the
provisions of § 143-3 hereof to construct or use on such property any privy,
privy vault, cesspool, septic tank or other device for the disposal of sanitary
sewage, and any such prohibited devices shall be cleaned and filled in with
clean bank-run gravel or dirt within 30 days following the date on which
the aforesaid connection is required to be made. Any such privy, privy vault,
cesspool, septic tank or other device constructed or used in violation hereof
is hereby declared to be a nuisance which shall be abated as provided by
law.
§ 143-5. Permit and fee.
A. Any person owning property accessible to a public sewer on which an
occupied building is hereafter erected shall, at the time of erection and
at his expense, install sanitary facilities in such building and connect
the same to the public sewer.
B. Any person owning property accessible to a public sewer on which
there is an occupied building shall be permitted to connect the same to
the public sewer at his expense.
C. Any person owning property accessible to public sewer on which there
is an occupied building shall be required to connect the same to the
public sewer system, at his expense, within 60 days of that property
being determined to have a documented on-site sewer system failure or
within 60 days of the receipt of the notice from the Township set forth in
§ 143-2 above, whichever occurs later.
D. Any person owning property not accessible to a public sewer on which
there is an occupied building, but who can arrange for connection
thereto through intermediate properties, shall be permitted to connect
the same thereto at his expense.
E. All industrial property and all commercial property connecting after the
effective date of this subsection shall be required to install a meter to
measure water usage and shall be subject to the rates computed on the
basis of water usage as set forth in Article II hereof, as amended.
A. No connection shall be made to any public sewer except upon payment
of the prescribed connection fee and upon permit issued by the sewer
authority pursuant to the rules and regulations regarding connections
promulgated by the sewer authority and approved by the Board of
Township Supervisors. No person shall make any connections with or
openings into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
§ 143-3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-5
135:148
§ 143-6. Failure to comply.
If any person required to make a connection to a public sewer by § 143-3
hereof fails to do so after reasonable notice and opportunity, the sewer
authority shall report such failure to the Board of Township Supervisors,
who may proceed as permitted by law to enter upon the property, make such
connection and collect the cost thereof by municipal lien or otherwise.
§ 143-7. Damage to sewer facilities prohibited.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
§ 143-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be served by the
sewer authority with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
prescribing a reasonable time limit for the correction thereof. Any person
continuing such a violation beyond such time limit shall be subject to fine in
an amount not exceeding $1,000 plus costs of prosecution for each offense.
Each separate building or dwelling unit in respect of which a violation
occurs and each ninety-day period during which a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the sewer
authority.
B. No such sewer connection permit shall be valid after the expiration of
one year from the time of its issuance. As to permits outstanding on the
effective date of this subsection, such one-year period shall commence
to run upon said effective date. After the expiration of the permit by
virtue of the operation of this subsection, the property with respect to
which it was issued shall be in a status as if it had never been applied
for, and such expired permit shall have no validity whatever. [Added
5-2-1977 by Ord. No. 186]
§ 143-5 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-8
135:149

ARTICLE II
Connection Fees and Sewer Rents
[Adopted 1-3-1967 by Ord. No. 109]
§ 143-9. Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings stated:
COLLECTION SYSTEM — The system of public sewers, including laterals
from street mains to curb or property lines, to be located within Upper
Providence Township, designed for the collection of sanitary sewage and
operated by a sewer authority.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or
waterborne wastes or form of energy rejected or escaping from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinguished
from sanitary sewage.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal, water-carried household and toilet
wastes resulting from human occupancy of residences and other
establishments.
SEWER AUTHORITY — The Township of Upper Providence or any sewer
committee or department of the Township or of the Board of Township
Supervisors or any other agency operating public sewers for or at the
request of the Board of Township Supervisors.41
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Providence, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 143-10. Tapping fee. [Amended 10-7-1968 by Ord. No. 117;
8-6-1983 by Ord. No. 237; 4-3-1989 by Ord. No. 291; 9-17-1990 by
Ord. No. 301; 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 466]
There is hereby imposed a tapping fee for each connection made to the
Township sewer collection/conveyance system, which fee shall be payable
prior to final subdivision/land development approval or the issuance of
building permit(s), whichever shall occur first, and which fee shall be set by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.42
§ 143-11. Sewer rents.
A. There is hereby imposed upon the owners and upon the users of each
property served by the collection system, for the use thereof, an annual
rent to be computed and payable quarterly in accordance with the
following subsections. [Amended 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 466]
B. The sewer rent in respect of properties served by the collection /
conveyance system which are also served by a metered water supply,
41.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 5, Authorities, Municipal.
42.Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 143-9 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-11
135:151
other than residential dwelling units, shall be computed on the basis of
gallonage of water usage per quarter-year at a rate to be set, from time
to time, by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, for the first 18,250
gallons or any portion thereof (such amount to be a quarterly minimum)
and at an additional rate per 1,000 gallons for usage in excess of
18,250 gallons. In any case, where a substantial portion of the total
water used by any such property is not discharged into the collection/
conveyance system, the owner or user of the property may install, at his
expense, a meter or other measuring device on the sewer connection
(in which case the sewer rent will be calculated on the reading obtained
thereby) or on the facilities through which is discharged effluent not
entering into the collection system (in which case the sewer rent will
be calculated on the net of the total water usage less the reading
obtained thereby), provided that any such meter or other measuring
device and the installation and continued maintenance thereof shall be
subject to the approval and inspection of the sewer authority. In the
case of any property served by a metered water supply in respect of
which the sewer authority determines that sewer rent cannot properly
be determined on a water usage basis because the entire water supply
is not metered or properly metered or the sewer authority is prevented,
for any reason, from reading the water meter or making such tests or
inspections of the meter or of the water transmission or distribution
facilities located on the property as it may deem necessary to determine
the accuracy or sufficiency of the metering devices, then the sewer
authority shall compute the sewer rent in the manner provided in
Subsection C of this section. [Amended 9-22-1970 by Ord. No. 132;
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 417; 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 466]
C. The sewer rent in respect of all properties served by the collection/
conveyance system other than those for which the rent is computed as
provided in Subsection B of this section shall be computed on a flat-rate
basis at a rate to be set, from time to time, by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, per quarter-year per equivalent dwelling unit. Other types
of structures or uses or property shall be equated to dwelling units in
accordance with the following Table of Equivalent Dwelling Units:
[Amended 10-3-1977 by Ord. No. 194; 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 301;
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 417; 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 466]
Table of Equivalent Dwelling Units (EDUs)
Classification of Property EDUs
2-family dwelling 2
Mobile home 1
Apartment house, per rental unit 1
Hotel, per 4 rental rooms 1
Restaurant, club or tavern, per 15 seats or
fraction thereof
1
Church or fire company 1
§ 143-11 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-11
135:152
Table of Equivalent Dwelling Units (EDUs)
Classification of Property EDUs
Service station or automobile repairs garage
2 bays or fewer 2
Each additional bay over 2 1/2
Barber- or beauty shop, not attached to the
owner's residence
2 chairs or fewer 1 1/2
Each additional 2 chairs or fraction thereof 1/2
Barber- or beauty shop, attached to and forming
a part of the owner's residence
2 chairs or fewer 1/2
Each additional 2 chairs or fraction thereof 1/2
Laundromat, per 5 washers 1
Retail store, office or business
8 or fewer employees 1
Each additional 4 employees or fraction
thereof
1 /2
Nursing home, hospital or similar institution, per
3.5 patients and employees
1
School, public or private
Toilet facilities only, per 35 students 1
Toilet facilities and kitchen, per 27 students 1
Toilet facilities and gymnasium, per 23
students
1
Toilet facilities, kitchen and gymnasium, per
19 students
1
Any user having a commercial (i.e., 3/4-horsepower or greater)
garbage grinder, per each such grinder, additional 1 EDU.
The Township reserves the right to change equivalency values from
time to time, to add or delete property classifications and, in cases of
dispute, to determine the proper classification of any property.
D. If two or more dwellings, apartments, stores, offices or industrial units
are connected to the collection system through a single lateral or if two
or more families use separate cooking and/or toilet facilities in a single
dwelling, the sewer rent payable under Subsection B or C, whichever is
appropriate, shall be computed as though each such dwelling,
apartment, store, office or industrial unit and each such family were a
separate property or user with a separate connection to the collection
system. In computing sewer rents under Subsection B, in such cases the
total water usage shall be divided by the number of such units, unless
§ 143-11 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-11
135:153
§ 143-12. Prohibited discharges to sewers.
such units are satisfactorily separately metered, and the rate applied to
the resulting usage per unit, but each unit shall separately be subject
to the minimum rent.
E. Sewer rents for commercial establishments under Subsection C, which
are dependent upon the number of bays, washers, chairs, stalls or
garbage grinders under the foregoing schedule shall be computed on
the basis of the average number of such bays, washers, etc., for the
calendar quarter preceding the date of the quarterly bill.
F. Sewer rents for schools payable under Subsection C shall be computed
on the basis of the average number of pupils enrolled during the school
term preceding the date of the quarterly bill. Teachers and employees
shall be included with pupils for purposes of such computation.
G. In the event that the sewer authority is not provided, upon request, with
accurate information, including supporting documents to determine the
number of employees or pupils using any property or such other data as
may be necessary to determine a user classification or rate under
Subsection C, the sewer authority's estimate or determination thereof
shall be conclusive. [Amended 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 46643]
H. The sewer rent with respect to all properties which have purchased
equivalent dwelling units (EDUs) more than 24 months prior to a billing
period but have not connected to the sewer system or otherwise are not
utilizing the total number of EDUs purchased for the property shall be
computed on a flat-rate basis, per quarter-year per equivalent dwelling
unit, for EDUs not in use, at a rate to be set, from time to time, by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors. [Added 9-18-2006 by Ord. No.
466]
A. The annual sewer rents imposed by § 143-11 hereof cover the discharge
into the collection/conveyance system of sanitary sewage only, and all
persons are hereby prohibited from discharging into the collection/
conveyance system any wastes, substances or other matter other than
sanitary sewage, except in accordance with this section. Without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, all persons are specifically
prohibited from discharging into the collection/conveyance system any
stormwater or roof or subsurface drainage from stormwater inlets,
sump pumps, floor drains, roof leaders or other direct sources and any
substance or waste: [see Ordinance No. 322, "Pre-Treatment
Regulations, and Ordinance No. 469, which amends Ord. No. 322].
[Amended 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 466; 12-4-2006 by Ord. No.
469]
43.Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, pertaining to sewer rents for retail stores and offices,
as amended, was deleted 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 466, and former Subsection H was
redesignated G.
§ 143-11 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-12
135:154
B. Industrial wastes may be discharged into the collection system but only
upon prior written permit issued by the sewer authority. Application for
any such permit shall be accompanied by such information relating to
the nature or character of the industrial waste proposed to be
discharged or otherwise, including, without limitation, a detailed
engineering report in respect thereof prepared by a registered
engineer or engineering firm, as the sewer authority may reasonably
require. Any permit issued under this Subsection B may be conditioned
upon compliance with such reasonable restrictions as the sewer
authority may impose, including, without limitation, requirements for
the establishment of facilities for the pretreatment and prescreening of
wastes, the construction of flow-equalization facilities to assure a
uniform rate of discharge and the construction of suitable control
manholes to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
wastes and the discharge thereof. Grease, oil and sand interceptors
shall be provided by the applicant when they are required by the sewer
authority for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients. All such interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the sewer authority and shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Where any such
required facilities or interceptors are constructed, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
applicant, at his expense. No permit for the discharge of industrial
wastes issued under this Subsection B shall be deemed to give any right
to the applicant to continue such use, and any such permit may be
revoked by the sewer authority at any time.
C. The sewer authority may promulgate prohibitions against specific types
or strengths of industrial wastes or other substances (in addition to
those set forth in Subsection A above) which are harmful to the
collection system or which the Montgomery County Sewer Authority
has prohibited from discharge to its treatment and disposal facilities to
which the collection system is to be connected. Such prohibitions may
be modified from time to time by the sewer authority, and any permit
issued pursuant to Subsection B of this section shall, by virtue hereof,
be subject to such prohibitions as the same are in existence from time
to time. Any person questioning the reasonableness of any such
prohibitions as applied to property owned or used by such person shall
have the right to a hearing before the Board of Supervisors within a
reasonable time after requesting the same (but such request shall not
operate as a stay of such prohibitions), except in cases where such
prohibitions have been established or specifically approved by
ordinance.
D. Upon the issuance of any permit for the discharge of industrial waste in
accordance with Subsection B of this section, the sewer authority shall
establish the rent to be paid for the use permitted thereunder and shall
report such rent to the Board of Township Supervisors. Upon approval
by the Board, such rent shall be deemed imposed under this article.
§ 143-12 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-13
135:155
§ 143-13. Billing and payment of sewer rents.
§ 143-14. Penalty for unpaid sewer rents. [Amended 11-7-1988 by
Ord. No. 288]
If any quarterly installment of sewer rent is not paid within 30 days after the
date of the bill, a penalty of 10% shall be added thereto. Any unpaid sewer
rent, together with penalties thereon to the extent permitted by law, shall be
a lien on the property served which may be collected by action in assumpsit,
by distress or by a lien filed in the nature of a municipal claim, as and to
the extent provided by law. In addition, the sewer authority may require any
water utility to shut off the water supply to any property with respect to
which the sewer rent imposed hereby is unpaid until all such rents, together
with penalties as aforesaid, are paid.
§ 143-15. Additional rules and regulations.
Rules and regulations regarding the payment and collection of the sewer
rents imposed hereunder and the use of the collection system may be
promulgated by the sewer authority, and upon approval by the Board of
A. The flat-rate sewer rents imposed by § 143-11C shall be payable
quarterly in advance, and the rent for each calendar quarter shall be
billed and payable as of the 15th day of each quarter, i.e., on the 15th
day of January, April, July and October in each year. Rent for the quarter
in which the connection is made shall be prorated and shall be billed in
conjunction with the next regular quarterly billing or by special billing,
as the official responsible for billing may elect. When sewer service has
been provided in such manner as to make a connection available for
more than six months, any property capable of connection therewith
shall be billed as if connection had actually been made, unless a waiver
has been granted by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with
§ 143-3A. [Amended 3-3-1969 by Ord. No. 120; 9-18-2006 by Ord.
No. 466]
B. The water-usage sewer rents imposed by § 143-11B shall be payable
upon billing and shall be billed and payable on a quarterly basis. The
respective dates of quarterly meter reading and billing in respect of the
several properties subject to such sewer rents shall be established by
the sewer authority and may be on a staggered basis. The first such
reading and billing in respect of each such property may be based upon
such time period not exceeding six months, as the sewer authority may
determine, with appropriate proration of the rent in respect of any such
periods which vary from an exact quarter-year.
C. Bills for sewer rent shall be mailed to the address specified in the
application for permit to make the connection, unless and until a
different address is specified by the owner or user of the property to the
sewer authority. Failure to receive a bill as a result of an incorrect
address or otherwise shall not excuse nonpayment of rent nor extend
the time for payment.
§ 143-13 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-15
135:156
Township Supervisors, such rules and regulations shall become effective as
though set forth herein.
§ 143-16. Amendments.
The Township reserves the right to amend or modify this article or any parts
thereof at any time or from time to time.
§ 143-17. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-2-1973 by Ord. No.
153; amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 301]
Any discharge into the collection system in violation of the provisions of
§ 143-12 hereof shall be deemed a violation of this article and shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 plus costs of prosecution for each
day upon which such discharge takes place or, in default of payment thereof,
by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 143-15 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-17
135:157

ARTICLE III
Retaining Tanks
[Adopted 9-6-1983 by Ord. No. 238]
§ 143-18. Intent.
The intent of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of retaining tanks designed to receive and retain sewage from
certain residential uses, and it is hereby declared that the enactment of
this article is necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of the
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this Township during the
time that a connection ban is in effect.
§ 143-19. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have
the following meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the singular include the plural, words in the plural
include the singular, and words used in the present tense include the future.
The word "shall" is always mandatory.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Upper Providence, Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania, or its authorized representative.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon which
there is erected a residential structure intended for continuous or periodic
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged and which would ordinarily be served by
public sanitary sewers, but for a sewer connection ban.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the Township.
PERSON or PERSONS — Any person or persons, male or female,
corporation, partnership, association, company, individual, owner,
occupant, lessee, tenant or any organization.
RETAINING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate disposal
of the sewage at another site. The term includes but is not limited to the
following:
CHEMICAL TOILET — A permanent or portable nonflushing toilet using
chemical treatment in the retaining tank for odor control.
A.
HOLDING TANK — A tank, whether permanent or temporary, to which
sewage is conveyed by a water-carrying system.
B.
PRIVY — A tank designed to receive sewage where water under
pressure is not available.
C.
INCINERATING TOILET — A device capable of reducing waste
materials to ashes.
D.
§ 143-18 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-19
135:159
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for the
domestic water supply or for recreation.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Providence, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 143-20. Rights and privileges granted.
The Board is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the
Township the control and methods of retaining tank sewage disposal and
the collection and transportation thereof.
§ 143-21. Conformance required. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No.
490]
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Board shall be in conformity
with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the Township, all
applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of administrative
agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, particularly the
Department of Environmental Protection and, in particular, the regulations
set forth in Chapter 71, Sections 71.51 and 71.52, and Chapter 73, Sections
73.81 and 73.82.
§ 143-22. Maintenance of retaining tank systems.
All applications for retaining tank systems shall include a contract for
maintenance by a disposal agency approved by the Board. Such contract
shall include but not be limited to the name of the contractor, method
of maintenance, method of disposal, frequency of inspection and ultimate
place of disposal of all waste. Such contract shall be required to remain
in force for the entire period of operation of the system. Failure by the
owner to renew such contract or submit proof of another approved contract
shall constitute a violation of this article. The system must be inspected by
the approved disposal agency a minimum of three times per year. Further,
prior to the issuance of any building permits for any residential dwelling
that will utilize a retaining tank, a performance bond must be posted with
the Township in an amount equal to three years' contract price for sewage
removal and for the cost of removal of the retaining tank as estimated by the
Township Engineer, which shall run for the entire period that the retaining
tank is to be in use. This bond shall be conditioned upon the landowner
COMPOSTING TOILET — A device for holding and processing human
and organic kitchen waste, employing the process of biological
degradation through the action of microorganisms to produce a stable,
humus-like material.
E.
RECYCLING TOILET — A device in which the flushing medium is
restored to a condition suitable for reuse in flushing.
F.
§ 143-19 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-22
135:160
maintaining the retaining tank system in accordance with the rules and
regulations of this article.
§ 143-23. Charges.
The Board shall, by resolution, have the power to fix, alter, charge and
collect such fees or costs as may be necessary to properly enforce this
article.44
§ 143-24. Revocation of use and occupancy permit.
By obtaining permission to use a retaining tank under this article, the owner
of the subject property shall agree that any failure to make timely removal
of the contents of the retaining tank, or any other violation of this article or
sanitary requirements, will subject the owner to an automatic revocation of
the use and occupancy permits issued for the subject properties.
§ 143-25. Collection and transportation of sewage. [Amended
6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property
using a retaining tank shall be done under the direction of the Board,
and the disposal thereof shall be made only at such site or sites as may
be approved by the Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 143-26. Conditions requiring installation of tanks.
The installation of a retaining tank, at the expense of an improved property
owner, shall be required when it is determined that the malfunctioning of an
on-lot sewage system constitutes a public health hazard. Such installation
shall be required only after all other means of on-site sewage disposal have
been determined to be inadequate.
§ 143-27. Duties of property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a retaining tank shall:
A. Maintain the retaining tank in conformance with this article or any
ordinance of this Township, the provisions of any applicable law and the
rules and regulations of the Board and any administrative agency of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only an approved agency acting in accordance with the
regulations of the Board to collect, transport and dispose of the
contents therein.
C. Remove the retaining tank system within 30 days after connection to
the public sewage system.
44.Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 143-22 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-27
135:161
§ 143-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof by summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of said fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for a period of not in excess of 30 days. After notice of
a violation, each day that the violation continues shall be considered a
separate violation.
§ 143-29. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of
this article may be deemed to constitute a nuisance and may be abated
by the Board by seeking either appropriate equitable or legal relief from a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 143-30. Official Plan revision.
The appropriate officials of the Township are directed to take such action as
may be necessary to amend the Official Plan of Upper Providence Township
to implement the purposes of this article.
D. Within 24 hours of the execution of an agreement of sale for the sale of
any lot to be connected to a retaining tank, submit to the Township an
executed statement in a form to be designed by the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer in which the purchaser acknowledges that the
purchaser has been advised of the terms of this article and understands
the procedures, penalties and fines for noncompliance with this article.
§ 143-27 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-30
135:162
ARTICLE IV
Grinder Pumps
[Adopted 11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 447]
§ 143-31. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have
the following meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the singular include the plural, words in the plural
include the singular, and words used in the present tense include the future.
The word "shall" is always mandatory.
ACT 537 PLAN — The Township's Official Plan as defined in the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535
(1965), No. 537, as amended, 35 P.S. §§ 750.1-750.20a ("Sewage Facilities
Act" or "Act 537").
AUTHORITY — An Authority, as defined by the Municipality Authorities Act
of 2001 (2001, June 19, P.L. 287, No. 22, and as amended thereafter, 53 Pa.
C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.)
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
GRINDER PUMP — Any electric-motor-driven, submersible, centrifugal
pump capable of macerating all material found in normal domestic sanitary
sewage, including reasonable amounts of objects such as plastics, sanitary
napkins, disposable diapers, rubber and the like, to a fine slurry, and
pumping this material through a small diameter discharge.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPALITY — The Board of Supervisors of Upper Providence Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — The Upper Providence Township Municipal
Authority.
OFFICIAL PLAN REVISION — A change in the Township's Act 537 Plan to
provide for additional or newly identified future or existing sewage facilities
needs, as defined fully in Section 1 of the Sewage Facilities Act, 35 P.S.
§ 750.1.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person or entity vested with ownership, legal or
equitable, sole or partial, of any property located in the Township.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation, or any substance which constitutes pollution
under the Clean Streams Law, 35 P.S. §§ 691.1-691.1001, as amended.
§ 143-31 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-32
135:163
§ 143-32. Planning requirements.
The connection of existing properties or proposed new land development to
an existing or proposed sewerage system through the use of sewage grinder
pumps, their associated force mains or low-pressure laterals shall occur
only after an Official Plan Revision to the Township's Act 537 Plan, approved
by both the Township and the Department, designates that the proposed
properties be served by such a connection.
§ 143-33. Powers of the Township.
The Township is authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and
regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from time
to time to effect the purposes herein. The Township is authorized and
empowered to take such other actions as are necessary, including without
limitation entering into agreements with property owners that assure
proper operation and maintenance of sewage facilities within the
Township's boundaries, including without limitation sewage grinder pumps
and any associated force mains or low-pressure laterals.
§ 143-34. Rights, duties and responsibilities of the Township.
§ 143-35. Duties and responsibilities of others.
A. The Township shall exercise its powers and legal authority set forth
herein, and under all applicable statutes, ordinances, and other laws to
effect the purposes of this article.
B. The Township may enter into an agreement with each property owner
proposing to install or who has installed a sewage grinder pump or lowpressure
sewage system to assure the short-and long-term operation
and maintenance, use, service, repair or replacement of such systems.
C. All grinder pumps and low-pressure sewer systems (and the
installation, use, operation, maintenance, service, repair and
replacement thereof) shall comply with the rules and regulations of the
Township.
D. All grinder pumps and low-pressure sewer systems shall be connected
to the sewage collection and conveyance system in full compliance with
the rules and regulations of the Township and the Municipal Authority.
E. The Township shall maintain control over the type of grinder pumps
used and assure that full service capability is available locally on short
notice.
F. The Township shall bear no responsibility whatsoever for the purchase,
installation, use, operation, maintenance, service, repair or
replacement of the grinder pump and/or its low-pressure force main or
lateral, or any of their component parts, except as otherwise set forth
herein.
§ 143-32 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-35
135:164
§ 143-36. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violations of
§§ 143-34 and 143-35 hereof shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated
by the Township by either seeking mitigation of the nuisance or appropriate
equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 143-37. Rules and regulations to be in conformity with applicable
law.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Township to effectuate this
article shall be in conformity with the provisions hereof and all other
ordinances of the Township and all applicable laws and applicable rules
and regulations of the administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
A. Each property owner served by a grinder pump shall bear full
responsibility for providing, installing, using, operating, maintaining,
servicing, repairing and replacing his or her grinder pump and/or its
low-pressure force main or lateral, unless otherwise set forth herein.
B. Each property owner served by a grinder pump shall have full
responsibility for using the pump consistent with the manufacturer's
instructions and shall avoid introducing into the sewerage system
materials that may damage the impellers on the pump, including
without limitation items designated as biodegradable in septic tanks.
C. Each property owner served by a grinder pump shall close the sewage
system and cease operations during any period when the grinder pump
and/or low-pressure system serving a property is inoperable for more
than one day.
D. Where the low-pressure force main or lateral is shared between
property owners, they shall submit to the Township a declaration of
easements, covenants and restrictions in recordable form setting forth
the agreement of each benefited property owner with respect to the
installation, use, operation, maintenance, service, repair and
replacement of the low-pressure system, which agreement shall bind all
future property owners. Following the approval of the low-pressure
system by all applicable governmental entities, the Township will not
issue a permit for its installation until evidence is presented that such
agreement has been recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds in
and for Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
§ 143-35 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-37
135:165

ARTICLE V
On-lot Sewer System Management
[Adopted 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 455]
§ 143-38. Short title; introduction; purpose.
§ 143-39. Definitions.
A. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Upper Providence
Township On-Lot Sewage Disposal System Management Ordinance."
B. This article is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in the Second
Class Township Code, the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law (35 P.S.
§§ 699.1-699,1001), and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act of
January 24, 1966), P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S. §§ 750.1 et seq., also
known as Act 537, This article is also adopted pursuant to the official
sewage facilities plan adopted for Upper Providence Township pursuant
to Act 537.
C. This article is intended to prevent and abate water pollution and the
hazards to the public health caused by the improper treatment and
disposal of sanitary sewage. This article is further intended to provide
for the inventory and inspection of on-lot sanitary sewage disposal
systems within the Township, which said inventory and inspections are
designed to provide for the adequate maintenance, management,
rehabilitation, repair, replacement and construction of on-lot sewage
disposal systems; to permit the Township to intervene in events which
are public nuisances or hazards to the public health; to license
wastewater management persons that engage in the repair, inspection,
and/or installation of on-lot sanitary sewage disposal systems, as well as
the removal and disposal of septage; and to establish penalties and
appeal procedures necessary for the appropriate administration of the
Upper Providence Township On-Lot Sanitary Sewage Disposal System
Management Program.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the words and phrases used in this
Article V shall have the following meanings. The singular number
includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A sewage enforcement officer, employee of
the Township, licensed civil engineer, plumbing inspector or any other
qualified or licensed person who is authorized to function within the
specified limits as an agent of the Township to administer or enforce
the provisions of this article.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Upper Providence Township.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly or
privately owned, for the collection of sanitary sewage from two or more
lots or structures, and the treatment and/or disposal of the sewage on
one or more lots or at any other site.
§ 143-38 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-39
135:167
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving a single lot and collection and disposing in whole or in
part into the soil or any waters of the commonwealth.
MALFUNCTION — The condition which occurs when an on-lot sanitary
sewage disposal system discharges untreated or inadequately treated
sewage onto the surface of the ground, into the groundwater, or into
the surface waters of the commonwealth. Malfunction also occurs when
sanitary sewage backs up into the building connected to the system, or
otherwise causes a nuisance or hazard to the public health or pollution
of the ground or surface water or contamination of any public and/or
private drinking water wells.
OFFICIAL SEWAGE FACILITIES PLAN — The plan adopted by the
Township and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection in furtherance of the requirements as set
forth in the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.
ON-LOT SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system for
disposal of sanitary sewage involving pretreatment and subsequent
disposal of the clarified sewage into the soil for final treatment and
disposal; including both individual sanitary sewage systems and
community sanitary sewage systems.
PERSON — Any individual, company, association, public or private
corporation for profit or not for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate,
department, board, bureau or agency of the commonwealth, political
subdivision, municipality, district, authority, or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as having rights and duties.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty or
imposing a fine, the term "person" shall include the members of an
association, partnership or firm and the officers of any local agency or
municipal, public or private corporation for profit or not for profit.
REHABILITATION and REPAIR — Work done to modify, alter or repair
an existing on-lot sanitary sewage disposal system or individual
components thereof, including the enlargement of the total absorption
area, provided the flows from the structure being served are unchanged
or reduced.
SEPTAGE — The residual scum and sludge pumped from septic
systems.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products
or excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or
animals, and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or
inimical to the public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of
water for domestic water supply or for recreation or which constitutes
pollution under the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as
"The Clean Streams Law," as amended.
§ 143-39 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-39
135:168
§ 143-40. Applicability.
From the effective date of this article, its provisions shall apply in any
portion of the Township identified in the Official Sewage Facilities Plan as
a sewage management district. Within such area or areas, the provisions of
this article shall apply to all persons owning any property serviced by an
on-lot sewage disposal system and to all persons installing or rehabilitating
on-lot sewage disposal systems.
§ 143-41. Permit requirements.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A person certified by DEP who
issues and reviews permit applications and/or conducts such
investigations and inspection as are necessary to implement the
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537) and the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder and this or any other ordinance adopted by the
Township.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT — The entirety of Upper
Providence Township, unless a particular area or areas of the Township
have been designated in the Official Sewage Facilities Plan adopted
by the Board as an area for which a sewage management plan is
implemented.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — A comprehensive set of legal
and administrative requirements encompassing the requirements of
this article and other administrative requirements adopted by the
Township to effectively enforce and administer the article.
SUBDIVISION — The definition of "subdivision" shall be the definition
as set forth in the Upper Providence Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.45
TOWNSHIP — Upper Providence Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All streams, lakes, ponds,
marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or
accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial,
public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border
upon the state or any portion thereof, and as defined by the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act.
ZONING OFFICER — An individual employed by the municipality to
administer and enforce the Township Zoning Ordinance.46
B. All definitions included in Act 537 and the Clean Streams Act, as
amended, are hereby incorporated by reference into this article.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 154, Subdivision and Land Development.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 182, Zoning.
§ 143-39 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-41
135:169
§ 143-42. Inspections.
A. No person shall install, construct or request bid proposals for
construction or alter an individual sewage system or community
sewage system or construct or request bid proposals for construction or
install or occupy any building or structure for which an individual
sewage or community sewage system is to be installed without first
obtaining a permit from the Sewage Enforcement Officer, which permit
shall indicate that the site and the plans and specifications of such
system are in compliance with the provisions of the Clean Streams Law
(35 P.S. §§ 691.1-691.1001) and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act
(35 P.S. 750.1 et seq.) and the regulations promulgated pursuant to
those Acts.
B. No system or structure designed to provide individual or community
sewage disposal shall be covered from view until approval to cover the
same has been given by a sewage enforcement officer. If 72 hours have
elapsed, excepting Sundays and holidays, since the Sewage
Enforcement Officer issuing the permit received notification of
completion of construction, the applicant may cover said system or
structure unless permission has been specifically refused by the
Sewage Enforcement Officer.
C. Applicants for sewage permits may be required to notify the Sewage
Enforcement Officer of the schedule for construction of the permitted
on-lot sanitary sewage disposal system so that inspection(s) in addition
to the final inspection required by the Sewage Facilities Act may be
scheduled and performed by the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
D. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for a new building
which will contain sewage-generating facilities until a valid sewage
permit has been obtained from the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
E. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued and no work shall
begin on any alteration or conversion of any existing structure, if said
alteration or conversion will result in the increase or potential increase
in sewage flows from the structure, until either the structure's owner
receives a permit for alteration or replacement of the existing sewage
disposal system or until the structure's owner and the appropriate
officials of the Township receive written notification from a sewage
enforcement officer that such a permit will not be required. The Sewage
Enforcement Officer shall determine whether the proposed alteration
or conversion of the structure will result in increased sewage flows.
F. Sewage permits may only be issued by a sewage enforcement officer
employed by the Township. DEP shall be notified as to the identity of
each sewage enforcement officer employed by the Township.
A. Any on-lot sewage disposal system may be inspected by an authorized
agent at any reasonable time as of the effective date of this article.
§ 143-41 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-42
135:170
§ 143-43. Operation.
Only normal domestic wastes shall be discharged into any on-lot sewage
disposal system. The following shall not be discharged into the system:
B. Such inspection may include a physical tour of the property; the taking
of samples from surface water, wells, other groundwater sources; the
sampling of the contents of the sewage disposal system; and/or the
introduction of a traceable substance into the interior plumbing of the
structure served to ascertain the path and ultimate destination of
wastewater generated in the structure.
C. An authorized agent shall have the right to enter upon land for the
purposes of inspections described in this section.
D. An initial inspection shall be conducted by an authorized agent within
one year of the effective date of this article for the purpose of
determining the type and functional status of each sewage disposal
system in the sewage management district. A written report shall be
furnished to the owner of each property inspected, and a copy of said
report shall be maintained in the Township records.
E. A schedule of routine inspections may be established to assure the
proper functioning of the sewage systems in the sewage management
district.
F. An authorized agent shall inspect systems known to be, or alleged to be,
malfunctioning. Should said inspections reveal that the system is
indeed malfunctioning, the authorized agent shall order action to be
taken to correct the malfunction. If total correction cannot be done in
accordance with the regulations of DEP, including without limitation
those outlined in Chapter 73 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, or is
not technically or financially feasible in the opinion of the authorized
agent and a representative of DEP, then action by the property owner to
mitigate the malfunction shall be required.
G. If there arises a geographic area where numerous on-lot sewage
disposal systems are malfunctioning, a resolution of these areawide
problems may necessitate detailed planning and a revision to the
portion of the Sewage Facilities Plan pertaining to areas affected by
such malfunctions. If a DEP-authorized Official Sewage Facilities Plan
Revision has been undertaken, repair or replacement of individual
malfunctioning sewage disposal systems within the area affected by the
revision may be adopted, pending the outcome of the plan revision
process. However, immediate corrective action will be compelled
whenever a malfunction, as determined by Township officials and/or
DEP, represents a serious public health or environmental threat.
A. Industrial waste.
B. Automobile oil and other nondomestic oil.
§ 143-42 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-43
135:171
§ 143-44. Maintenance.
C. Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including but not limited
to pesticides, disinfectants, acids, paints, paint thinners, herbicides,
gasoline and other solvents.
D. Clean surface or ground water, including water from roof or collar
drains, springs, basement sump pumps and French drains.
E. Any nonbiodegradable materials.
F. Radioactive waste materials.
A. Each person owning a building served by an on-lot sanitary sewage
disposal system which contains a septic tank shall have the septic tank
pumped by a qualified pumper/hauler within six months of the effective
date of this article. Thereafter, that person shall have the tank pumped
at least once every three years or whenever an inspection reveals that
the septic tank is filled with solids or with scum in excess of 1/3 of the
liquid depth of the tank. Receipts from the pumper/hauler shall be
submitted to the Township within the prescribed six-month and threeyear
pumping periods.
B. The required pumping frequency may be increased at the discretion of
an authorized agent if the septic tank is undersized, if solids buildup in
the tank is above average, if the hydraulic load on the system increases
significantly above average, if a garbage grinder is used in the building,
if the system malfunctions, or for other good cause shown. If any person
can prove that such person's septic tank had been pumped within three
years of the six-month anniversary of the effective date of this article,
then that person's initial required pumping may be delayed to conform
to the general three-year frequency requirement, except where an
inspection reveals a need for more frequent pumping frequencies.
C. Any person owning a building served by a septic tank shall submit, with
each required pumping receipt, a written statement from the pumper/
hauler or from any other qualified individual acceptable to the
Township that the baffles in the septic tank have been inspected and
found to be in good working order. Any person whose septic tank baffles
are determined to require repair or replacement shall first contact a
sewage enforcement officer for approval of the necessary repair.
D. Any person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal
system which contains an aerobic treatment tank shall follow the
operation and maintenance recommendations of the equipment
manufacturer. A copy of the manufacturer's recommendations and a
copy of the service agreement shall be submitted to the Township
within six months of the effective date of this article. Thereafter, service
receipts shall be submitted to the Township at the intervals specified by
the manufacturer's recommendations. In no case may the service or
§ 143-43 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-44
135:172
§ 143-45. System rehabilitation.
pumping intervals for aerobic treatment tanks exceed those required
for septic tanks.
E. Additional maintenance activity may be required as needed, including
without limitation cleaning and unclogging of piping, servicing and the
repair of mechanical equipment, leveling of distribution boxes, tanks
and lines, removal of obstructing roots or trees, and the diversion of
surface water away from the disposal areas.
A. No person shall operate or maintain an on-lot sewage disposal system
in such a manner that it malfunctions. All liquid wastes, including
kitchen and laundry wastes and water softener backwash, shall be
discharged to a treatment tank. No sewage system shall discharge
untreated or partially treated sewage to the surface of the ground or
into the waters of the Commonwealth unless a permit for such
discharge has been obtained from DEP.
B. A written notice of violation shall be issued to any person who is the
owner of any property which is found to be served by a malfunctioning
on-lot sewage disposal system or which is discharging sewage without a
permit.
C. Within seven days of notification by the Township that a malfunction
has been identified, the property owner shall make application to the
Sewage Enforcement Officer for a permit to repair or replace the
malfunctioning system. Within 30 days of initial notification by the
Township, construction of the repair or replacement shall commence.
Within 60 days of the original notification by the Township, the
construction shall be completed, unless seasonal or unique conditions
mandate a longer period; in which case, the Township shall set an
extended completion date.
D. A sewage enforcement officer shall have the authority to require the
repair of any malfunction by the following methods: cleaning, repair or
replacement of components of the existing system, adding capacity or
otherwise altering or replacing the system's treatment tank, expanding
the existing disposal areas, replacing the existing disposal area,
replacing a gravity distribution system with a pressurized system,
replacing the system with a holding tank, or any other alternative
appropriate for the specific site.
E. In lieu of, or in combination with, the remedies described in Subsection
D above, a sewage enforcement officer may require the installation of
water conservation equipment and the institution of water conservation
practices in structures served. Water-using devices and appliances in
the structure may be required to be retrofitted with water-saving
appurtenances or they may be required to be replaced by waterconserving
devices.
§ 143-44 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-45
135:173
§ 143-46. Liens.
The Township, upon written notice from a sewage enforcement officer that
an imminent health hazard exists due to failure of a property owner to
maintain, repair or replace any on-lot sewage disposal system, as provided
under the terms of this article, shall have the authority to perform or
contract to have performed the work required by the Sewage Enforcement
Officer. The property owner shall be charged for the work performed and,
if necessary, a lien shall be recorded therefor in accordance with law. The
Township shall not, however, be obligated to perform or contract to have
performed any work required to maintain, repair, rehabilitate or replace any
on-lot sanitary sewage system.
§ 143-47. Disposal of septage.
§ 143-48. Administration.
F. In the event that the rehabilitation measures in Subsections A through
E are not feasible or effective, the owner may be required to apply for a
permit to install an individual spray irrigation treatment system or to
DEP for a single residence treatment and discharge system. Upon
receipt of said permit, the owner shall complete construction of the
system within 30 days.
G. Should none of the remedies described in this section be totally
effective in eliminating the malfunction of an existing on-lot sewage
disposal system, the property owner is not absolved of responsibility for
that malfunction. The Township may require whatever action is
necessary to lessen or mitigate the malfunction to the extent necessary.
A. All septage originating within the sewage management district shall be
disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the Solid Waste
Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. §§ 6018.101 et seq.) and all
other applicable laws and at sites or facilities approved by DEP.
Approved sites or facilities shall include the following: septage
treatment facilities, wastewater treatment plants, composting sites and
approved farmlands.
B. Pumpers/haulers operating within the Township shall operate in a
manner consistent with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste
Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. §§ 6018.101-6018.1003) and
all other applicable laws.
A. The Township may fully utilize those powers it possesses through
enabling statutes and ordinances to effect the purposes of this article.
B. All permits, records, reports, files and other written materials relating
to the installation, operation, maintenance and malfunction of on-lot
sewage disposal systems in the sewage management district shall
become the property of the Township.
§ 143-45 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-48
135:174
§ 143-49. Appeals.
§ 143-50. Violations and penalties.
Any person who has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions
of this article shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500 and costs,
and not more than $5,000 and costs, or in default thereof shall be confined
in the County jail for a period of not more than 90 days. Each day of
noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense.
C. The Board of Supervisors of Upper Providence Township may establish
the procedures necessary to carry out the provisions of this article.
D. The Township may establish a fee schedule and authorize the collection
of fees to cover the cost to the Township in administering this article.
A. Appeals from the final decisions of the Township or any of its authorized
agents under this article shall be made to the Upper Providence
Township Board of Supervisors in writing within 30 days from the date
of written notification of the decision in question.
B. The applicant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Upper
Providence Township Board of Supervisors at its next regularly
scheduled meeting, if a written appeal is received at least 14 days prior
to that meeting. The Board of Supervisors may affirm, modify or reverse
the aforesaid decision. Additional evidence may be introduced at the
hearing, provided that it is submitted with the written notice of appeal.
§ 143-48 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-50
135:175

ARTICLE VI
Wastewater Collection and Treatment
[Adopted 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 49347]
§ 143-51. Short title; introduction; purpose.
A. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Upper Providence
Township Wastewater Collection and Treatment Ordinance."
B. This article is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in the Second
Class Township Code,48 the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law (35 P.S.
§ 691.1 et seq.), and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act of
January 24, 1966), P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., also
known as "Act 537." This article is also adopted pursuant to the official
Sewage Facilities Plan adopted for Upper Providence Township
pursuant to Act 537.
C. This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the wastewater
collection and treatment system of the Lower Perkiomen Valley
Regional Sewer Authority, as control authority, and enables the Lower
Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority to comply with all
applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act [33
United States Code (U.S.C.) § 1251 et seq.) and the General
Pretreatment Regulations [Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations
(CFR) Part 403].
D. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW and
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW and
wastewater system which will pass- through the system,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or
otherwise be incompatible with the system;
(3) To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who
may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and the general public;
(4) To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewaters and
sludges from the system;
(5) To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW and
wastewater system; and
47.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded Ord. No. 322, regarding wastewater
management, adopted in 1993.
48.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 143-51 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-51
135:177
§ 143-52. Administration.
§ 143-53. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms
and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
ACT (“the act”) — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Regional Administrator of the EPA.
AUTHORIZED OR DULY REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER —
(6) To enable the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority, as
control authority, to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the
publicly owned treatment works is subject.
A. This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the POTW and wastewater system through the issuance
of permits to certain nondomestic users and, through enforcement of
general requirements for users, authorizes monitoring, compliance,
and enforcement activities, requires user reporting; assumes that
existing customer's capacity will not be preempted and provides for the
setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the
program established herein.
B. This article shall apply to all users of the POTW. Except as otherwise
provided herein, the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority
shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article as
the control authority.
If the user is a corporation:
The president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or
(1)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make
management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated
facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty of making
major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct
other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental
compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to
gather complete and accurate information for wastewater
discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign
(2)
A.
§ 143-51 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-53
135:178
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in §§ 143-55 and 143-56 [40
CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure for five days at 20 C. expressed in terms of concentration
[milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of
a user to the public sanitary sewer system of the POTW.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS or CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARDS — National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, being any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which
apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD — A measure of the oxygen
required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The term "control authority" shall refer to Lower
Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use, such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added
is heat.
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or
proprietor, respectively.
B.
If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility, a director
or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility or their
designee.
C.
The individuals described in Subsections A through C above may
designate another duly authorized representative if the authorization
is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to
Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority.
D.
§ 143-53 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-53
135:179
DAILY MAXIMUM — The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT — The maximum allowable discharge limit of a
pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed
in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the
course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement
of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that
day.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the State of Pennsylvania.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also
be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized
official of said agency, including the Regional Water Management Division
Director.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge that is not a new source.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The discharge or the
introduction of pollution from any nondomestic source regulated under
Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) into the POTW
(including holding tank waste discharge into the system).
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to
Section 402 of the Act. In addition, industrial user shall also be defined as
an establishment which discharges or introduces industrial wastes into the
POTW.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The meaning ascribed to it in the Act of June 22,
1937, (P.L. 1987, No. 394) known as "The Clean Stream Law" and the
regulations adopted thereunder.
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT — The
maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any
time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample
collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the
sampling event.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, causes the inhibition or
disruption of the POTW treatment process or operations or its sludge
processes, use or disposal; and, therefore, is the cause of a violation of the
§ 143-53 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-53
135:180
Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority's NPDES permit or of
the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of
the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder,
or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act;
the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the
"Resource Conservation and Recovery Act" (RCRA); any state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic
Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and
Sanctuaries Act.
LOCAL LIMIT — Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the
control authority upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the
general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and
(b).
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The sum of all daily discharges measured during a
calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during
that month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT — The highest allowable average of daily
discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily
discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of
daily discharges measured during that month.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance
with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which applies to
a specific category of industrial users, as set forth in 40 CFR, Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or NPDES
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the authority
of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or
may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of the proposed pretreatment standards pursuant
to the Section 307(c) of the Act, which will be applicable to such source
if the standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section, provided that:
A.
§ 143-53 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-53
135:181
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into the waters of
the U.S. in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of
the POTW's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ("NPDES")
permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
(1)
The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant
and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same
general type of activity as the existing source should be considered.
(3)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting
the criteria of Subsection A(2) or (3) or above, but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
B.
Construction of a new source, as defined under subsection, has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
(a)
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(b)
(1)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial
losses, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies
do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
(2)
C.
§ 143-53 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-53
135:182
PERMITTEE — The term "permittee" shall refer to the Lower Perkiomen
Valley Regional Sewer Authority as control authority.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context. This definition includes
all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. A measure of the
acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, and
agricultural wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes, by process changes, or by other means, except by diluting the
concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard,
imposed on a user. Any substantive or procedural provision of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act (62 Stat. 115, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) or the
Act of June 22, 1937, (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as "The Clean Streams
Law," or any rule or regulation, ordinance or term or condition of a permit
or order adopted or issued by the Commonwealth or a POTW for the
implementation or enforcement of an industrial waste pretreatment
program established under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or The
Clean Streams Law.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES —
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances. These
prohibitions appear in §§ 143-55 and 143-56 of this article.
§ 143-53 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-53
135:183
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works,
as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned
and operated by the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority.
This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW
treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances
not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this
article, POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the
POTW from persons who are users of the POTW. This definition includes
any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling,
and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any
conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. As used herein,
POTW refers to the wastewater treatment plant owned by Lower Perkiomen
Valley Regional Sewer Authority.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks, such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SEWAGE — Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).
SHALL — Is mandatory; may is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
Except as provided in Subsections B and C of this definition, a
significant industrial user is:
An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
or
(1)
An industrial user that:
Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more
of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(a)
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the POTW treatment plant; or
(b)
Is designated as such by the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional
Sewer Authority on the basis that it has a reasonable potential
for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating
any pretreatment standard or requirement.
(c)
(2)
A.
The control authority may determine that an industrial user subject
to categorical pretreatment standards is a nonsignificant categorical
industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that
the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day
(gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in
the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met:
B.
§ 143-53 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-53
135:184
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — An industrial user is in significant
noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the specific criteria set
forth in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii). For purposes of this definition, an industrial
user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the
following criteria:
The industrial user, prior to the control authority's finding, has
consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements;
(1)
The industrial user annually submits the certification statement
required in § 143-97B [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)], together with any
additional information necessary to support the certification
statement; and
(2)
The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated
wastewater.
(3)
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection A(2) has
no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Lower
Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority may at any time, on its
own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in
accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such
user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
C.
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude)
a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits as defined in §§ 143-55 through 143-63;
A.
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product
of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits as defined in §§ 143-55 through 143-63, multiplied
by the applicable TRC (TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and
grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
B.
Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement, as
defined in §§ 143-55 through 143-63 (daily maximum, long-term
average, instantaneous limit or narrative standard), that the control
authority determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the
health of POTW personnel or the general public;
C.
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the
POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under of this article to halt
or prevent such a discharge;
D.
§ 143-53 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-53
135:185
SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE — Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in §§ 143-55 through § 143-63 of this article. A slug discharge is
any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited
to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has a
reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in any other
way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
United States Office of Management and Budget.
STATE — State of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom, including snowmelt.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the control authority to
supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total
suspended matter that floats on the surface of or is suspended in water,
wastewater or other liquids and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency under the provision of Clean Water Act Section 307(a) or
other acts.
USER or INDUSTRIAL USER — Any person who contributes, causes or
permits the indirect discharge of wastewater into the POTW.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial and domestic
wastes and sewage from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal
sewage and industrial waste.
Failure to meet, within 30 days after the schedule date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in this article or in an enforcement order.
E.
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance
with compliance schedules;
F.
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the control authority determines will
adversely effect the operation or implementation of the pretreatment
program.
H.
§ 143-53 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-53
135:186
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.
§ 143-54. Abbreviations and acronyms.
The following abbreviations or acronyms shall have the designated
meanings:
Abbreviation Meaning
AO Administrative order
BAT Best available treatment
BATEA Best available technology economically achievable
BCT Best control technology
BMP Best management practices
BMR Baseline monitoring report
B/N Base neutral
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
BPJ Best professional judgment
BPT Best professional technology
CERCLA Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
and Liability Act
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CIU Categorical industrial user
COD Chemical oxygen demand
CSO Combined sewer overflow
CWA Clean Water Act
CWF Combined waste stream formula
DMR Discharge monitoring report
DSS Domestic sewage study
EMS Enforcement management system
EP Extraction procedure
EPA Environmental Protection Agency of the United States
FDF Fundamentally different factor
FOV Finding of violation
FOG Fats, oil, and grease
FR Federal Register
§ 143-53 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-54
135:187
Abbreviation Meaning
FWA Flow-weighted averaging
FWPCA Federal Water Pollution Control Act
GC/MS Gas chromatograph/mass spectrophotometry
gpd Gallons per day
I + I Infiltration and inflow
IU Industrial user
IWS Industrial waste survey
MAHL Maximum allowable headworks loading
MGD Million gallons per day
mg/l Milligrams per liter
MOU Memorandum of understanding
MSDS Material safety data sheet
NIOSH National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health
NMP National Municipal Policy
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NON Notice of noncompliance
NOV Notice of violation
OCPSF Organic chemicals, plastics, and synthetic fibers
O&G Oil and grease
O&M Operations and maintenance
OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Administration
OWEC Office of Water Enforcement and Compliance
PAD Proportioned actual domestic flow
PAH Polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons
PAI Proportioned actual industrial flow
PASS Pretreatment audit summary system
PCB Polychlorinated biphenols
PCI Pretreatment compliance inspection
PCME Pretreatment compliance monitoring and enforcement
PCS Permit compliance system
PIRT Pretreatment Implementation Review Task Force
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
ppd Pounds per day
ppm Parts per million
ppb Parts per billion
PPETS Pretreatment permits enforcement tracking system
§ 143-54 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-54
135:188
Abbreviation Meaning
PQR Permit quality review
PSNS Pretreatment standards for new sources
PSES Pretreatment standards for existing sources
QA/QC Quality assurance/quality control
QNCR Quarterly noncompliance report
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
RNC Reportable noncompliance
SARA Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act
SIC Standard industrial classification
SIU Significant industrial user
SMP Solvent management plan
SNC Significant noncompliance
SPCC Spill prevention control and countermeasures
SPMS Strategic planning and management system
STP Sewage treatment plant
STLC Soluble threshold limit concentration
SUO Sewer Use Ordinance
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act
TCLP Toxicity characteristic leachate procedure
TDS Total dissolved solids
TICH Total identifiable chlorinated hydrocarbons
TOMP Toxic organic management plan
TRC Technical review criteria
TRE Toxicity reduction evaluations
TSS Total suspended solids
TTO Total toxic organics
TTLC Total threshold limit concentration
USC United States Code
VOA Volatile organic analysis
VOC Volatile organic compounds
VSS Volatile suspended solids
WENDB Water Enforcement National Data Base
WQA Water Quality Act
WQS Water quality standards
WWTP Wastewater treatment plant
§ 143-54 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-55
135:189
§ 143-55. General discharge prohibitions and standards.
No user shall contribute, introduce or cause to be contributed or
introduced, directly or indirectly, into the POTW any pollutant or
wastewater which causes pass-through or interference. These general
prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not the user is
subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state,
or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
§ 143-56. Specific prohibitions.
A. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the
following pollutants, substances or wastewater:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C.) using the text methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
(2) Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 10.0 or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or
equipment;
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference (but in
no case solids greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension). The
following substances are also prohibited: ashes, cinders, sand,
mud, straw, metal, glass, bones, rags, feather, tar, plastic, wood,
paunch manure, whole blood or blood products, lye, building
materials, rubber, hair, shavings, leather, china, ceramic wastes,
asphalt, paint, waxes, butcher offal, porcelain, and bentonite;
(4) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW;
(5) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 104° F. (40° C.), or
which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting
in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed
104° F. (40° C.);
(6) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through;
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems;
(8) Trucked or hauled pollutants or wastewater;
§ 143-55 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-56
135:190
(9) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
(10)Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to
the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the Lower
Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority's NPDES permit;
(11)Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes;
(12) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
de-ionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted
wastewater;
(13) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
(14) Medical wastes;
(15)Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail toxicity test;
(16) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
(17)Wastewater causing an explosive hazard at the point of discharge
or at any point in the sewer interceptor system or the POTW;
(18) Any substance or condition which will cause the POTW to violate its
NPDES and/or State Disposal System Permit, the receiving water
quality standards, or any statute, rule, or regulation of any public
agency;
(19) In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain
concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceed any time period
longer than 15 minutes or contain more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration of flow during normal operation, or
otherwise constitutes a slug discharge;
(20) The discharge of toxic or hazardous wastes, as defined in the Act or
RCRA;
(21) Total solids of such character or quantity as to require unusual
attention or expense in treatment;
(22) Discharges prohibited by state or federal regulations;
(23) Fats, oils, or greases of an animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 100 mg/l.
§ 143-56 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-56
135:191
§ 143-57. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
§ 143-58. Modification of National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards.
Where the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority's wastewater
treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by
national pretreatment standards, the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional
Sewer Authority, as control authority, may apply to the approval authority
for modification of specific limits in the National Pretreatment Standards.
"Consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant
or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment
system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by
the system in 95% of the samples taken when measured according to the
B. When the control authority determines that a user is contributing to the
POTW any of the above-enumerated substances in such amounts as to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, the control authority shall:
(1) Advise the user(s) of the impact of the contribution on the POTW;
(2) Develop effluent limitation(s) for such user to correct the
interference with the POTW; and
(3) Proceed with enforcement pursuant to the provisions of this article.
C. Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in a manner that they could be discharged to
the POTW.
A. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated in this
article by reference as though set forth in full.
B. Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
control authority may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
C. When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the control
authority shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste
stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
D. A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard
if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when
developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
E. A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
§ 143-56 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-58
135:192
procedures set forth in Section 403.7(c)(2) of Title 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations, Part 403 "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and
New Sources of Pollution" promulgated pursuant to the Act. The Lower
Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority, as control authority, may then
modify pollutant discharge limits in the National Pretreatment Standards if
the requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval
from the approval authority is obtained.
§ 143-59. State requirements.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this article.
§ 143-60. Right of revision.
The Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority, as control authority,
reserves the right to establish by resolution more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed
necessary to comply with the objectives presented in § 143-51 of this article.
§ 143-61. Dilution.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation, unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or
requirement. The control authority may impose mass limitations on users
who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.
§ 143-62. Accidental discharges.
A. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall
be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and
expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to
provide this protection shall be submitted to the control authority for
review and shall be approved by the control authority before
construction of the facility. All existing users shall complete such a plan
by January 1, 1994. No user shall be permitted to introduce pollutants
into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been
approved by the control authority. Review and approval of such plans
and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the
responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this article. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is
the responsibility of the user to immediately notify the control authority
§ 143-58 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-62
135:193
§ 143-63. Local limits.
of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type
of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions.
B. Written notice. Within five days followings an accidental discharge the
user shall submit to the control authority a detailed written report
describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by
the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall
not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or
any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification
relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may
be imposed by this article or other applicable law.
C. Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to
call in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall insure that
all employees who may cause or suffer such an accidental discharge to
occur are advised of the emergency notification procedures.
A. The Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority, as control
authority, is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR
403.5(c).
B. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against passthrough,
interference, and sludge contamination. No person shall
discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following limits:
Parameter
Daily Maximum
(mg/l)
Arsenic 0.425
Cadmium 0.05
Chromium 3.5
Copper 1.0
Cyanide 1.0
Lead 1.0
Mercury 0.002
Nickel 1.1
Oil and grease and fats of animal or vegetable
origin
100
Oil and grease of petroleum origin,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil, mineral oil
25
Silver 0.35
Zinc 3.0
§ 143-62 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-63
135:194
§ 143-64. Pretreatment facilities.
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with
this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in §§ 143-55 through
143-63 of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the
state, or the control authority, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities
necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at
the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the control authority for review and shall
be acceptable to the control authority before such facilities are constructed.
The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve
the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary
to produce a discharge acceptable to the control authority under the
provisions of this article.
§ 143-65. Additional pretreatment measures.
C. The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged
to the sewer. All concentrations from metallic substances are for total
metal unless otherwise indicated. The above local limits are based on
maximum allowable headworks loadings (MAHL) as approved by EPA.
The Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority, as control
authority, through the issuance of an industrial waste discharge permit,
may establish other effluent limits consistent with the approved MAHL.
No such permits, however, shall waive or abrogate federal or state
categorical pretreatment standards or regulations. Categorical
concentrations apply at the end of the process waste stream. No person
shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of allowable discharge
limits as established by the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer
Authority as control authority. The Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional
Sewer Authority, as control authority, may impose mass limitations in
addition to or in place of the concentration-based limitations.
D. The Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority, as control
authority, may develop best management practices (BMPs), by
resolution or in wastewater discharge permits, to implement local limits
and the requirements of §§ 143-55 through 143-63.
A. Whenever deemed necessary, the control authority may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from
industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be
necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance
with the requirements of this article.
B. The control authority may require any person discharging into the
POTW to install and maintain, on his/her property and at his/her
expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure
§ 143-63 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-65
135:195
§ 143-66. Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans.
The control authority shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user
needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan or other action to control
slug discharges. The control authority may require any user to develop,
submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the control
authority may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/
slug discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
§ 143-67. Hauled wastewater.
The Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority does not accept
septic tank waste or industrial waste from haulers or RCRA hazardous
wastes.
§ 143-68. Wastewater dischargers.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to the POTW or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the control authority and/or to the POTW any wastewater,
equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued
solely for flow equalization.
C. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided by the user when,
in the opinion of the control authority, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil,
or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity
approved by the control authority and shall be so located to be easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be
inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at its
expense.
D. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.
A. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
B. Description of stored chemicals;
C. Procedures for immediately notifying the control authority of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by this article; and
D. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials,
loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
§ 143-65 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-68
135:196
except as authorized by the control authority in accordance with the
provisions of this article, subject to state and federal laws and regulations.
§ 143-69. Wastewater analysis.
When requested by the control authority, a user must submit information
on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the
request. The control authority is authorized to prepare a form for this
purpose and may periodically require users to update this information.
§ 143-70. Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
§ 143-71. Wastewater discharge permitting for existing
connections.
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was
discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this
article, and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall
within 30 days after said date, apply to the control authority for a
wastewater discharge permit in accordance with this article. Said user shall
not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 30 days of
the effective date of this article, except in accordance with a wastewater
discharge permit issued by the control authority.
§ 143-72. Wastewater discharge permitting for new connections.
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes
to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such
permit from the control authority prior to the beginning or recommencing
of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in
accordance with this article, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date
upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
A. No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the
control authority. A permitted user may discharge for the time period
specified in the permit.
B. The control authority may require other users to obtain wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.
C. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in this article.
Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee
of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment
standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal,
state, and local law.
§ 143-68 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-73
135:197
§ 143-73. Wastewater discharge permit application contents.
Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and
file with the control authority an application in the form prescribed in this
article. The control authority may require users to submit all or some of the
following information as part of a permit:
A. Identifying information.
(1) The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner.
(2) Contact information, description of activities, facilities, and plant
production processes on the premises;
B. Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held
by or for the facility.
C. Description of operations.
(1) A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and
rate of production), and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should
include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of
discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
(2) Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could
accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
(3) Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed
or actual hours of operation;
(4) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);
(5) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details
to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size,
location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;
D. Time and duration of discharges;
E. The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit;
F. Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated
process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the
combined waste stream formula set out in § 143-56 [40 CFR 403.6(e)].
G. Measurement of pollutants.
§ 143-73 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-73
135:198
§ 143-74. Application signatories and certification.
(1) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes
for existing sources.
(2) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by
the control authority, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from
each regulated process.
(3) Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.
(4) The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be
analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in § 143-92 of this
article. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or
pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit
documentation as required by the control authority or the
applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard.
(5) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set
out in § 143-93 of this article.
(6) Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved
monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to
be present in the discharge based on § 143-87B [40 CFR
403.12(e)(2)].
H. Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the control
authority to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
I. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
A. All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and
certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative
of the user and contain the certification statement in § 143-97A.
B. If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate
because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization
satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the
control authority prior to or together with any reports to be signed by
an authorized representative.
C. A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user
by the control authority, pursuant to § 143-53, must annually submit the
signed certification statement in § 143-97B.
§ 143-73 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-75
135:199
§ 143-75. Wastewater discharge permit decisions.
The control authority will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete
wastewater discharge permit application, the control authority will
determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The
control authority may deny any application for a wastewater discharge
permit.
§ 143-76. Wastewater discharge permit duration.
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years at the
discretion of the control authority. Each wastewater discharge permit will
indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
§ 143-77. Wastewater discharge permit contents.
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the control authority to prevent pass-through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
A. Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
(1) A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit
issuance date, expiration date and effective date;
(2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the control authority,
in accordance with §§ 143-78 and 143-80 of this article, and
provisions for furnishing the new owners or operator with a copy of
the existing wastewater discharge permit;
(3) Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards;
(4) Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and
local law;
(5) The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant
neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in
accordance with § 143-87B.
(6) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
§ 143-75 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-77
135:200
§ 143-78. Wastewater discharge permit appeals.
The control authority shall provide public notice of the issuance of a
wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition
the control authority to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge
permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance.
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or
local law;
(7) Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
control authority to be necessary; and
(8) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the control authority
(§ 143-87B) must be included as a condition in the user's permit.
B. Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to,
the following conditions:
(1) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization;
(2) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction
of pollutants into the treatment works;
(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions, including management
practices, necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
(4) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
(5) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
(7) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with
all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including
those which become effective during the term of the wastewater
discharge permit; and
(8) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the control authority to
ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws,
rules, and regulations.
§ 143-77 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-78
135:201
§ 143-79. Wastewater discharge permit modification.
The control authority may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
A. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
B. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection,
and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
C. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
D. If the control authority fails to act within 30 days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater
discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall
be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial
review.
E. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint
with the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County within 30 days
of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision.
A. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
B. To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation,
processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
C. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
D. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the POTW, Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority
personnel, or the receiving waters;
E. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
F. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
G. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
H. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit; or
§ 143-78 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-79
135:202
§ 143-80. Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
§ 143-81. Wastewater discharge permit revocation.
I. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator.
A. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or
transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a
new or changed operation without approval of the control authority.
Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and
conditions of the existing permit, as well as any additional terms and
conditions which may be required as a result of the proposed transfer.
B. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or
operator only if the permittee gives at least 90 days' advance notice to
the control authority and it approves the wastewater discharge permit
transfer. The notice to the control authority must include a written
certification by the new owner or operator which:
(1) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent
to change the facility's operations and processes;
(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
(3) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
C. The new owner and/or operator shall provide a completed application
pursuant to §§ 143-68 through 143-75 of this article.
D. Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater
discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
A. The control authority may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons;
(1) Failure to notify the control authority of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the control authority of
changed conditions pursuant to § 143-88 of this article;
(3) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(6) Refusing to allow the control authority or its designated
representative timely access to the facility premises and records;
§ 143-79 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-81
135:203
§ 143-82. Wastewater discharge permit reissuance.
§ 143-83. Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.
(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(8) Failure to pay fines;
(9) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(11) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
(12) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
(13) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article.
B. Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge
permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new
wastewater discharge permit to that user.
A. User with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete
permit application to the control authority, in accordance with § 143-73
of this article, a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of user's
existing wastewater discharge permit. It is the responsibility of the user
to request a permit application form no less than 120 days prior to the
expiration of the existing permit. The application shall include
calibration reports on flow monitoring devices used during the term of
the prior permit.
A. If a municipality or user located within another municipality contributes
wastewater to the POTW, the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer
Authority, as control authority, shall enter into an intermunicipal
agreement with the contributing municipality.
B. Prior to entering into an agreement required by Subsection A above,
the control authority shall request the following information from the
contributing municipality:
(1) A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged
to the POTW by the contributing municipality;
(2) An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
(3) Such other information as the control authority may deem
necessary.
§ 143-81 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-83
135:204
§ 143-84. Baseline monitoring reports.
C. An intermunicipal agreement, as required by Subsection A above, shall
contain the following conditions:
(1) A requirement specifying that such ordinance and local limits must
be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the Lower
Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority's resolution or local
limits;
(2) A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
user inventory on at least an annual basis;
(3) A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance,
inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by
the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be
conducted by the control authority; and which of these activities
will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the
control authority;
(4) A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
control authority with access to all information that the
contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment
activities;
(5) Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the
POTW;
(6) Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge;
(7) A provision ensuring the control authority or its designated
representative access to the facilities of users located within the
contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the
purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed
necessary by the control authority; and
(8) A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of
the intermunicipal agreement, and authorizing the Lower
Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority as control authority to
take legal action to enforce the terms of the contributing
municipality's ordinance or impose and enforce pretreatment
standards.
A. Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the control
authority a report which contains the information listed in Subsection B
§ 143-83 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-84
135:205
below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge,
new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard,
shall submit to the control authority a report which contains the
information listed in Subsection B below. A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow
and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
B. Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
(1) All information required in §§ 143-73A(1) and (2), 143-73C(1) and
143-73F.
(2) Measurement of pollutants.
(a) The user shall provide the information required in
§ 143-73G(1) through (4).
(b) The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements
of this subsection.
(c) Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately
downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment
exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the
flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the
combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate
compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an
alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along
with supporting data shall be submitted to the control
authority.
(d) Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
§ 143-93.
(e) The control authority may allow the submission of a baseline
report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data
provides information sufficient to determine the need for
industrial pretreatment measures.
(f) The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such
sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles
and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
(3) Certification. A statement reviewed by the user's authorized
representative, as defined in § 143-53, and certified to by a
qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards
§ 143-84 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-84
135:206
§ 143-85. Compliance schedule progress reports.
The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by
§ 143-84B(4) of this article.
§ 143-86. Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standard deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source,
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW,
any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall
submit to the control authority a report containing the information
described in §§ 143-73F and G and 143-84B(2) of this article. For users
are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment
is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
(4) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance
schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set
out in § 143-85 of this article.
(5) Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be
signed and certified, in accordance with § 143-97A of this article,
and signed by an authorized representative as defined in § 143-53.
A. The schedule shall contain progress increments (milestones) in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards
(such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning
and conducting routine operation);
B. No increment referred to above shall exceed six months;
C. The user shall submit a progress report to the control authority no later
than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for
compliance, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with
the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if appropriate,
the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the
established schedule; and
D. In no event shall more than one month elapse between such progress
reports to the control authority.
§ 143-84 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-86
135:207
subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance
with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a
reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other
users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of
allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of
operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the
appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with § 143-74 of this article.
§ 143-87. Periodic compliance reports.
A. All SIUs are required to submit periodic compliance reports even if they
have been designated a nonsignificant categorical industrial user under
the provisions of § 143-87C.
B. Except as specified in § 143-87C, all significant industrial users must, at
a frequency determined by the control authority, submit no less than
twice per year [June and December (or on dates specified)] reports
indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In
cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best
management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the
user must submit documentation required by the control authority or
the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance
status of the user.
C. The control authority may authorize an industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant
regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user
has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that
the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the
discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water
and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the
industrial user. [See 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2).] This authorization is subject
to the following conditions:
(1) The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to
be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the
facility, provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by
an applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no
process wastewater.
(2) The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective
period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no
case longer than five years. The user must submit a new request for
the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent
individual wastewater discharge permit. See § 143-73G(6).
(3) In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the
§ 143-86 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-87
135:208
facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the
facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes.
(4) The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance
with § 143-53, and include the certification statement in § 143-97
[40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii)].
(5) Nondetectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration
that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40
CFR Part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that
pollutant was used in the analysis.
(6) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the control authority must be
included as a condition in the user's permit. The reasons
supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user in
its request for the waiver must be maintained by the control
authority for three years after expiration of the waiver.
(7) Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the user's
permit by the control authority, the industrial user must certify on
each report, with the statement in § 143-97C below, that there has
been no increase in the pollutant in its waste stream due to
activities of the industrial user.
(8) In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is
expected to be present because of changes that occur in the user's
operations, the user must immediately: comply with the monitoring
requirements of § 143-87A, or other more frequent monitoring
requirements imposed by the control authority, and notify the
control authority.
(9) This provision does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards,
except as otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment
standard.
D. Reduced reporting.
(1) The control authority may reduce the requirement for periodic
compliance reports [see § 143-87A; 40 CFR 403.12(e)(1)] to a
requirement to report no less frequently than once a year, unless
required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the
EPA, where the industrial user's total categorical wastewater flow
does not exceed any of the following:
(a) One thousand two hundred eleven gallons per day [0.01% of
the POTW's design dry-weather hydraulic capacity (12.11 mgd)
of the POTW], or 5,000 gallons per day, whichever is smaller, as
measured by a continuous effluent flow monitoring device
unless the industrial user discharges in batches.
§ 143-87 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-87
135:209
(b) One and twenty-five hundredth pounds per day [0.01% of the
design dry-weather organic treatment capacity (12,500 pounds
per day) of the POTW]; and
(c) The loading for any pollutant regulated by the applicable
categorical pretreatment standard for which approved local
limits were developed in accordance with § 143-58 of this
article shall be below 0.01% of the maximum allowable
headworks loading as set forth below:
Parameter
0.01% MAHL
(0.001 lbs/day)
Arsenic 0.140
Cadmium 0.040
Chromium 1.800
Copper 1.483
Cyanide 1.453
Lead 0.365
Mercury 0.032
Nickel 1.160
Silver 2.732
Zinc 2.400
(2) Reduced reporting is not available to industrial users that have in
the last two years been in significant noncompliance, as defined in
§ 143-53 of this article. In addition, reduced reporting is not
available to an industrial user with daily flow rates, production
levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that, in the
opinion of the control authority, decreasing the reporting
requirement for this industrial user would result in data that are
not representative of conditions occurring during the reporting
period.
E. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with § 143-74 of this article.
F. All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at
all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
G. If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors
any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more
frequently than required by the control authority, using the procedures
§ 143-87 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-87
135:210
§ 143-88. Reports of changed conditions.
Each user must notify the control authority of any planned significant
changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change.
§ 143-89. Reports of potential problems.
prescribed in § 143-93 of this article, the results of this monitoring shall
be included in the report.
A. The control authority may require the user to submit such information
as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application
under § 143-73 of this article.
B. The control authority may issue a wastewater discharge permit under
§ 143-82 of this article or modify an existing wastewater discharge
permit under § 143-79 of this article in response to changed conditions
or anticipated changed conditions.
C. For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are
not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the discharge of
any previously unreported pollutants.
A. In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug discharge or slug load that
may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately
telephone and notify the control authority of the incident. This
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the
user.
B. Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived
by the control authority, submit a detailed written report to the control
authority describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to
be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property
nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or
other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article.
C. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of
a discharge described in Subsection A above. Employers shall ensure
that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised
of the emergency notification procedure.
§ 143-87 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-89
135:211
§ 143-90. Reports from unpermitted users.
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the control authority as the control authority may
require.
§ 143-91. Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting.
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the result
of the repeat analysis to the control authority within 30 days after becoming
aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the control
authority monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the
control authority samples between the user's initial sample and when the
user receives the results of this sampling.
§ 143-92. Analytical requirements.
All pollutant analyses, including sample techniques, to be submitted as
a part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part
136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where
the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques
are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall
be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable
sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
control authority or other parties approved by EPA.
§ 143-93. Sample collection.
Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on
data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during
the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of
conditions occurring during the reporting period.
D. Significant industrial users are required to notify the control authority
immediately of any changes at their facility affecting the potential for a
slug discharge.
A. Except as indicated in Subsections B and C below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flow-proportional
composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the control authority. Where
time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized
by the control authority, the samples must be representative of the
discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation)
specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple
grab samples collected during a twenty-four-hour period may be
§ 143-89 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-93
135:212
§ 143-94. Timing.
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date or receipt of
the report shall govern.
§ 143-95. Recordkeeping.
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain
and make available for inspection and copying all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article, any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and
documentation associated with best management practices established
under § 143-63. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and
time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the
dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall
be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the
user or the control authority, or where the user has been specifically notified
of a longer retention period by the control authority.
composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols,
and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in
the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be
composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters
unaffected by the compositing procedures, as documented in approved
EPA methodologies, may be authorized by the control authority, as
appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show
compliance with instantaneous limits.
B. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.
C. For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety-day
compliance reports required in §§ 143-84 and 143-86 [40 CFR 403.12(b)
and (d)], a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide,
total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for
facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for
which historical sampling data are available, the control authority may
authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by § 143-87 [40
CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)], the industrial user is required to collect
the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance
with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
§ 143-93 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-96
135:213
§ 143-96. Discharge of hazardous waste.
The discharge of hazardous waste into the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional
Sewer Authority system is strictly prohibited.
§ 143-97. Certification statements.
A. Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial monitoring
waiver. The following certification statement is required to be signed
and submitted by users submitting permit applications in accordance
with § 143-74; users submitting baseline monitoring reports under
§ 143-84B(5); users submitting reports on compliance with the
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under § 143-86; users
submitting periodic compliance reports required by § 143-87A through
D and users submitting an initial request to forego sampling of a
pollutant on the basis of § 143-87B(4). The following certification
statement must be signed by an authorized representative as defined in
§ 143-53: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in
accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel
properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my
inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those
persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties
for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations."
B. Annual certification for nonsignificant categorical industrial users. A
facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user by
the control authority, pursuant to §§ 143-53 and 143-74C, must annually
submit the following certification statement signed in accordance with
the signatory requirements in § 143-53. This certification must
accompany an alternative report required by the control authority:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR _____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and
belief that during the period from __________, _____ to __________, _____
[months, days, year]:
(a)The facility described as _______________ [facility name] met the
definition of a nonsignificant categorical industrial user as
described in § 143-53;
(b)The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements during this reporting period; and
(c)The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting
period.
This compliance certification is based on the following information.
§ 143-96 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-97
135:214
§ 143-98. Right of entry for inspection and sampling.
The control authority or its designated representative shall have the right to
enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying
with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the control authority or its
designated representative ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the
performance of any additional duties. A user shall not obstruct, block or
otherwise interfere with access to the sampling point(s).
C. Certification of pollutants not present. Users that have an approved
monitoring waiver based on § 143-87B must certify on each report with
the following statement that there has been no increase in the pollutant
in its waste stream due to activities of the user: "Based on my inquiry of
the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance
with the pretreatment standard for 40 CFR _____ [specify applicable
National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of _____
[list pollutant(s) in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility
since filing of the last periodic report under § 143-87A."
A. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the control authority or its
designated representative shall be permitted to enter without delay for
the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
B. The control authority or its designated representative shall have the
right to set up on the user's property or require installation of such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the
user's operations.
C. The control authority or its designated representative may require the
user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in
a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense.
All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated semiannually to ensure their accuracy.
D. Any temporary or permanent obstruction of safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the user at the written or verbal request of the control authority or its
designated representative and shall not be replaced. The costs of
clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
§ 143-97 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-98
135:215
§ 143-99. Search warrants.
If the control authority or its designated representative has been refused
access to a building, structure, or property or any part thereof and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program of the control authority designed to verify
compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to
protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then
the control authority may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Court
of Common Pleas of Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
§ 143-100. Confidential information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, monitoring programs, and from the control
authority's inspection and sampling activities shall be available to the public
without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the control authority, that the release
of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state
law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user
furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses
related to NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics and other effluent data, as defined by 40
CFR 2.302, will not be recognized as confidential information and will be
available to the public without restriction.
§ 143-101. Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
The control authority shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions
served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time during the
previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant
noncompliance shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any
other industrial user that violates Subsection C, D or H of this section) and
shall mean:
E. Unreasonable delays in allowing the control authority or its designated
representative access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this
article.
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same
§ 143-98 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-101
135:216
§ 143-102. Notification of violation.
When the control authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
control authority may serve upon that user a written notice of violation.
Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the control
authority. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits as defined in §§ 143-55 through 143-63;
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by §§ 143-55 through 143-63,
multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and
grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
C. Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by §§ 143-55 through 143-63 (daily maximum, long-term
average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the control
authority determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the
health of POTW personnel or the general public;
D. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the control
authority's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within 30 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic selfmonitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
H. Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the control authority determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
§ 143-101 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-102
135:217
any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the control authority
to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement
action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
§ 143-103. Consent orders.
The control authority may enter into consent orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents
shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the
noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such
documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders
issued pursuant to §§ 143-105 and 143-106 of this article.
§ 143-104. Show cause hearing.
The control authority may order a user which has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement
to appear before the control authority and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement
action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause
why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return
receipt requested) at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be
served on any authorized representative of the user, as defined in § 143-53
and required by § 143-74A. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against,
or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
§ 143-105. Compliance orders.
When the control authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
control authority may issue an order to the user responsible for the
discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified
time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided,
sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to
address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and
management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants
discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline
for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement,
nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user.
§ 143-102 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-106
135:218
§ 143-106. Cease and desist orders.
§ 143-107. Administrative civil penalties.
§ 143-108. Emergency suspensions.
A. When the control authority finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the
control authority may issue an order to the user directing it to cease
and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
B. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
A. When the control authority finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the control authority may fine such a user in an amount
not to exceed $25,000 per day for each violation regardless of
jurisdictional boundaries. Such fines shall be assessed on a per
violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term
average discharge limits, penalties shall be assessed for each day
during the period of violation. The foregoing administrative civil
penalties shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of
§§ 143-112 and 143-118 of this article.
B. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges,
fines and penalties.
C. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the
control authority to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the
fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request
has merit, the control authority may convene a hearing on the matter. In
the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with
any interest accruing thereon, shall be returned to the user. The control
authority may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement
actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
D. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
A. The control authority may immediately suspend a user's discharge,
after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably
§ 143-106 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-108
135:219
§ 143-109. Termination of discharge.
appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons. The control authority may also
immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to
respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW or
which represents or may present an endangerment to the environment.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
control authority may take such steps as deemed necessary,
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent
or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The control authority may allow
the user to recommence its discharge when the user has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the control authority that the
period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings in § 143-109 of this article are initiated against the
user.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and
the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the
control authority prior to the date of any show cause or termination
hearing under §§ 143-104 or 143-109 of this article.
B. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior
to any emergency suspension under this section.
A. In addition to the provisions in § 143-81 of this article, any user who
violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
(1) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§ 143-55 through
143-63 of this article.
B. Such user will be notified of proposed termination of its discharge and
be offered an opportunity to show cause under § 143-104 of this article
why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by
§ 143-108 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-109
135:220
§ 143-110. Notification to contributing jurisdictions.
The control authority shall provide to the contributing municipality a true
and correct copy of any administrative enforcement remedy, judicial
enforcement remedy, or supplemental enforcement action initiated by the
control authority with reference to an industrial user within the
municipality, pursuant to §§ 143-102 through 143-119 of this article. The
failure to provide a copy to the contributing municipality shall not be a
defense to any third party who is a subject of an administrative enforcement
remedy, judicial enforcement remedy, or supplemental enforcement action.
§ 143-111. Injunctive relief.
When the control authority finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit,
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the control authority may petition the Court of Common Pleas
of Montgomery County, Pennsylvania for appropriate legal and equitable
relief, including the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this
article on activities of the user. Relief requested may also include
requirements for environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against a user.
§ 143-112. Civil penalties.
the control authority shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user.
A. A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the
control authority for a maximum civil penalty of $25,000 per violation,
per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge
limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the
violation. Each violation for each separate day shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense under this section.
B. The control authority may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court
costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the control authority.
C. In determining the amount of civil liability, there shall be taken into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of
the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and
any other factor as justice requires.
§ 143-109 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-112
135:221
§ 143-113. Criminal prosecution.
A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article,
a wastewater discharge permit, order issued hereunder, any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, or who willfully or negligently
introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or
property damage, or any user who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations or certifications in any application, record, report, plan,
or other document filed, or required to be maintained pursuant to this
article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article or
who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device of method required under this article, may be subject to criminal
prosecution in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
Pennsylvania Crimes Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 143-114. Remedies nonexclusive.
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The control
authority may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally
be in accordance with the control authority's enforcement response plan.
However, the control authority may take other action against any user when
the circumstances warrant. Further, the control authority is empowered to
take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
§ 143-115. Performance bonds.
The control authority may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater
discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision
of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such
user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the control authority, in a sum
not to exceed a value determined by the control authority to be necessary
to achieve consistent compliance.
§ 143-116. Liability insurance.
The control authority may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater
discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision
of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the
user submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to
restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
§ 143-117. Public nuisances.
A violation of any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement
D. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
§ 143-112 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-117
135:222
is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as
directed by the control authority. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance
shall be subject to the provisions of the Second Class Township Code or
Borough Code, as the case may be, and applicable ordinances governing
such nuisances, including reimbursing the control authority for any costs
incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.
§ 143-118. Assessment of civil penalties.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of Act 9 of 1992, providing for enhanced
penalty authority for publicly owned treatment works which are
authorized to enforce industrial pretreatment standards for industrial
waste discharges, and in addition to proceeding under any other
remedy available at law or equity for violation of pretreatment
standards and/or requirements, the control authority, as the operator of
a publicly owned treatment works, may assess a civil penalty upon an
industrial user for violation of any of the terms and provisions of this
article. The penalty may be assessed whether or not the violation was
willful or negligent. The civil penalty shall not exceed $25,000 per day
for each violation, regardless of jurisdictional boundaries. Each
violation for each separate day shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense under this section.
B. As part of any notice of assessment of civil penalties issued by the
control authority to an industrial user, there shall also be included a
description of the applicable appeals process to be followed, including
the name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for
accepting such appeal on behalf of the control authority.
C. For purposes of this section, a single operational upset which leads to
simultaneous violations of more than one pretreatment standard or
requirement shall be treated as a single violation as required by the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act. The control authority may,
however, recover its costs for reestablishing the operation of the
treatment works in addition to any civil penalty imposed under this
section.
D. The Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority, as control
authority, shall publicly adopt a formal, written civil penalty assessment
policy and make it publicly available. Each industrial discharger
participating in the pretreatment program shall be given written notice
of the policy. The penalty assessment policy shall consider:
(1) Damage to air, water, land or other natural resources of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and their uses;
(2) Costs of restoration and abatement;
(3) Savings resulting to the person in consequence of the violation;
(4) History of past violations;
§ 143-117 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-118
135:223
(5) Deterrence of future violations; and
(6) Other relevant factors.
E. Uses for penalties. All civil penalties collected pursuant to this section
shall be placed by the control authority in a restricted account and shall
only be used by the control authority and the publicly owned treatment
works for the following uses:
(1) The repair of damage and any additional maintenance needed or
any additional costs imposed as a result of the violation for which
the penalty was imposed;
(2) Pay any penalties imposed on the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional
Sewer Authority, as control authority, or the publicly owned
treatment works by the federal or state government for violation of
pretreatment standards;
(3) For the costs incurred by the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional
Sewer Authority, as control authority, or publicly owned treatment
works to investigate and take the enforcement action that resulted
in a penalty being imposed;
(4) For the monitoring of discharges in the pretreatment program and
for capital improvements to the treatment works, including sewage
collection lines, which may be required by the pretreatment
program; and
(5) Any remaining funds may be used for capital improvements to the
treatment works, including collection lines.
F. Injunctive relief.
(1) The control authority shall have the power to obtain injunctive
relief to enforce compliance with or restrain any violation of any
pretreatment requirement or standard pursuant to and in
accordance with the provisions of Act 9 of 1992 and 40 CFR
403.8(f)(l)(vi)(A). Injunctive relief shall be available upon the
showing of one or more of the following:
(a) A discharge from an industrial user presents an imminent
danger or substantial harm to the POTW or the public;
(b) A discharge from an industrial user presents an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the environment;
(c) A discharge from an industrial user causes the POTW to violate
any condition of its discharge permit; or
(d) The industrial user has shown a lack of ability or intention to
comply with a pretreatment standard.
(2) Notwithstanding the preceding subsection, an injunction affecting
an industrial operation not directly related to the condition or
§ 143-118 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-118
135:224
§ 143-119. Falsifying information.
§ 143-120. Upset.
violation in question may be issued if the court determines that
other enforcement procedures would not be adequate to affect
prompt correction of the condition or violation. In addition to an
injunction, the court in any such proceedings may levy civil
penalties in accordance with Act 9 of 1992 and this article.
G. Appeal. An industrial user assessed with a civil penalty under the terms
of this section shall have 30 days to pay the proposed penalty in full, or,
if the industrial user wishes to contest either the amount of the penalty
or the fact of the violation, the industrial user must file an appeal of the
action within 30 days pursuant to Title 2 Pa.C.S.A. (relating to
administrative law and procedure). Failure to appeal within this period
shall result in a waiver of all legal rights to contest the violation or the
amount of the penalty.
H. The penalty authorized in this section is intended to be concurrent and
cumulative, and the provisions of this section shall not abridge or alter
any right of action or remedy, now or hereafter existing in equity, or
under the common law or statutory law, criminal or civil, available to a
person, the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority as
control authority, or the commonwealth.
A. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation
or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other
document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or
wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this article, shall be prosecuted in accordance with the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code pertaining to perjury and
falsification in official matters pursuant to 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4901 et seq.
A. For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of Subsection C below, are met.
C. A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs
or other relevant evidence that:
§ 143-118 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-120
135:225
§ 143-121. Prohibited discharge standards.
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in §§ 143-55
through 143-63 of this article or the specific prohibitions in § 143-56 of this
article, except § 143-56A, B and H, if it can prove that it did not know,
or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference
and that either:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and
(3) The user has submitted the following information to the control
authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be
provided within five days):
(a) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
(b) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and
(c) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
D. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.
F. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary
to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in situations where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or
fails.
A. A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the passthrough
or interference; or
B. No local limits exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in
nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the Lower
§ 143-120 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-121
135:226
§ 143-122. Bypass.
Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority, as control authority, was
regularly in compliance with the NPDES permit, and in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
A. For the purposes of this section:
(1) "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from
any portion of a user's treatment facility.
(2) "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the
absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean
economic loss caused by delays in production.
B. A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of Subsections C and D of this
section.
C. Bypass notification.
(1) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the control authority, at least 10 days before the date
of the bypass, if possible.
(2) A user shall submit oral notice to the control authority of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the
bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days
of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written
submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause;
the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times; and, if
the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce,
eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
D. Bypass.
(1) Bypass is prohibited, and the control authority may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless.
(a) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
(b) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
§ 143-121 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-122
135:227
§ 143-123. Recovery of costs.
It is the purpose of this article to provide for the recovery of costs from
users of the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority's
wastewater disposal system for the implementation of the program
established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in a
schedule of charges and fees.
§ 143-124. Charges and fees.
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal period of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and
(c) The user submitted notices as required under Subsection C of
this section.
(2) The control authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the control authority determines
that it will meet the three conditions listed in Subsection D(1) of
this section.
A. The Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority as control
authority may adopt, by resolution, charges and fees which may
include:
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
pretreatment program;
(2) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
(3) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
(4) Fees for permit applications;
(5) Fees for filing appeals;
(6) Fees for consistent removal of pollutants otherwise subject to
federal pretreatment standards; and
(7) Other fees as the control authority may deem necessary to carry
out the requirements contained herein.
B. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are
separate from all other fees or sewer rentals chargeable by the Lower
Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority as control authority or any
municipality contributing wastewater flows to the POTW.
§ 143-122 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 143-125
135:228
§ 143-125. Severability.
If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of this article is
invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provisions, paragraphs, words, sections, and chapters shall not be affected
and shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 143-126. When effective.
This article shall take effect and shall be enforced from and after its
approval.
§ 143-125 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 143-126
135:229
Chapter 144
GREASE TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 60.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 143.
Solid waste — See Ch. 148.
§ 144-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation, inspection
and maintenance of oil and grease interceptor systems; to allow Township
intervention in situations which may constitute a nuisance or hazard to the
public health, safety and welfare; to allow Township inspection of records
and devices for the removal of FOGs from the public sewer collection
system and POTW; and to establish penalties and appeal procedures
necessary for the proper enforcement of this program.
§ 144-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words shall have the meanings
assigned to them, as follows:
AUTHORIZED AGENT — An employee of Upper Providence Township or
consultant who is authorized to function as an agent of the Board of
Supervisors to administer or enforce the provisions of this chapter.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors, Upper Providence Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
FATS, OILS AND GREASES (FOG) — Organic compounds derived from
animal and/or vegetable sources that contain multiple carbon chain
triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable
using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be
amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as
"grease" or "greases."
MCHD — The Montgomery County Health Department.
OIL AND GREASE INTERCEPTOR — A system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving a single property and intended for the collecting and
holding of waste oil and grease to include gravity and hydromechanical
grease interceptors and any other devices approved by the authorized agent
for the removal of FOGs from the collection system and POTW.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company or any other legal entity.
POTW — Publically owned treatment works.
§ 143-126 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 144-2
135:230
TOWNSHIP — Upper Providence Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 144-3. Applicability.
§ 144-4. Design and sizing.
§ 144-5. Permit requirements.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all commercial, industrial
and institutional establishments located within the Township.
B. Oil and grease interceptors shall be provided when required by the
Township Plumbing Code or by an authorized agent of the Township.
C. Oil and grease interceptors shall not be required for residential users.
D. This chapter shall apply to both new and existing facilities generating
fats, oil or greases as a result of manufacturing, processing or
preparing food. These facilities include, but are not limited to
restaurants, food manufacturers, food processors, hospitals, hotels and
motels, prisons, nursing homes, groceries, convenience stores, any
other facility preparing, serving or otherwise making any food available
for consumption or any industrial process disposing of FOGs into the
public sewer collection system.
E. No person may intentionally or unintentionally allow the direct or
indirect discharge of any fats, oils or greases into the public sewer
system in such amounts as to cause interference with the collection,
conveyance and treatment system, or as to cause pollutants to pass
through the POTW into the environment.
A. Oil and grease interceptor systems shall be designed or selected by an
experienced design professional and approved by a certified agent of
the Township. Oil and grease interceptors shall be located where easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
B. Oil and grease interceptors shall comply with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act49 and those sections of the code
regulating "Traps, Interceptors and Separators" of the International
Plumbing Code, as adopted by the Township.
A. No person shall install, construct or alter an oil and grease interceptor
system, or occupy any building or structure for which an oil and grease
interceptor is required without first receiving a permit from the
Township. Said permit shall identify the site and indicate that the plans
and specifications for the system are in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
49.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 144-2 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 144-5
135:231
§ 144-6. Inspections.
B. After receipt of all required approvals, any person desiring to construct
permitted oil and grease interceptor system shall notify and schedule
an inspection with the Code Enforcement Officer of the Township. A
minimum of 24 hours' advance notice must be given.
C. No building or occupancy permits shall be issued for a new building
that will generate sewage containing FOGs until all devices installed for
the removal of FOGs have been inspected and approved as required in
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act50 by a certified authorized
agent of the Township.
D. No building or occupancy permits shall be issued, and no work shall
begin on any alteration or conversion of any existing structure, if said
alteration or conversion will result in the increase or potential increase
of sewage containing FOGs from the structure, until the owner receives
a permit for alteration or replacement of the existing oil and grease
separator from the Township.
A. All persons responsible for the operation of oil and grease interceptors
shall conduct weekly self inspections of the facility's condition and
operation and keep written document of the same.
B. Any oil and grease interceptor and any required manifest or record may
be inspected by an authorized agent of the Township without advance
notice to the person owning or operating said oil and grease
interceptor. Inspections may take place at any reasonable time.
C. An inspection may include, but not be limited to, a physical inspection
of the premises including food preparation areas, internal inspection of
the oil and grease interceptor, review of operational records and
manifests of grease removal, and verifying the sources of flow into the
oil and grease interceptor by introducing a traceable substance into the
facility plumbing.
D. Operation of new oil and grease interceptors may not commence until
the facility has been inspected by an authorized representative of the
Township and an operating permit issued. Following startup, a written
schedule of routine inspections shall be established based on the nature
of the grease producing operation.
E. All oil and grease interceptors in operation at the time of adoption of
this ordinance shall be inspected by an authorized agent of the
Township within six months of the date of adoption. A written schedule
of routine inspections shall be established based on the nature of the
grease-producing operation.
F. Inspection of an oil and grease interceptor known or alleged to be
malfunctioning may occur at any time. Should the inspection verify the
50.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 144-5 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 144-6
135:232
§ 144-7. Operation and maintenance.
existence of a malfunction, the person owning or operating said oil
and grease interceptor shall be ordered to take corrective actions in
accordance with this chapter and the rules and regulations of the
Township, MCHD and PADEP.
A. Persons owning and/or operating oil and grease interceptors shall limit
discharges to those facilities to oil- and grease-bearing wastewater
from kitchens and food processing operations.
(1) Prohibited discharges shall include:
(a) Automotive fluid;
(b) Mineral and petroleum based oils;
(c) Industrial waste;
(d) Toxic substances;
(e) Groundwater and surface runoff.
(2) No surfactants, solvents, emulsifiers or other chemicals designed
to dissolve or allow grease to pass through the interceptor shall be
introduced into the interceptor or any of its associated piping.
(3) Sewage generated by bathrooms, toilets and other non-food related
activities located on the same premises shall not be discharged to
oil and grease interceptors but rather, piped around the interceptor
and thence to the public sewer.
B. Every person owning a facility served by an oil and grease interceptor
shall have the oil and grease interceptor pumped by a qualified pumper/
hauler within 60 days the effective date of this chapter. Thereafter, the
oil and grease interceptor shall be pumped and cleaned no less
frequently than once every 30 days or whenever an inspection reveals
that the oil and grease interceptor is filled with grease on the surface or
with solids at the bottom in excess of one-third of the liquid depth of the
tank.
(1) Any person who owns or operates a grease interceptor may submit
to the Township a request in writing for an exception to the thirtyday
cleaning frequency of their grease interceptor. Then Township
may grant an extension for the cleaning frequency on a case-bycase
basis when:
(a) The grease interceptor owner/operator has demonstrated the
specific interceptor will produce effluent, based on defensible
analytical results, in consistent compliance with established
local discharge limits such as BOD, TSS, PH, FOG or other
parameters as determined by Chapter 143 of the Code of the
Township of Upper Providence.
§ 144-6 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 144-7
135:233
(b) Less than 25% of the wetted height of the grease interceptor,
as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the
outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or
greases.
(2) In any event, a grease interceptor shall be fully cleaned, evacuated,
and inspected at least once every 90 days.
C. Manifest receipts from the pumper/hauler shall be retained by the
person responsible for the oil and grease interceptor and a copy shall
be submitted annually to the Township Code Enforcement Officer or
Sewer Department electronically. Each pump-out manifest shall include
a written statement from the pumper/hauler that the piping and baffles
in the oil and grease interceptor have been inspected and an
assessment of their condition.
D. The Township can order an increase in the pumping frequency if it is
determined that the oil and grease interceptor is undersized, if solids
build up more rapid than the interceptor can easily accommodate, if the
hydraulic or grease loading to the system increases suddenly or if
malfunctions or other system deficiencies, in the opinion of an
authorized agent of the Township, demand more frequent pumping.
E. Maintenance and repairs to the physical facilities associated with the
oil and grease interceptor system shall be conducted in accordance
with the recommendations of the system manufacturer, a qualified
pumper/hauler or the authorized representative of the Township.
Repairs may only be conducted following receipt of approval from the
Township Code Enforcement Officer. Following Township approval,
repairs shall be completed within 30 days.
F. Additional maintenance such as pipe cleaning, unclogging of piping,
removal of surface and underground obstructions, and general service
of the facility shall be performed by the person responsible on an asneeded
basis.
G. Oil and grease interceptors shall limit the concentration of grease
discharge into the public collection system to a level not to exceed 100
milligrams per liter. The discharges from oil and grease interceptors
shall also comply with prohibited discharge standards. An authorized
representative of the Township shall have the right to sample the
discharge from an oil and grease interceptor at any reasonable time
without advance notice to the person responsible for said oil and grease
interceptor. If the concentration of pollutants in the discharge from the
oil and grease interceptor is found to be in violation of standards
contained in the Township Code (specifically Chapter 143, Article VI,
§ 143-56), a written notice of violation shall be issued to the person
responsible for said interceptor describing the nature of the violation
and requiring that the cause of the violation be identified and remedied
within 60 days of said notice.
§ 144-7 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 144-7
135:234
§ 144-8. Record keeping.
§ 144-9. Oil and grease disposal.
Grease removed from oil and grease interceptors located in the Township
shall be disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the Solid Waste
Management Act51 and all applicable rules and regulations, and shall be
disposed of only at sites or facilities approved by PADEP. It shall be the
responsibility of the person responsible for the oil and grease interceptor
to verify that the pumper/hauler is disposing of grease in the appropriate
manner.
H. The authorized agent of the Township shall have the authority to
require the repair or replacement of a malfunctioning oil and grease
interceptor. If the person responsible for the malfunctioning oil and
grease interceptor fails to repair or replace the system as required
under the terms of this chapter, the Township shall have the authority to
perform, or contract to perform, the work required. The person
responsible for the malfunctioning oil and grease interceptor shall be
invoiced for the work performed and, if necessary, a lien shall be
entered against the property in accordance with law.
A. Any persons responsible for an oil and grease interceptor system shall
keep records with regard to the pump out, repair and other
maintenance associated with said system. Manifests for grease removal
shall be kept for a period of two years. Permits and records of system
repairs shall be kept indefinitely.
B. Each pump out of an oil and grease interceptor shall be documented by
a manifest filled out by the pumper/hauler and acknowledged by the
person responsible for the facility. The manifest shall include, at
minimum, the following information:
(1) Name and contact information for the pumper/hauler.
(2) License number of the pumper/hauler.
(3) Date and location of the pump out.
(4) Location and permit number of the disposal facility.
(5) Volume of grease removed.
(6) Signature of person responsible for the oil and grease interceptor.
C. Copies of manifests shall be provided to the person responsible for the
interceptor, the pumper/hauler and the Township. The Township's
manifest copy shall submitted annually to the Township Code
Enforcement Officer/or Sewer Department electronically.
51.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 144-7 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 144-10
135:235
§ 144-10. Administration.
§ 144-11. Appeals.
§ 144-12. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed a summary
criminal offense and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000
plus court cost for each day that the offense continues. Each day of
noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 148
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 58. Hazardous substances — See Ch. 103.
A. The Board of Supervisors of the Township shall establish administrative
procedures necessary to carry out the provisions of the chapter. By
resolution, the Board of Supervisors may establish a fee schedule, and
authorize the collection of fees, to cover the cost to the Township of
administering this program.
B. The Township shall also fully utilize those powers that it possesses
through other enabling statutes and ordinances to affect the purposes
of this chapter.
C. All permits, records, manifests, and other written material related to
the installation, operation, maintenance and repair of oil and grease
interceptor systems in the Township shall become the property of the
Township.
A. Anyone aggrieved by a decision of the authorized agent of the Township
may appeal said decision by submitting an appeal in writing to the
Board of Appeals within 10 days from the date of written notification of
the decision in question.
B. The aggrieved individual shall be entitled to a hearing before the Board
of Appeals, or its designee, within 45 days of the written appeal. Either
party, by good cause shown, may extend the time for the hearing, but
the final decision shall be left to the discretion of the Board of Appeals
or its designee. Additional items may be introduced at the hearing by
the aggrieved individual, provided that it is submitted with the written
notice of appeal.
C. A written decision shall be rendered within 45 days of the conclusion of
the hearing and all related proceedings.
§ 144-10 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 144-12
135:236
ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted 7-1-1991 by Ord. No. 303]
§ 148-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Upper Providence
Township Recycling Ordinance."
§ 148-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events sponsored in whole or in part by Upper
Providence Township or conducted within Upper Providence Township and
sponsored privately, which include but are not limited to fairs, bazaars,
socials, picnics and organized sporting events that will be attended by 200
or more individuals per day.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residue, shrubbery and tree trimmings and
similar materials, but not including grass clippings.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial, lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from the operations of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
as defined in the Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.L.
380, No. 97, as amended, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq., from a municipal,
commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater
treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include
source-separated recyclable materials.
MUNICIPAL WASTE COLLECTOR — Any person collecting or transporting
municipal waste or recyclable materials for owners or occupants of property
in Upper Providence Township and any business or institution within Upper
Providence Township which generates municipal waste or recyclable
materials and uses its own employees and equipment for the collection
or transportation of municipal waste or recyclable materials.[Amended
9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 511]
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation,
institution, cooperative enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal
government or agency, commonwealth institution or agency or any other
legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as a subject of rights and
duties. In any provision of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or
penalty or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include
the officers and directors of any corporation or any other legal entity having
officers and directors.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials specified by Upper
Providence Township for collection in accordance with this article and
§ 148-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 148-2
135:237
recycling regulations which may be promulgated from time to time. Such
material may include, but shall not be limited to, aluminum cans, clear and
colored glass containers, tin, steel and bimetallic cans, clear and colored
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) rigid plastic bottles, natural and
pigmented high-density polyethylene (HDPE) plastic bottles, and newsprint
material. The list of "recyclable materials" may be changed from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of Upper Providence
Township.
RESIDENT — Any person who owns, leases or occupies a property located
in Upper Providence Township used as a residence.
§ 148-3. Separation program established.
There hereby is established a program for the mandatory source separation
and collection of recyclable materials and leaf waste within Upper
Providence Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania. No person shall
dispose of municipal waste, recyclable materials or leaf waste within Upper
Providence Township except in accordance with this article. The use of a
municipal waste collector will not relieve any person from compliance with
this article.
§ 148-4. Residential recycling.
A. Recyclable materials. All residents of Upper Providence Township shall
separate recyclable materials from all municipal waste generated at
their properties. When placed at the curb for collection in accordance
with the provisions of this article recyclable materials shall be placed in
separate, reusable containers which clearly identify the contents as
recyclable. Such containers shall be provided by Upper Providence
Township. The preparation for collection of municipal waste and
recyclable materials shall be made in accordance with the instructions
provided by the municipal waste collector.
B. Leaf waste. All residents of Upper Providence Township shall separate
leaf waste from all municipal waste generated at their property. When
collection procedures have been scheduled by the municipal waste
collector, leaf waste shall be placed in a location and manner that is in
accordance with instructions established by the Township and provided
by the municipal waste collector. Any resident who otherwise provides
for the proper disposal of leaf waste by composting or other method
authorized by township ordinance shall not be required to comply with
the provisions of this subsection. [Amended 9-7-2010 by Ord. No.
511]
C. Collection. Collection of recyclable materials from residents shall be
provided by all licensed municipal waste collectors in accordance with
Township and state requirements, specifically Act 140. Leaf waste shall
be collected by municipal waste collectors in accordance with the
schedules established by the Township and provided by the municipal
waste collector. [Amended 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 511]
§ 148-2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 148-4
135:238
§ 148-5. Commercial, institutional and municipal recycling.
[Amended 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 511]
All persons occupying commercial, institutional and municipal
establishments within Upper Providence Township shall separate highgrade
office paper, corrugated cardboard, aluminum cans and other
materials generated at such establishments and from community activities,
store the materials until collection by a municipal waste collector, and
annually provide written documentation and certification to Upper
Providence Township of the total volume of materials and the type of
materials recycled, as designated by Township regulations. Such persons
may comply with the reporting requirements hereunder by requiring their
municipal waste collector to provide said documentation and certification
directly to the Township.
§ 148-6. Prohibited acts.
D. Multifamily residences. An owner, landlord or agent of an owner or
landlord of multifamily residential housing properties with four or more
units or the residents of such multifamily residential properties acting
by and through a duly constituted homeowners' association shall
comply with their responsibilities under this article by establishing a
collection system for recyclable materials at each property and pickup
by a municipal waste collector. A collection system must include
suitable containers for collecting and sorting materials, easily
accessible locations for the containers and written instructions to the
occupants or residents concerning the use and availability of the
collection system. In addition, such owners, landlords, agents and
homeowners' associations shall annually provide written
documentation and certification to Upper Providence Township of the
total volume of materials and the types of materials recycled. Such
owners, landlords, agents and homeowners' associations may comply
with the reporting requirements hereunder by requiring their
municipal waste collection to provide said documentation and
certification directly to the township. Owners, landlords and agents of
owners or landlords who comply with this article under this subsection
shall not be liable for the noncompliance of occupants of their building.
A. No person shall place municipal waste in containers used for the
separation and collection of recyclable materials.
B. No person shall place recyclable materials in containers used for the
separation and collection of municipal waste.
C. No person shall store municipal waste outside of any enclosed building
in other than closed, watertight containers.
D. No person shall place containers for municipal waste or recyclable
materials at the curb or in the front yard of any lot except during the
period beginning at 6:00 p.m., prevailing time, on the day prior to a
scheduled collection and ending at midnight on the day of a scheduled
§ 148-4 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 148-6
135:239
§ 148-7. Ownership.
Nothing in this article or any regulation promulgated pursuant hereto shall
be deemed to impair the ownership of separated materials by the persons
who generated them unless and until separated materials are placed at
curbside or a similar location for collection by a municipal waste collector.
§ 148-8. Scavenging prohibited.
From the time of placement of the recyclable materials at the curb or other
designated place for collection by a municipal waste collector pursuant
to the provisions of this article and any rules and regulations adopted
hereunder, the recyclable materials shall become and be the property of the
municipal waste collector. It shall be a violation of this article for any person
not duly authorized by Upper Providence Township to collect or pick up or
cause to be collected or picked up any recyclable materials placed at the
curb or other designated place for collection by a municipal waste collector
pursuant to the provisions of this article. Any and each such unauthorized
collection in violation hereof from one or more residences shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided in this
article.
§ 148-9. Rules and regulations.
The collection of municipal waste and recyclable materials by municipal
waste collectors and the preparation and collection of municipal waste and
recyclable materials by property owners and residents of the township shall
be made in compliance with the regulations to be adopted by the Board
of Supervisors of Upper Providence Township to carry out the intent and
purpose of this article. Such rules and regulations shall be approved by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors and, when so approved, shall have
the same force and effect as the provisions of this article. Said rules and
regulations may be amended, modified or repealed by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 148-10. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
collection. "Front yard" shall mean the area between the street line and
the first building on the lot.
A. Unlawful activities; public nuisance. It shall be unlawful and a public
nuisance for any person to violate, cause or assist in a violation of any
provision of this article or violate, cause or assist in the violation of any
rule, regulation or resolution promulgated by the Board of Supervisors
pursuant to this article.
B. Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this article or of the
regulations adopted hereunder or any person who engages in unlawful
conduct as defined in this article shall, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 and not less than $50. Each continuing day
§ 148-6 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 148-10
135:240
§ 148-11. Legislative intent.
The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally construed, so as
to best achieve and effectuate the goals and purposes hereof. This article
shall be construed in pari materia with the Solid Waste Management Act,
Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, as amended, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.,
the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, Act of
July 28, 1988, P.L. 556, No. 101, 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., and the rules
and regulations adopted thereunder.
of any violation of this article or unlawful conduct as defined in this
article shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine or
penalty.
C. Injunction. In addition to any other remedy provided in this article,
Upper Providence Township may institute a suit in equity where
unlawful conduct or a public nuisance exists, as defined in this article,
for an injunction to restrain a violation of this article, or any rules,
regulations or resolution promulgated or issued by the Board of
Supervisors pursuant to this article.
D. Concurrent remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this
article shall be deemed concurrent. The existence or exercise of any
remedy shall not prevent the township from exercising any other
remedy provided by this article or otherwise provided at law or equity.
§ 148-10 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 148-11
135:241

ARTICLE II
Municipal Waste
[Adopted 7-1-1991 by Ord. No. 304]
§ 148-12. Definitions.
A. The following terms shall have the following meanings in this article:
ACCEPTABLE WASTE — Municipal waste which is not unacceptable
waste or nonprocessible waste.52
HAZARDOUS WASTE —
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Upper Providence, a township of
the second class, located within the County of Montgomery,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Municipal waste as defined in Section 103 of Act
97 and Section 103 of Act 101,55 and any rules, regulations or policies
promulgated thereunder.
NONPROCESSIBLE WASTE — White goods; automobile tires in
quantity; noncombustible items, stumps, logs, brush and other waste
which either weighs in excess of 25 pounds or exceeds one of the
Any material or substance which, by reason of its composition or
characteristics, is:
A toxic or hazardous waste as defined in the Resource,
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et
seq., or as defined in Section 6(e) of the Toxic Substances
Control Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2605(e), under Act 9753 or under any
other applicable laws of similar purpose or effect, including
but not limited to, with respect to each of such laws, any
replacement, amendment, expansion or supplement thereto
and any rules, regulations or policies thereunder; or
(a)
A special nuclear or by-product material within the meaning
of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.,
and any replacement, amendment, expansion or supplement
thereto and any rules, regulations or policies thereunder.
(b)
(1)
Any other material that any governmental agency or unit having
appropriate jurisdiction shall determine from time to time is
harmful, toxic or dangerous or otherwise ineligible for disposal in
the landfill.54
(2)
52.Editor’s Note: The former definitions of "county," "county ordinance or county waste flow
ordinance," and "date of Western County System operation," which immediately followed
this definition, were repealed 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 511.
53.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
54.Editor’s Note: The former definition of "landfill," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 511.
55.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.103 and 53 P.S. § 4000.103, respectively.
§ 148-12 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 148-12
135:243
following dimensions: four feet in length, four inches in diameter or
four inches in thickness; sludges; construction and demolition debris;
or leaf waste beyond that permitted by Act 101.56
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal
institution or agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other
governmental agency or any other legal entity or any group of such
persons whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties. In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine, penalty,
imprisonment or denial or grant of any license or any combination of
the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors
of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors of
any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.57
PROCESSIBLE WASTE — That portion of acceptable waste which is not
nonprocessible waste.
RECYCLING OR RECYCLED — The collection, separation, recovery and
sale or reuse of metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other
materials which would otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal
waste or the mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste,
other than through combustion, and creation and recovery of reusable
materials, other than a fuel, for the operation of energy.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The segregation and collection for the
purpose of recycling of individual components of acceptable waste,
such as, without limitation, bottles, cans and other materials in
accordance with Act 101.5859[Amended 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 511]
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE —
Any material that, by reason of its composition, characteristics or
quantity, is ineligible for disposal at the landfill pursuant to the
provisions of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976,
42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq., and the regulations thereunder or, except
for trace amounts normally found in household or commercial solid
waste, any other similarly applicable law, including but not limited
to the following laws and the regulations, if any, promulgated
under each: the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2601
et seq.; the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act, 7
U.S.C. § 136 et seq.; the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.; the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq.; Act 97;60
(1)
56.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
57.Editor’s Note: The former definitions of "plan," as amended, "plan revision," and "point of
entry into the Western County System," which immediately followed this definition, were
repealed 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 511.
58.Editor’s Note: The former definitions of “Waste Authority” and “Western County System or
System,” which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 9-7-2010 by Ord. No.
511.
59.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
60.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 148-12 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 148-12
135:244
WHITE GOODS — Refrigerators, washing machines, dryers, window air
conditioners, hot-water heaters and other major home appliances.
the Hazardous Sites Cleanup Act, Act 108, enacted October 18,
1988; and any similar or substituted legislation or regulations or
amendments to the foregoing, as well as any other laws coextensive
with the foregoing;
Any other materials that any governmental body or unit having or
claiming appropriate jurisdiction shall determine from time to time
to be harmful, toxic, dangerous or otherwise ineligible for disposal
at the landfill;
(2)
Any waste that a landfill or other applicable facility is precluded
from accepting pursuant to any permit or governmental plan
governing such landfill or other applicable facility;
(3)
(4) Hazardous waste;
Residual waste as defined in Act 101,61 except as otherwise
provided in any landfill agreement to which the Waste Authority is
a party;
(5)
Special nuclear or by-product materials within the meaning of
the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq., and
any similar or substituted legislation or regulation or amendments
to the foregoing, including but not limited to any other laws
coextensive with the foregoing;
(6)
Asbestos, sludge, infectious waste, chemotherapeutic waste and
incinerator ash, except as otherwise provided in any landfill
agreement to which the Waste Authority is a party;
(7)
(8) White goods, in quantity, and/or automobile tires, in quantity; and
Any other material that the Township reasonably concludes would
require special handling or present an endangerment to a disposal
facility, the public health or safety or the environment.62
[Amended 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 511]
(9)
B. All other words and phrases as defined in Act 97 or Act 10163 shall have
the same meanings as set forth in Act 97 or Act 101, as they may
hereinafter be amended or supplemented by legislation regarding
municipal waste management or planning,64 or as set forth in the IMA.
61.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.103.
62.Editor’s Note: The former definitions of "Waste Authority" and "Western County System or
System," which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 9-7-2010 by Ord. No.
511.
63.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., respectively.
64.Editor's Note: The first part of this sentence originally read as follows: "All other
capitalized words and phrases shall have the same meanings as set forth in Act 97 or Act
101 as they may hereinafter be amended or supplemented by legislation regarding
municipal waste management or planning," but was changed in order to allow stylization
in conformity with the Code.
§ 148-12 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 148-12
135:245
§ 148-13. Municipal waste and recyclables collection. [Added
9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 51165]
All residents of the Township and all commercial, industrial or institutional
establishments located in the Township shall contract with a municipal
waste and recyclables collector to have all the municipal waste and
recyclables generated at the premises occupied by such person or entity by
any of the occupants of said premises removed and deposited in a permitted
landfill or recycling facility at a minimum of once per week, in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and Act 140.
§ 148-14. Proof of contract. [Added 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 511]
§ 148-15. Regulations; enforcement. [Amended 9-7-2010 by Ord.
No. 511]
Consistency of regulations with this article and other laws. No rules or
regulations adopted by the municipality pursuant to this article shall be in
violation of or inconsistent with the provisions of this article, the provisions
and purposes of Act 97, Act 10166 or regulations adopted thereunder or such
other laws, regulations or requirements as may be enacted by the United
States of America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection or the Pennsylvania
Environmental Quality Review Board governing municipal waste planning,
collection, storage, transportation, processing or disposal.
To the extent that any definition herein varies from the definition in the
IMA, the definition in the IMA shall control.
A. Whenever requested by the Township, the owner of any real estate
located within the Township shall present proof, within 72 hours of said
request, that said owner or the occupant of said real estate has a
current contract with a municipal waste and recyclables collector to
dispose of waste and recyclables generated on the premises at a
minimum of once per week, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and Act 140.
B. Whenever requested by the Township, any municipal waste and
recyclables collector shall, within 72 hours of said request, advise the
Township as to whether an owner or occupant of any real estate located
within the Township has a current contract for municipal waste and
recyclables disposal with said municipal waste and recyclables
collector, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Act 140.
65.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former §§ 148-13, Operation by licensed
collectors and transporters; 148-14, Disposal; 148-16, Annual survey; 148-17,
Restrictions; 148-18, Municipal Waste Authority; 148-21, Revocation of license; 148-23,
Intermunicipal agreement; and 148-25, Compliance with IMA; and provided for the
redesignation of former §§ 148-19, 148-20, 148-22, and 148-24 as §§ 148-16, 148-17,
148-18, and 148-19, respectively.
66.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 148-12 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 148-16
135:246
§ 148-16. Unlawful activities; nuisances. [Amended 9-7-2010 by
Ord. No. 511]
§ 148-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person who engages in unlawful conduct as defined in this article shall,
upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Justice,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and not less than $500
for each offense and, in default of payment thereof, shall be committed to
the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that there is a
violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 148-18. Injunctions, concurrent remedies. [Amended 9-7-2010 by
Ord. No. 511]
A. Unlawful conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Violate, cause or assist in the violation of any provision of this
article, or any rule, regulation or order promulgated hereunder.
(2) Transport, process, teat, transfer or dispose of or cause to be
processed, treated, transferred or disposed of municipal waste
generated within the municipality except as provided for in this
article.
(3) Collect or transport municipal waste present or generated within
the municipality without a valid license for collection or
transportation.
(4) Hinder, obstruct, prevent or interfere with the municipality, or its
personnel, in the performance of any duty under this article or in
the enforcement of this article.
(5) Act in a manner that is contrary to Act 97 or Act 101, regulations
promulgated thereunder, this article, or rules or regulations
promulgated under this article.
(6) Openly burn any material, including the following, at any time in
any zone within the municipality: household trash, books,
magazines, newspapers, cardboard and/or any items that are
required to be recycled in the municipality under Pennsylvania Act
101, and as further regulated under UPT Code Chapter 80, Fire
Code.
B. Public nuisance. Any unlawful conduct set forth in Subsection A hereof
shall constitute a public nuisance.
A. Retaining violations. In addition to any other remedy provided in this
article, the Township may institute a suit in equity where unlawful
conduct or a public nuisance exists, as defined in this article, for an
injunction to restrain a violation of this article or rules, regulations,
§ 148-16 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 148-18
135:247
§ 148-19. Construal of provisions.
The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally construed so as
best to achieve and to effectuate the goals and purposes hereof. This article
shall be construed in pari materia with Act 97 and Act 101.
orders issued pursuant to this article. In addition to an injunction, the
court may impose penalties as authorized by § 148-16 hereof.
B. Concurrent remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this
article shall be deemed concurrent. The existence or exercise of any
remedy shall not prevent the exercising of any other remedy provided
by this article or otherwise provided at law or equity.
§ 148-18 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 148-19
135:248
Chapter 149
SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 149-1. Purpose.
In order to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the
attendees and Township residents attending special events and living in
proximity to these events, this chapter provides for the establishment of a
permit requirement and establishes standards for the issuance of a permit
for parades, athletic events, street fairs, craft shows, carnivals, block
parties, rallies and other activities that occur in Township parks or on a
Township street, sidewalk, alley or other street right-of-way which obstruct,
delay or interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
do not comply with traffic laws and controls. Permits shall also be required
for special events occurring on private property, such as conferences,
exhibition and exposition shows, concerts and athletic events, which impact
traffic and other Township services. This chapter also establishes standards
for the reimbursement of the Township's expenses caused by special events
which will result in interference with the normal flow of traffic or otherwise
require provision of Township services in excess of that which would be
required absent the special event.
§ 149-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings given in this section, as follows:
ANNUAL PERMIT — A permit issued annually by the Township to an
owner or operator that anticipates holding four or more annual events
requiring special events permits, subject to the required Township
amusement tax. Individual show promoters will still require individual
special event permits for each event.
APPLICANT — Any person, entity and/or any sponsoring organization
who or which seeks a special event permit from the Township to
conduct or sponsor an event governed by this chapter. Any entity or
organization shall designate an individual person as the responsible
contact person.
ATHLETIC EVENT — An occasion in which a group of persons
collectively engage in a sport or form of physical exercise on or in a
Township park, a Township street, sidewalk, alley or other street rightof-
way which uses said park facilities or obstructs, delays or interferes
with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or does not
comply with traffic laws and controls. Athletic events shall include
bicycle and foot races.
BLOCK PARTY — A festive gathering of the residents on a residential
street requiring a closure of a street or a portion thereof to vehicular
traffic and use of the street for the festivity, including barbecues,
picnics, music or games.
§ 148-19 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 149-2
135:249
§ 149-3. Permit required.
Any person or organization desiring to conduct or sponsor a special event
in Upper Providence Township shall first obtain a special event permit from
the Township.
FIRE OFFICIAL — Director of Fire and Emergency Services or his
designee.
PARADE — A march or procession consisting of persons, animals or
vehicles or any combination thereof on any Township street, sidewalk,
alley or other street right-of-way which obstructs, delays or interferes
with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic and/or does not
comply with traffic laws or controls.
PERMIT APPLICATION FEE — The fee to be paid by the special event
permit applicant at the time the application is filed with the Township.
A fee schedule shall be set by the Board of Supervisors by resolution
from time to time and shall cover the actual full costs, or a portion
thereof, of processing and investigating special event applications and
administering the special event permit program.
PERMITTEE — Any person, entity and any sponsoring organization who
has been issued a special event permit by the Township.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Public streets, alleys and crosswalks, including bike
and pedestrian paths.
SPECIAL EVENT — Parade, athletic event, street fair, art and craft
show, carnival, block party, soap box derby, rally and other special
events or activities that occur on or in a Township park, a Township
street, sidewalk, alley or other street right-of-way which obstruct, delay
or interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic and/
or do not comply with traffic laws and controls. Event shall also mean
indoor or outdoor concerts, expositions, displays, fairs, carnivals and
athletic events occurring on private property which are designed to
attract large crowds, interfering with the normal traffic flow.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Providence, the Township
Manager or his designee.
B. Word usage. The present tense includes the future. The singular
includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. The masculine
includes the feminine and the neuter.
A. Annual permit:
(1) Owners, groups and organizations who anticipate holding four or
more events per year are required to obtain an annual permit,
provided that they pay the fees as designated by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors and submit the following information to the
Township:
§ 149-2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 149-3
135:250
§ 149-4. Application procedure; fee.
(a) An application for an annual permit completed in accordance
with the provisions of § 149-5;
(b) An itinerary/calendar of events;
(c) Complete contact information for the property owner and
operator;
(d) Designated traffic routes;
(e) Parking locations on site and remote parking (if required);
(f) A signed affidavit acknowledging their responsibility for the
collection and payment of the Township's amusement tax and
for the life safety of occupants during special events.
(2) Any and all changes to the information provided under the annual
permit shall be reported to the Township as an amendment to the
annual permit.
B. A special event permit is not required for the following:
(1) Funeral processions.
(2) Parades involving a total of 40 or fewer pedestrians marching along
a parade route that is restricted to marching on sidewalks and
crossing streets only at pedestrian crosswalks in accordance with
traffic regulations and controls. Pedestrians participating in the
parade shall cross at crosswalks in units of 15 or fewer and shall
allow vehicles to pass between each unit.
(3) Parades, athletic events or other special events which occur
exclusively on Township property, public streets or school district
property and are sponsored by the Township or by the school
district.
(4) Parades, athletic events or other special events which occur
exclusively on Township property and are permitted and regulated
under the Upper Providence Township Department of Parks and
Recreation.
(5) Normal day-of-worship church services and youth-oriented summer
programs and vacation bible schools. Evangelical events expecting
more than 300 attendees shall obtain a special event permit.
(6) Special events held at hotel venues that are attended by fewer than
200 people.
A. Any person, entity or organization desiring to sponsor a parade, athletic
event or other special event not exempted by § 149-3 shall apply for a
special event permit by filing a verified application with the Township
on a form supplied by the Township. The requisite fees shall be waived
§ 149-3 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 149-4
135:251
§ 149-5. Contents of application.
for applications for parades, athletic events or other special events
which occur exclusively in what is known as the "Schuylkill Canal Park,"
in and along the Montgomery County Bike Trail, or involves events
sponsored by the Mont Clare Fire Company or the Oaks Fire Company.
B. All applications shall be submitted not less than 30 days nor more than
90 days before the event date(s).
C. Upon a showing of good cause, the Township shall consider an
application that is filed after the filing deadline if there is sufficient time
to process and investigate the application and obtain police services for
the event. Good cause can be demonstrated by the applicant by
showing that the circumstances that gave rise to the permit application
did not reasonably allow the participant to file within the time
prescribed.
D. The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
permit application fee which shall defray the administrative costs of the
Township in making preparations for such special events in the amount
set by the Board of Supervisors from time to time by resolution.
A. The application for a special event permit shall provide the following
information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and an
alternative contact person. The name, address and telephone
number of the property owner where the event is to occur.
(2) If the event is proposed to be sponsored by an organization, the
name, address and telephone number of the organization and the
authorized officer or head of the organization; if requested by the
Township, written authorization to apply for this special event
permit by an officer of the organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
present and in charge of the event on the day of the event.
(4) The nature and/or purpose of the event.
(5) The date and estimated starting and ending times of the event.
(6) The location of the event, including a description of its boundaries.
(7) The estimated number of participants and/or spectators.
(8) The type and estimated number of vehicles, animals and structures
that will be used at the event and whether there will be water aid
stations or first aid stations at the event.
(9) What provisions have been made for sanitary facilities for persons
participating in or attending the event.
§ 149-4 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 149-5
135:252
§ 149-6. Action on application.
The Township shall approve, conditionally approve or deny an application
for the grounds specified in § 149-7. Such action shall be taken no later
than 10 days after receiving a completed application for an event. If the
application is denied or conditionally approved, the Township shall inform
the applicant of the grounds for denial, in writing, or the reason for a
change in the date, time, route or location of the event and his right
of appeal. If the Township relied on information about the event other
than that contained in the application, it shall inform the applicant what
information it considered. The applicant shall be notified of any permit
(10) A description of any lighting and sound-amplification equipment
that will be used at the event.
(11) Whether any food or beverages or alcoholic beverages will be sold
at the event.
(12) Whether monitors will be employed at the event.
(13) Parking requirements for the event.
(14) If the proposed event is to be held within a structure, a written
firesafety and evacuation plan shall be prepared and approved by
the Fire Official prior to the event. The permittee shall be
responsible for maintaining the operational effectiveness of the
plan during the event. The firesafety and evacuation plan shall be
signed and acknowledged by the permittee.
B. Additional information required for parades, races and other events
occurring along a route shall be as follows:
(1) The assembly point for the event and the time at which units of the
parade or other event will begin to assemble.
(2) The route to be traveled.
(3) Whether the parade or other event will occupy all or only a portion
of the streets proposed to be traversed.
(4) The intervals of space to be maintained between units of a parade
or other event.
(5) The number, types and sizes of vehicles and floats.
(6) The material and maximum size of any signs or banners to be
carried along the route.
C. Supplemental information. Any supplemental information that the
Township shall find reasonably necessary, under the particular
circumstances of the special event application, to determine whether to
approve or conditionally approve a special event permit pursuant to
§ 149-8 shall be provided.
§ 149-5 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 149-6
135:253
conditions at the time the application is approved and of his right of appeal
of the permit conditions. If the Township refuses to consider a late
application under § 149-4C, the Township shall inform the applicant of its
reason for the refusal and of his right to appeal.
§ 149-7. Grounds for denial of application.
A. The Township shall approve an application for a special event permit,
unless it is determined from a consideration of the application or other
pertinent information that:
(1) Information contained in the application or supplemental
information requested from the applicant is found to be false in any
material detail.
(2) The applicant failed to complete the application form after having
been notified of the additional information or documents required.
(3) The sole purpose of the event is advertising of any product, good,
ware, merchandise.
(4) Another special event permit application has been received prior in
time or has already been approved to hold another event at the
same time and place requested by the applicant or so close in time
and place as to cause undue traffic congestion or the Police
Department is unable to meet the needs for police services for both
events.
(5) The time, route or size of the event will substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the event site or
route or disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually
subject to a great traffic congestion.
(6) The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the site of
the event or the assembly and disbanding areas around an event
will prevent proper police, fire or ambulance services to areas
proximate to the event.
(7) The size of the event will require diversion of so great a number of
police officers of the Township to ensure that participants stay
within the boundaries or route of the event or to protect
participants in the event as to prevent normal protection to the rest
of the Township. Nothing herein authorizes denial of the permit
when additional peace officers would be available to the Township
under applicable state law and mutual aid plans, if requested by the
Township in advance of the event. Nothing herein authorizes denial
of a permit because of the need to protect participants from the
conduct of others, if reasonable permit conditions can be imposed
to allow for the adequate protection of event participants with the
number of police officers available to police the event.
§ 149-6 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 149-7
135:254
§ 149-8. Conditions of issuance.
The Township may condition the issuance of a special event permit by
imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place and manner
of the event and such requirements as are necessary to protect the safety
of persons and property and the control of traffic, provided that such
conditions shall not unreasonably restrict the right of free speech. Such
conditions include:
(8) The parade or other event moving along a route will not move from
its point of origin to its point of termination in three hours or less.
(9) The location of the event will substantially interfere with any
construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or
along the Township streets or a previously granted encroachment
permit.
(10) The event will occur at a time when a school is in session at a route
or location adjacent to the school or class thereof and the noise
created by the activities of the event would substantially disrupt
the education activities of the school or class thereof.
(11) Any life safety systems within the structure failed to pass the Fire
Official's inspection, including but not limited to the sprinkler
system, alarm system, exit components and their operation and
private water service systems.
(12) The applicant failed to submit a firesafety and evacuation plan for
review by the Fire Official.
B. When the grounds for denial of an application for permit specified in
Subsection A(4) through (10) above can be corrected by altering the
date, time, duration, route or location of the event, the Township shall,
instead of denying the application, conditionally approve the
application upon the applicant's acceptance of conditions for permit
issuance. The conditions imposed shall provide for only such
modification of the applicant's proposed event as are necessary to
achieve compliance with Subsections A(4) through (10) above.
A. Alteration of the date, time, route or location of the event proposed on
the event application.
B. Conditions concerning the area of assembly and disbanding of a parade
or other event occurring along a route.
C. Conditions concerning accommodation of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, including restricting the event to only a portion of a street
traversed.
D. Requirements for the use of traffic cones or barricades.
E. Requirements for provision of first aid or sanitary facilities.
§ 149-7 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 149-8
135:255
§ 149-9. Issuance of permit.
The Township shall issue the special event permit once the application has
been approved and the applicant has agreed, in writing, to comply with the
terms and conditions of the permit and the following sections of this chapter
have been complied with:
F. Requirements for use of event monitors and providing notice of permit
conditions to event participants.
G. Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles, animals or structures
at the event and inspection and approval of floats, buildings, structures
and decorated vehicles for firesafety by the Upper Providence Township
Fire Marshal.
H. Compliance with animal protection ordinances and laws.
I. Requirements for use of garbage containers, cleanup and restoration of
Township or other public property and the properties of adjoining
persons which may be impacted by the special event.
J. Restrictions on use of amplified sound.
K. An application for a special event permit to conduct a block party may
be conditioned on notice to the residents of dwellings along the affected
street(s). The issuance of a special event permit does not exempt the
event from compliance with the noise ordinance.
L. Compliance with any relevant ordinance or law and obtaining any
legally required permit or license.
M. Unless advance approval is obtained, the standard hours of operation
shall be as follows:
(1) Monday to Thursday: 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(2) Friday and Saturday: 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
(3) Sunday: 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
N. Operation of all fire protection systems in accordance with the
Township Fire Code to the satisfaction of the Fire Official.
A. Section 149-10, pertaining to indemnification.
B. Section 149-11, pertaining to insurance.
C. Section 149-12, pertaining to police traffic control fees.
D. Section 149-13, pertaining to cleanup deposits.
§ 149-8 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 149-10
135:256
§ 149-10. Indemnification agreement.
Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the permit applicant and
an authorized officer of the sponsoring organization, if any, must sign an
agreement to reimburse Upper Providence Township for any costs incurred
by it in repairing damage to Township property occurring in connection with
the permitted event proximately caused by the actions of the permittee, its
officers, employees or agents or any person who was under the permittee's
control insofar as permitted by law. The agreement shall also provide that
the permittee shall defend the Township against and indemnify and hold
the Township harmless from any liability to any persons resulting from any
damage or injury, including attorney's fees, occurring in connection with
the permitted event proximately caused by the actions of the permittee, its
officers employees or agents or any person who was under the permittee's
control insofar as permitted by law. Persons who merely join in a parade or
event are not considered by that reason alone to be under the control of the
permittee.
§ 149-11. Insurance requirements.
A. The applicant for a special event permit must possess or obtain public
liability insurance to protect against loss from liability imposed by law
for damages on account of bodily injury and property damage arising
from the event. Such insurance shall name on the policy or by
endorsement as additional insured Upper Providence Township, its
officers, employees and agents. Insurance coverage must be
maintained for the duration of the event.
(1) Coverage shall be a comprehensive general liability insurance
policy.
(2) The following minimum limits shall be required:
(a) Five hundred thousand dollars for each person for bodily
injury; $1,000,000 for each occurrence of bodily injury; and
$250,000 for each occurrence of property damage; or
(b) One million dollars for each occurrence of combined single
limit bodily injury and property damage.
(3) If food or nonalcoholic beverages are sold or served at the event,
the policy must also include an endorsement for products liability
in an amount not less than $500,000. If alcoholic beverages are
sold or served at the event, the policy must also include an
endorsement for liquor liability in an amount not less than
$500,000. At any time when the insurance coverage required under
this section may be purchased by a permit applicant through a
Township insurance policy, such coverage shall be made available
to all permit applicants at the rates stated in the policy premium
schedule.
§ 149-10 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 149-11
135:257
§ 149-12. Traffic control fees; preestablished event routes.
§ 149-13. Cleanup deposit.
B. A copy of the policy or a certificate of insurance, along with all
necessary endorsements, must be filed with the Township no less than
10 days before the date of the event unless the Township for good cause
waives the filing deadline. The special event permit shall not be valid
until after the insurance policy or certificate of insurance along with
necessary endorsements has been filed by the applicant and approved
by the Township Manager.
A. Prepayment of fees. Upon approval of an application for a special event
permit, the Township shall provide the applicant with a statement of the
estimated cost of providing overtime police officers or fire police
officers for traffic control at the event. The applicant of the event shall
be required to prepay the traffic control fees 10 days prior to the special
event. Traffic control by officers includes clearing the event route or
site of unauthorized vehicles, diversion of traffic around the event and
directing pedestrian and vehicular traffic along the route of an event or
to and from parking facilities at an event.
B. Fees. The fee to be paid by the applicant for the services set forth
herein shall be based upon actual costs or overtime costs, with a
minimum of four hours per officer.
C. Refunds or overruns. If the actual cost for traffic control on the date of
the event is less than the estimated cost pursuant to Subsection A
above, the applicant shall be promptly refunded the difference by
Upper Providence Township.
A. The applicant of an event involving the sale of food or beverages,
erection of structures, horses or other large animals, water aid stations
or first aid stations on public rights-of-way or other public land shall be
required to provide a cleanup deposit prior to the issuance of a special
event permit. The cleanup deposit shall be in the amount established in
a cleanup fee schedule adopted from time to time by the Board of
Supervisors in the Upper Providence Township Fee Schedule.
B. The cleanup deposit shall be returned after the event if the area used
for the permitted event has been cleaned and restored to the same
condition as existed prior to the event.
C. If the property used for the event has not been properly cleaned or
restored, the permittee shall be billed for the actual cost by Upper
Providence Township for cleanup and restoration, and the cleanup
deposit or a portion thereof shall be applied toward payment of the bill.
If the permittee disputes the bill, he may appeal to the Township within
10 days after the mail date of the bill. Should there be any unexpended
balance on deposit after completion of the work, this balance shall be
refunded to the permittee. Should the amount of the bill exceed the
§ 149-11 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 149-13
135:258
§ 149-14. Duties of permittee.
§ 149-15. Certain acts unlawful.
§ 149-16. Violations and penalties.
cleanup deposit, the difference shall become due and payable to the
Township upon billing.
A. Each permittee of an event shall comply with all terms and conditions of
the special event permit.
B. Each permittee of an event shall ensure that the person leading a
parade or other event along a route or the person in charge of any other
event shall carry the special event permit on his person for the duration
of the event.
C. Each permittee of an event shall ensure that any public area used for
the permitted event is cleaned and restored to the same condition as
existed prior to the event immediately following the completion of the
event.
D. Each permittee of an event shall obtain all required inspections as
indicated on the special events permit prior to holding the event.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sponsor or conduct a parade,
athletic event or other special event requiring a special event permit
pursuant to this chapter, unless a valid permit has been issued for the
event. It is unlawful for any person to participate in such an event with
the knowledge that the sponsor of the event has not been issued a
required, valid permit.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or to disrupt a
lawful parade, athletic event or other special event.
C. The special event permit authorizes the permittee/sponsor to conduct
only such event as is described in the permit and in accordance with the
terms and conditions of the permit. It is unlawful for the permittee/
sponsor to willfully violate the terms and conditions of the permit or for
any event participant with knowledge thereof to willfully violate the
terms and conditions of the permit.
A. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 and the costs of prosecution, in addition any sums
payable under § 149-4 and other applicable provisions of this chapter.
B. Any person, firm, corporation or association which conducts or
sponsors an event without first providing the necessary fees and
deposits shall be billed for the actual cost to Upper Providence
Township for police and cleanup services. Failure to pay any such bill
§ 149-13 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 149-16
135:259
Chapter 150
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 60.
Grading, excavating and filling — See Ch. 99.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 143.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
154.
Wastewater management — See Ch. 174.
Zoning — See Ch. 182.
for services within 15 days shall result in the imposition of a ten-percent
penalty and interest at the rate of 1% per month until collected.
§ 149-16 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 149-16
135:260
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 150-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Upper Providence
Township Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 150-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety and welfare within
the Township and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in this section of this chapter, through provisions
designed to:
§ 150-3. Statutory authority. [Amended 1-5-2009 by Ord. No. 499]
The Township is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
stormwater impacts by the authority of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
A. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
B. Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems as much as
possible.
C. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, in a manner
which requires a minimum of structures and relies on natural
processes.
D. Focus on infiltration of stormwater, to maintain groundwater recharge
and to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality and to
otherwise protect water resources.
E. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
F. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality to support those
uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water quality in special
protection streams.
G. Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambeds.
H. Provide for proper operations and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management BMPs that are implemented in the Township.
I. Provide a mechanism to identify controls necessary to meet the NPDES
permit requirements.
J. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program to
address nonstormwater discharges into the Township's separate storm
sewer system.
§ 150-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 150-3
135:261
Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.) and the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Management Act (32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.).
§ 150-4. Applicability.
§ 150-5. Compatibility with other requirements.
A. This chapter applies to any regulated earth disturbance activities
within the Township and all stormwater runoff entering into the
Township's separate storm sewer system from lands within the
boundaries of the Township.
A. Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or
ordinance. To the extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous or
stringent requirements for stormwater management, the specific
requirements contained in this chapter shall be followed.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the
Township's requirements regarding stormwater matters which do not
conflict with the provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.).
§ 150-3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 150-5
135:262
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 150-6. Definitions and word usage.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of human activities and the natural
processes at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application for approval to engage in any regulated earth disturbance
activity at a project site in the Township.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated earth disturbance activities, to meet State Water Quality
Requirements, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise
meet the purposes of this chapter.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Montgomery County Conservation
District.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DEVELOPER — A person that seeks to undertake any regulated earth
disturbance activities at a project site in the Township.
DEVELOPMENT — See "earth disturbance activity." The term includes
redevelopment.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tact of land where any earth
disturbance activities in the Township are planned, conducted or
maintained.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road
§ 150-6 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 150-6
135:263
maintenance, building construction and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including
channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan for a project
site, which identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and
sedimentation.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of
water into the ground. Impervious surface includes, but is not limited
to, any roof, parking or driveway areas and any new streets and
sidewalks. Any surface areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed
stone shall be assumed to be impervious surfaces.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water
Act, which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.
OUTFALL — Point source, as described in 40 CFR § 122.2, at the point
where the Township's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters
of the commonwealth.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association,
company or corporation or a governmental unit, public utility or any
other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject
of rights and duties.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated earth
disturbance activities in the Township arc planned, conducted or
maintained.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been disturbed or developed.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Earth disturbance
activity one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface
waters or the Township's storm sewer system or five acres or more
regardless of the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on
any portion of, part or during any stage of a larger common plan of
development. This only includes road maintenance activities involving
25 acres or more or earth disturbance.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road cross-section, such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches and other similar activities.
§ 150-6 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 150-6
135:264
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state
regulations, protection of designated and existing uses (See 25 Pa.
Code Chapters 93 and 96), including:
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation
reaching the ground surface.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other
bodies or channels of conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
TOWNSHIP — Township of Upper Providence, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as
a steam or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a "designated use," such
as "cold water fishery" or "potable water supply," which are listed
in Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained,
under state regulations.
(1)
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated earth
disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
protect those uses in all streams and to protect and maintain water
quality in special protection streams.
(2)
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can be
impacted by addition of pollutants such as sediment and changes
in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result
of changes in land surface area from those activities. Therefore,
permanent discharges to surface waters must be managed to
protect the streambank, streambed and structural integrity of the
waterway to prevent these impacts.
(3)
§ 150-6 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 150-6
135:265

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management for Water Quality
§ 150-7. General requirements for stormwater management.
§ 150-8. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
§ 150-9. Water quality requirements after regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete.
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall be
designed, implemented, operated and maintained to meet the purposes
of this chapter, through these two elements:
(1) Erosion and sediment control during the earth disturbance
activities (e.g., during construction), and
(2) Water quality protection measures after completion of earth
disturbance activities (e.g., after construction), including
operations and maintenance.
B. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until the requirements of this chapter are met.
C. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth disturbance
activities shall be addressed as required by § 150-8.
D. Postconstruction water quality protection shall be addressed as
required by § 150-9. Operations and maintenance of permanent
stormwater BMPs shall be addressed as required by Article V.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until approval by the Township of an erosion and sediment
control plan for construction activities.
B. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the Township.
C. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project
site at all times.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until approval by the Township of a plan which demonstrates
compliance with this chapter after construction is complete.
B. To control postconstruction stormwater impacts from regulated earth
disturbance activities, State Water Quality Requirements can be met by
BMPs, including site design, which provide for replication of
preconstruction stormwater infiltration and runoff condition, so that
postconstruction stormwater discharges do not degrade the physical,
§ 150-7 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 150-9
135:267
chemical or biological characteristics of the receiving waters. This may
be achieved by the following:
(1) Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration
conditions;
(2) Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure filtering
out of the chemical and physical pollutants from the stormwater
runoff: and
(3) Streambank and streambed protection: management of volume and
rate of postconstruction stormwater discharges to prevent physical
degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring).
§ 150-9 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 150-9
135:268
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management for Runoff Control
§ 150-10. General requirements.
Measures used to collect and carry stormwater on any site shall be designed
to meet the following minimum performance standards:
A. Prevent erosion damage and satisfactorily carry off or detain and
control the rate of release of surface waters.
B. When subsurface soil conditions are suitable, require runoff control
measures to percolate the stormwater into the ground to aid in the
recharge of ground waters, and the preservation of baseflow.
C. Carry surface water to the nearest adequate street, storm drain,
detention basin, natural watercourse or drainage facility.
D. Take surface water from the bottom of vertical grades, to lead water
away from springs and collect water upgrade of all street intersections
at the earliest or most efficient point.
E. Control/accommodate not only the anticipated peak discharge from the
on-site disturbed ares, but also the existing runoff being contributed
from all land at a higher elevation in the same watershed.
F. Maintain the adequacy of the natural stream channels. Accelerated
bank erosion shall be prevented by controlling the rate and velocity of
runoff discharged to these watercourses so as to avoid increasing the
occurrence of stream bank overflow.
G. Preserve the adequacy of existing culverts and bridges by suppressing
the new flood peaks created by the new earth disturbances.
H. If in the course of preparing or reviewing the stormwater management
plan the Township Engineer determines that off-site improvements are
necessary to satisfactorily control the stormwater from the site, the
applicant shall be responsible for such off-site improvements.
I. All stormwater detention and retention facilities shall be in place and
functioning prior to the creation of any impervious surface.
J. Whenever a watercourse, stream or intermittent stream is located
within a grading site, it shall remain open in its natural state and
location and shall not be piped unless permitted by Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) and the Upper
Providence Township Board of Supervisors.
K. The existing points of natural drainage discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered without the written approval and a
drainage easement from the affected land owners.
§ 150-10 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 150-10
135:269
§ 150-11. Detention facility design.
L. No stormwater runoff or natural drainage shall be so diverted as to
overload existing drainage systems or create flooding or the need for
additional drainage structures on other private properties or public
lands.
A. Stormwater detention facilities. Stormwater detention facilities include
all structural measures, which can reliably and predictably achieve the
peak discharge requirements. Stormwater detention facilities include,
but are not necessarily limited to, detention basins, retention basins,
bioretention areas, open (at-grade) sand filters, closed (belowgrade)
sand filters, water quality inlets, dry wells, below-grade detention
chambers and rooftop detention.
B. Peak discharge design storms. The design storm criteria to be used in
calculations for the watershed is to limit the post-development runoff
for the fifty-year storm to the two-year storm pre-development rates.
Any stormwater detention facilities required by this chapter and subject
to the water quality requirements and stormwater runoff peak rate
requirements herein shall meet the applicable water quality and peak
rate requirement for the two-, ten-, 50- and one-hundred-year return
period runoff events (design storms) consistent with the standard and
accepted calculation methodology and engineering standards and be
satisfactory to the Township engineer.
C. Runoff calculation methodology.
(1) Any stormwater runoff calculation involving drainage areas greater
than 20 acres, including on- and off-site areas, shall use a generally
accepted calculation technique that is based on the NRCS soil
cover complex method. It is assumed that all methods will be
selected by the design professional based on the individual
limitations and suitability of each method for a particular site.
(2) All calculations consistent with this chapter using the soil cover
complex method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for
the various return period storms.
(3) For purposes of pre-development flow rate determination,
undeveloped land shall be considered as "meadow, in good
condition", unless the natural ground cover generates a lower
curve number or rational "c" value.
(4) All calculations using the rational method shall use rainfall
intensities consistent with appropriate times of concentration for
overland flow and return periods from NRCS methodology. Time of
concentration for overland flow (maximum 300 feet) and
concentrated flow shall both be calculated using NRCS
methodology. Times of concentration for channel and pipe flow
§ 150-10 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 150-11
135:270
shall be computed using Manning's equation or NRCS
methodology.
(5) The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet
the performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by
routing the design storm hydrograph through these facilities using
accepted methods of practice. The Township Engineer may approve
the use of any generally accepted reservoir routing technique,
which shall use a total runoff volume that is consistent with the
volume from a method that produces a full hydrograph. The
computer routing program used must take into account the
tailwater effect of the discharge pipe on the orifice design as well
as the submergence of the discharge pipe outlet.
(6) Outlet structures for stormwater BMPs shall be designed to meet
the performance standards of this chapter using any generally
accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method approved by the
Township Engineer.
D. Stormwater detention and retention facilities. Stormwater detention
and retention facilities shall meet the following minimum design/
construction standards:
(1) Detention basin shall be designed to facilitate regular
maintenance, mowing and periodic silt removal and reseeding.
Shallow broad basins are preferred to steep sided basins.
(2) The maximum slope of the earth and detention basin embankment
shall be three to one (3:1) with the exception that any slope to be
maintained by the Township shall be 4:1. The top or toe of any slope
shall be located a minimum of five feet from a property line.
Whenever possible, the side slope and basin shape shall conform to
the natural topography.
(3) Unless permitted by the conditions of § 182-28.1B, detention basins
shall not be located within floodplains nor within areas of floodplain
or alluvial soils.
(4) Detention basins shall be designed so they return to normal
conditions within approximately 24 hours after termination of the
storm, unless the Township Engineer finds that downstream
conditions may warrant other design criteria for stormwater
release.
(5) If retention basins are used, the applicant shall demonstrate that
such ponds are designed to protect public health, safety and
welfare.
(6) Fences may be required for any detention or retention basins
where there is a permanent water surface or conditions warrant.
§ 150-11 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 150-11
135:271
(7) The minimum top width of the detention basin berm shall be 10
feet. A cutoff trench (keyway) of relative impervious material shall
be provided beneath all embankments requiring fill material. The
keyway shall be a minimum eight feet wide, minimum three feet
deep and have 1:1 side slopes.
(8) In order to insure proper drainage on the basin bottom, a minimum
grade of 2% shall be maintained for sheet flow. Where a 2% slope
cannot be maintained, low flow channels at a minimum grade of 1%
constructed of concrete or other materials approved by the
Township Engineer, shall be constructed between all basin inlets
and the basin outlet.
(9) All detention and retention basin embankments shall be placed in
eight-inch maximum lifts to a minimum ninety-five-percent dry
density. Prior to proceeding to the next lift, compaction shall be
checked by the Township Engineer or an approved soils engineer
who shall provide the Township Engineer with a written report.
Compaction tests shall be performed using the modified proctor
method in accordance with ASTM D-1577. Compaction tests shall
be run on the leading and trailing edge as well as the top of the
berm.
(10) Emergency overflow facilities shall be provided for detention
facilities to accommodate runoff in excess of design flows.
Whenever possible, emergency spillway for the detention basins
shall be constructed on undisturbed ground. Emergency spillways
shall be constructed of concrete pavers, gabions or other similar
materials approved by the Township Engineer. All emergency
spillways shall be constructed so that the detention basin berm is
protected against erosion. The minimum capacity of all emergency
spillway shall be the flow rate of the one-hundred-year design
storm after development. The construction material of the
emergency spillway shall extend along the upstream and
downstream berm embankment slopes. The upstream edge of the
emergency spillway shall be a minimum of three feet below the
spillway crest elevation. The downstream slope of the spillway
shall, as a minimum, extend to the top of the berm embankment.
The emergency spillway shall not discharge over earthen fill or
easily erodible material.
(11) The minimum freeboard shall be one foot.
(12) Antiseep collars shall be installed around the pipe barrel within the
normal saturation zone of the detention basin berms. The antiseep
collars and their connections to the pipe barrels shall be
watertight. The antiseep collars shall extend a minimum of two feet
beyond the outside of the principle pipe barrel. The maximum
spacing between collars shall be 14 times the minimum projection
of the collar measured perpendicular to the pipe. A minimum of two
antiseep collar shall be installed on each outlet pipe.
§ 150-11 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 150-11
135:272
(13) All outlet pipes through the basin berm shall be reinforced
concrete pipe, designed to withstand the loading caused by a fully
saturated berm and shall be watertight joints using O-ring joint
pipe. Outlet pipe shall be backfilled with material similar to the
core material (semiimpervious).
(14) The invert of the inlet pipe(s) into a basin shall be six inches above
the basin floor or lining so that it can adequately drain after
rainstorms. Inlet pipe(s) shall discharge to areas of the basin that
slope toward the outlet structure.
(15) Energy dissipaters and/or level spreaders shall be installed at
points where pipes or drainageways drain to or from the basin.
Energy dissipaters shall comply with criteria in Hydraulic
Engineering Circular No. 15 - Design of Stable Channels with
Flexible Linings published by the Federal Highway Administration
of the United States Department of Transportation of the
Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices. NCRS
energy dissipating device calculations shall be submitted for
Township review and approval.
(16) Inlet and outlet structures shall be located at a maximum distance
from one another in order to promote water quality benefits. The
Township Engineer may require a rock filter or rock-filled gabion
for entrapping sediments carried in stormwater if sufficient
separation of inlet and outlet structures cannot be achieved.
(17) A perforated riser, or similar sediment control device, shall be
provided at each outlet of all detention basins during construction
for sediment control. The riser shall be constructed of metal or
concrete. The riser shall extend to a maximum elevation of two feet
below the crest elevation of the emergency spillway. The perforated
riser shall be designed so that the rate of outflow is controlled by
the pipe barrel through the basin berm, when the depth of water
within the basin exceeds the height of the riser. Circular
perforations with a maximum diameter of one inch shall be spaced
12 inches vertically. The horizontal spacing shall be in accordance
to DEP soil erosion and sedimentation control manual
specifications. The perforations shall be cleanly cut and shall not be
susceptible to enlargement. All metal risers shall be suitably coated
to prevent corrosion. A trash rack or similar appurtenance shall be
provided to prevent debris from entering the pipe. All risers shall
have concrete base attached with a watertight connect. The base
shall be of sufficient weight to prevent flotation of the riser. An
antivortex device consisting of a thin vertical plate normal to the
base and berm shall be provided at the top of the riser. Unless this
structure is part of the permanent outlet control, it shall be
removed from the site when it has been adequately stabilized as
determined by the Township Engineer.
§ 150-11 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 150-11
135:273
§ 150-12. Stormwater conveyance system.
(18) All drainage channels shall be designed to prevent erosion of the
bed and banks. The maximum permissible flow velocity shall not
exceed the design requirements outlined in the current Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual, published by the
Pennsylvania Depart of Environmental Protection. Suitable
stabilization shall be provided where required to prevent erosion of
the drainage channels.
(19) Any vegetated drainage channel requiring mowing of the
vegetation shall have a maximum of three horizontal to one vertical
on those areas to be mowed.
(20) Because of the critical nature of vegetated drainage channels, the
design of all vegetated channels shall, as a minimum, conform to
the design requirements outlined in the current Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Manual, published by the Department of
Environmental Protection.
A. General.
(1) Storm sewers, culverts, bridges and related installations shall be
provided:
(a) To permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses and in such
a manner as to protect the natural character of the
watercourses and to provide regulated discharge;
(b) To insure adequate drainage of all low points along the line of
streets; and
(c) To intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained
and to prevent substantial flow of water across intersections.
(2) All storm sewer system components shall conform to current
PennDOT standards.
(3) Drainage structures, which drain watershed areas in excess of onehalf
square mile (320 acres) or which have a span of eight feet or
more, shall be designed for a maximum expected runoff as
calculated using the Soil Conservation Service Technical release 55
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds (less than 2,000 acres).
(4) The design storm for the above structures shall be a one-hundredyear
storm. A water obstruction permit shall be obtained from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for the
waterway opening before final design is undertaken.
(5) The cartway over the culvert or bridge shall be as wide as the
ultimate width of the roadway approaches. Additional width may be
required to provide sidewalk on one or both sides of the cartway.
§ 150-11 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 150-12
135:274
B. Storm sewer design and construction requirements. [Amended
6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
(1) Minimum pipe size shall be 18 inches in diameter. All storm sewer
piping shall be reinforced concrete pipe unless otherwise approved
by the Township Engineer. [Amended 1-5-2009 by Ord. No. 499]
(2) Minimum pipe slope shall be 0.005 ft./ft.
(3) Minimum drop across junctions shall be two inches. At changes in
pipe diameter, pipe crowns shall be matched at junctions (manhole,
inlet or junction box).
(4) Maximum distance between junctions shall be 300 feet.
(5) Runoff to proposed storm sewers and inlets shall be calculated
using the rational method.
(6) Runoff coefficients.
Character of Land Runoff Coefficient
Woods 0.18
Meadow 0.22
Pasture 0.30
Cultivated ground 0.35
Roofs and paving 0.95
Steep grass slopes (15% and <) 0.35
Gravel paving 0.85
Lawns (mowed) 0.26
These values should be weighted for actual design conditions by
combining the various land use components, when approved by
the Township
(7) The time of concentration shall be assumed five minutes for pipes
under 30 inches. For pipes 30 inches or greater, the calculated time
of concentration can be utilized.
(8) The time of concentration to inlets for grate capacity calculations
shall be assumed five minutes.
(9) All storm sewer pipes shall be designed at a minimum to
accommodate a minimum of a ten-year storm. Twenty-five-year
storms shall be used as required by the Township Engineer.
(10) All storm sewer pipes at inlets in sump condition shall be designed
to accommodate the fifty-year storm; floodplain and other critical
areas shall be designed to accommodate the one-hundred-year
storm.
§ 150-12 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 150-12
135:275
(11) The rainfall intensity shall be obtained from the Storm Intensity-
Duration-Frequency Curves for Region 5 in the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Design Manual-Part 2.
(12) All storm sewer pipes and inlets intended to drain to detention
facilities shall be designed to accommodate the one-hundred-year
storm if the bypass or overflow runoff will not reach the basin by
overland flow. In cases where the bypass or overflow runoff will
flow over land, a stable Swale shall be constructed to accommodate
the excess runoff.
(13) All inlets in sump condition shall be six-foot inlets or dual four-foot
inlets, as needed.
(14) All storm sewer systems shall be analyzed for both inlet and outlet
control (including tailwater effects) by using the equations and
nomographs as shown in the ERA's Hydraulic Design Services No.
5. In lieu of this, computer programs that calculate the actual
hydraulic grade line for the storm sewer system can be used,
provided that all losses (friction, bend, junction, etc.) are taken into
account. Documentation for the program must be submitted for
approval.
(15) Minimum cover over pipes is two feet from finished grade to
outside of pipe bell.
(16) Inlet capacities shall be calculated using PennDOT or
manufacturer's nomographs. Documentation for manufacturer's
nomograph must be provided to the Township Engineer.
(17) A minimum of one foot of freeboard must be provided between the
inlet grate elevation or stormwater manhole rim and the hydraulic
grade line elevation.
C. Shoulders in cut areas (without swales).
(1) Water flowing in the shoulder shall not encroach more than twothirds
the shoulder width during a twenty-five-year frequency
storm of five-minute duration.
(2) The maximum velocity as determined by Manning's equation shall
not exceed the allowable velocities for the specific type of shoulder
material.
(3) Inlets shall be provided to control the shoulder encroachment and
water velocity.
D. Swales adjacent to shoulders.
(1) Swales in cut areas shall be designed to prevent the passage of
water on the cartway during a twenty-five-year frequency storm of
five-minute duration.
§ 150-12 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 150-12
135:276
§ 150-13. Water quality and groundwater recharge BMPs.
All stormwater BMPs shall be designed to satisfy the following
requirements:
(2) The maximum velocity as determined by Manning's equation shall
not exceed the allowable velocities for the specific type of shoulder
material.
E. Curb sections.
(1) The maximum encroachment of water on the roadway pavement
shall not exceed three inches in depth at the curb during a twentyfive-
year frequency storm of five minute duration.
(2) Inlets shall be provided to control the encroachment of water on
the pavement.
F. Inlets - general.
(1) At street intersections, inlets shall be placed in the tangent portion,
rather than the curved portion, of the curbing.
(2) If the capacity of the shoulder, swale, curb section, or depressed
median section exceeds the assumed inlet capacities, the inlet
capacities shall govern the spacing of inlets.
(3) If the capacity of the shoulder, swale, curb section, or depressed
median section is less than the inlet capacities, then the shoulder,
swale, curb section or depressed section capacity shall govern the
spacing of inlets.
A. All facilities shall be provided with the capability to withstand the
discharge associated with the one-hundred-year return rainfall event,
without failing or resulting in damage to downstream areas. Some
nondetention BMPs may be designed to bypass stormwater discharges,
which are in excess of the appropriate design storm. In this case,
conveyance must be provided to transport the one-hundred-year
surcharge flow to a downstream facility, natural watercourse or storm
drainage system inlet.
B. All groundwater recharge devices shall be protected from
sedimentation. Areas designated for recharge shall not receive runoff
until the contributory drainage areas have achieved final stabilization.
§ 150-12 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 150-13
135:277

ARTICLE V
Stormwater BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan Requirements
§ 150-14. General requirements.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until approval by the Township of BMP operations and
maintenance plan which describes how the permanent (e.g.,
postconstruction) stormwater BMPs will be properly operated and
maintained.
B. The following items shall be included in the BMP operations and
maintenance plan:
(1) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements
for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of
Montgomery County, and shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch by
thirty-six-inch or thirty-inch by forty-two-inch sheets. The contents
of the maps(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs;
(b) The location of the project site relative to highways, municipal
boundaries or other identifiable landmarks;
(c) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others as
appropriate;
(d) Existing streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within
the project site area;
(e) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses and areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved;
(f) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers and water lines within 50 feet of property lines of the
project site;
(g) Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative
cover, including the type and amount of impervious area that
would be added;
(h) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas and buildings;
and
(i) A fifteen-foot wide access easement around all stormwater
BMPs that would provide ingress to and egress from a public
right-of-way.
§ 150-14 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 150-14
135:279
§ 150-15. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance of
stormwater BMPs.
§ 150-16. Township review of BMP operations and maintenance
plan.
(2) A description of how each permanent stormwater BMPs will be
operated and maintained and the identity of the person(s)
responsible for operations and maintenance;
(3) The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of
the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the
plan; and
(4) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or removed only
after approval by the Township.
A. The BMP operations and maintenance plan for the project site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance
of all permanent BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the Township, stormwater BMPs may also be
dedicated to and maintained by the Township;
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single
ownership or if sewers and other public improvements are to be
privately owned and maintained, then the operation and
maintenance of stormwater BMPs shall be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
B. The Township shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The Township reserves
the right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater BMPs.
A. The Township shall review the BMP operations and maintenance plan
for consistency with the purposes and requirements of this chapter and
any permits issued by DEP.
B. The Township shall notify the applicant in writing whether the BMP
operations and maintenance plan is approved.
C. The Township may require an as-built survey of all stormwater BMPs
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the operations and
maintenance plan.
§ 150-14 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 150-17
135:280
§ 150-17. Adherence to approved stormwater BMP operations and
maintenance plan.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan, or to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to an
approved BMP operations and maintenance plan, unless an exception is
granted in writing by the Township.
§ 150-18. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately
owned stormwater BMPs.
§ 150-19. Stormwater management easements.
§ 150-20. Recording of approved BMP operations and maintenance
plan and related agreements.
A. The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance
agreement with the Township covering all BMP that are to be privately
owned. The agreement shall be substantially the same as the
agreement in Appendix B of this chapter.67
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of
all permanent BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Township.
A. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater control unless a waiver is granted by the Municipal
Engineer. All such easements shall be in a form satisfactory to the
Township Solicitor.
B. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property
owner if necessary for access for inspections and maintenance or
preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration and
detention areas and other BMPs by persons other than the property
owner. The purpose of the easement shall be specified in any agreement
under § 150-18.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed or implemented, as described in the BMP operations and
maintenance plan, shall record the following documents in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds for Montgomery County within 15 days of
approval of the BMP operations plan by the Township:
(1) The operations and maintenance plan or a summary thereof;
(2) Operations and maintenance agreements under § 150-18; and
(3) Easements under § 151-19.
67.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 150-17 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 150-20
135:281
§ 150-21. Municipal stormwater BMP Operation and Maintenance
Fund.
If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the Township for dedication, the
Township may require persons installing stormwater BMPs to pay a
specified amount to the Municipal BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund
to help defray costs of operations and maintenance activities. The amount
may be determined as follows:
B. The Township may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
A. If the stormwater BMP is to be owned and maintained by the Township,
the amount shall cover the estimated costs for operations and
maintenance for 10 years, as determined by the Township.
B. The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
§ 150-20 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 150-21
135:282
ARTICLE VI
Inspections and Right of Entry
§ 150-22. Inspections.
§ 150-23. Right of entry.
A. The Township or its designee may inspect all phases of the
construction, operations, maintenance and any other implementation of
stormwater BMPs.
B. During any stage of the regulated earth disturbance activities, if the
Township or its designee determines that any BMPs are not being
implemented in accordance with this chapter, the Township may
suspend or revoke any existing permits or other approvals until the
deficiencies are corrected.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Township may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the Township to inspect the implementation,
condition or operation and maintenance of the BMPs in regard to any
aspect governed by this chapter.
B. Stormwater BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on
behalf of the Township ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any BMP in the Township such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges
from such BMP.
§ 150-22 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 150-23
135:283

ARTICLE VII
Fees and Expenses
§ 150-24. General.
The Township may charge a reasonable fee for review of erosion and
sedimentation control plans, design of BMPs and operations and
maintenance plans to defray review costs incurred by the Township. The
applicant shall pay all such fees.
§ 150-25. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter may cover:
A. Administrative/clerical costs.
B. The review of all above-mentioned plans and designs by the Township
Engineer.
C. The site inspections, including, but not limited to, preconstruction
meetings, inspections during construction of BMPs, and final inspection
upon completion of the stormwater BMPs.
D. Any additional work required to monitor and enforce sny provisions of
this chapter, correct violations and assure proper completion of
stipulated remedial actions.
§ 150-24 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 150-25
135:285

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 150-26. Prohibited discharges.
§ 150-27. Prohibited connections.
A. No person in the Township shall allow, or cause to allow, stormwater
discharges into the Township's separate storm sewer system which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except as provided in Subsection
B below.
B. Discharges which may be allowed, based on a finding by the Township
that the discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to pollution to
surface waters of the commonwealth, are:
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including dechlorinated water line and fire
hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(5) Air-conditioning condensate.
(6) Water from individual residential car washing.
(7) Springs.
(8) Water from crawl space pumps.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
(10) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(11) Lawn watering.
(12) Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(13) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(14) Uncontaminated groundwater.
C. In the event that the Township determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection B significantly contribute to pollution of waters
of the commonwealth, or is so notified by DEP, the Township will notify
the responsible person to cease the discharge.
A. The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in
§ 150-26B above:
§ 150-26 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 150-27
135:287
§ 150-28. Roof drains.
§ 150-29. Alteration of stormwater BMPs.
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage,
process wastewater and washwater, to enter the separate storm
sewer system and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks; and
(2) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the separate storm sewer system which has
not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and
approved by the Township.
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches except as provided in § 150-26B.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted by the Township.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
BMP, unless it is part of an approved maintenance program, without the
written approval of the Township.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a BMP or within a drainage easement, which would limit or alter the
functioning of the BMP, without the written approval of the Township.
§ 150-27 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 150-29
135:288
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and penalties
§ 150-30. Public nuisance.
§ 150-31. Enforcement generally.
§ 150-32. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
A. Whenever the Township finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the Township may order
compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice
may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
(2) The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or operations;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) The implementation of stormwater BMPs and
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the Township or designee and the expense thereof shall be charged
to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Township from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
D. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Any building land development or other permit or approval issued by
the Township may be suspended or revoked by the Township for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter; or
§ 150-30 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 150-32
135:289
§ 150-33. Violations and penalties.
§ 150-34. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee relevant
the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the relevant judicial or
administrative body according to law within the time period allowed.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the Township
when:
(1) The Township Engineer or designee has inspected and approved
the corrections to the stormwater BMPs or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance; and/or
(2) The Township is satisfied that the violation of this chapter, law or
rule and regulation has been corrected.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs or imprisonment
of not more than two days, or both. Each day that the violation
continues shall be a separate offense.
B. In addition, the Township, through its Solicitor, may institute injunctive,
mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
§ 150-32 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 150-34
135:290
Chapter 151
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages on streets — See Ch. 51.
Animals at large on streets — See Ch. 53.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 64.
Loitering — See Ch. 112.
Streets in subdivisions — See Ch. 154.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 169.
§ 150-34 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-34
151:291

ARTICLE I
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 4-6-1970 by Ord. No. 128]
§ 151-1. Removal from sidewalks.
§ 151-2. Restrictions on deposit of snow removed.
No person, partnership or corporation shall deposit or cause to be deposited
any snow or ice on or against a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, roadway or
loading or unloading area of a public transportation system or school bus
system.
§ 151-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who violates any provision of this
article shall be deemed guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100 and costs of
prosecution and in default thereof shall undergo imprisonment for not more
than 30 days. Each day that such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
A. Every person, partnership or corporation in charge or control of any
building or lot of land within the township fronting or abutting on a
paved sidewalk, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or
otherwise, shall remove and clear away or cause to be removed and
cleared away snow and ice from a path of at least 24 inches in width
from so much of said sidewalk as is in front of or abuts on said building
or lot of land.
B. Except as provided in Subsection C hereof, snow and ice shall be so
removed from sidewalks on the same day as cessation of any fall of
snow, sleet or freezing rain or within the first three hours of daylight
after the cessation of any such fall, whichever period is longer.
C. However, in the event that snow and ice on a sidewalk has become so
hard that it cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the
sidewalk, the person or entity charged with its removal shall, within the
time mentioned in Subsection B hereof, cause enough sand, salt or
other abrasive or melting agent to be put on the sidewalk to make travel
thereon reasonably safe and shall then, as soon thereafter as the
weather permits, cause a path in said sidewalk as provided in
Subsection A hereof to be thoroughly cleaned.
§ 151-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 151-3
151:293

ARTICLE II
Excavations and Openings
[Adopted 6-3-1974 by Ord. No. 157]
§ 151-4. Permit required.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 1156 of Article XI of the
Second Class Township Code, as amended,68 no railroad or street railway
shall hereafter be constructed upon any township road, nor shall any
railroad or street railway crossings nor any gas pipe, water pipe, electric
conduits or other piping be laid upon or in, nor shall any telephone,
telegraph or electric light or power poles or any other obstructions be
erected upon or in, any portion of a township road except under such
conditions, restrictions and regulations relating to the installation and
maintenance thereof as may be prescribed in permits granted by the
township for such purpose.
§ 151-5. Application for permit; fees.
The application for a permit shall be on a form prescribed by the township
and submitted to the township in triplicate. Unless otherwise prescribed
by a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, the
application shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the prevailing
Schedule of Fees of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for
Highway Occupancy Permits and Restoration Charges.69 In addition, the
applicant shall submit three copies of a sketch showing such dimensions as
the location of the intended facility and width of the traveled roadway, rightof-
way lines and a dimension to the nearest intersecting street.
§ 151-6. Issuance of permit.
A permit shall be issued to the applicant after all the aforementioned
requirements have been filed.
§ 151-7. Notice of completion.
Upon completion of the work, the applicant shall give written notice thereof
to the township.
§ 151-8. Inspection; defects.
Upon completion of the work authorized by the permit, the township shall
inspect the work and, when necessary, enforce compliance with the
conditions, restrictions and regulations prescribed by the permit. Where
any settlement or defect in the work occurs, if the applicant shall fail to
rectify any such settlement or other defect within 60 days after written
notice from the township to do so, the township may do the work and shall
68.Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. §§ 67321 and 67322.
69.Editor's Note: Information regarding applicable fees is available from the Township
Secretary.
§ 151-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 151-8
151:295
impose upon the applicant the cost thereof, together with an additional 20%
of such cost.
§ 151-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
Any person, firm, corporation or utility which shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall be subject, upon conviction before a District
Justice, to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in
default of the payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more
than 30 days.
§ 151-8 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 151-9
151:296
ARTICLE III
(Reserved)70
§ 151-10. (Reserved)
§ 151-11. (Reserved)
§ 151-12. (Reserved)
§ 151-13. (Reserved)
§ 151-14. (Reserved)
70.Editor's Note: Former Article III, Official Street Map, adopted 6-23-1975 by Ord. No. 168,
was repealed 4-17-2006 by Ord. No. 459.
§ 151-10 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 151-14
151:297

ARTICLE IV
Ultimate Right-of-Way
[Adopted 4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 239]
§ 151-15. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Upper
Providence Ultimate Right-of-Way Ordinance."
§ 151-16. Applicability. [Amended 7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 365]
The provisions of this article are applicable to all public roads existing
in the township as depicted on the Ultimate Right-of-Way Map of Upper
Providence Township, dated April 1997, which supersedes any previous
map and to newly dedicated streets in accordance with the provisions of
§ 151-23 herein. Said map, as may be amended, is adopted by reference as
part of this article.71 The provisions of this article shall also be applicable to
all planned public roads which abut or pass through any subdivision or land
development proposed within the township, as well as to those public roads
which abut or pass through any lot in the township for which construction
activity is proposed, which under applicable township regulations requires
a building permit.
§ 151-17. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to Section 670 of the Pennsylvania State
Highway Law, as amended;72 Articles XI and XII of the Pennsylvania Second
Class Township Code, as amended;73 and Articles IV and V of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247 of 1968), as amended.74
§ 151-18. Legislative intent.
The intent of this article is to promote the general health, safety and
welfare of Upper Providence Township, its residents and all members of
the traveling public by preserving the land needed for present and future
transportation purposes from inappropriate and confining development and
providing the physical improvements within that area as needed to
adequately accommodate the traveling public. In advancing these
principles, the specific intent and purpose of this article is to:
A. Provide adequate land in the public rights-of-way of sufficient width to
comfortably accommodate both present and future vehicular traffic
demands, to accommodate future road widening to service said
demands and to provide for sufficient area for storm drainage facilities
and other related public improvements.
71.Editor's Note: The map is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
72.Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-101 et seq.
73.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 66101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 66201 et seq.
74.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10401 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
§ 151-15 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 151-18
151:299
§ 151-19. Information required on development plans.
On all subdivision or land development plans or plans for construction
activity as defined in § 151-16 herein, information shall be included on the
plan as stipulated in the following subsections.
§ 151-20. Reservation of ultimate right-of-way line.
B. Implement the recommendations and intent of the circulation element
of the 1983 Upper Providence Township Comprehensive Plan.75
C. Comply with the intent, provisions and requirements of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development, as amended.
D. Assure that adequate land of proper width and alignment is available
for the realignment of existing roads or the construction of new
segments or links which the plan referenced in Subsection B herein or
other highway or planning studies have identified as critical
components of the township's traffic circulation system.
A. The ultimate right-of-way line for each existing or proposed public road
abutting or passing through the site or lot shall be drawn and labeled as
such.
(1) For abutting roads, 1/2 of the applicable ultimate right-of-way
width shall be drawn as measured from the center line of the road.
(2) The appropriate width of the ultimate right-of-way for existing
public roads or extensions thereof shall be as drawn on the
Ultimate Right-of-Way Map.
(3) The appropriate width for new public roads, shall be determined
according to the proposed classification of said road, as determined
by § 154-18C of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development.
With respect to said new public roads, the ultimate and intended
legal right-of-way lines shall be the same.
(4) Additional widths for ultimate rights-of-way may be required, as
provided for in § 154-18E of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development. [Amended 7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 365]
B. All lots bordering on an existing public road shall have their lot line
computed along the road's legal right-of-way line.
C. The lot area and setbacks required by Chapter 182, Zoning, for all lots
created by subdivision after the effective date of this article shall be
calculated from the ultimate right-of-way line.
A. The area between the legal right-of-way line and the ultimate right-ofway
line shall continue to be owned in fee by the record property owner
and reserved for future road widening and improvement purposes. A
75.Editor's Note: Copies of the Comprehensive Plan are available in the township office.
§ 151-18 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 151-20
151:300
§ 151-21. Deed notation.
The deed for each and every lot located on an existing public road created
by subdivision after the effective date of this article shall contain specific
language noting that the area between the legal and ultimate rights-ofway
is reserved for future road widening and improvement purposes. In
addition, each such deed shall acknowledge by appropriate notation the
financial liability limitation contained in § 151-22 herein.
§ 151-22. Financial liability limitation on reserved land.
On any land within an ultimate right-of-way which has been or is being
reserved, no financial compensation shall be provided for any structure,
fence, wall, landscaping or other feature constructed or placed therein after
the effective date of this article. For any structures or other improvements
existing therein as of the effective date, financial compensation shall be paid
as required by law. This shall be done if and when the governmental agency
having jurisdiction over the affected road condemns the land on which the
structure or improvement is located, for road widening or related purposes.
§ 151-23. Newly dedicated streets. [Added 7-7-1997 by Ord. No.
365]
All new streets dedicated as the result of new subdivisions shall fall into the
appropriate roadway classification(s) based upon the ultimate right-of-way
as depicted on the final plan approved by the township and shall be deemed
classified accordingly; any roads for which a classification is not otherwise
obvious shall be considered to fall into the residential category with an
ultimate right-of-way of 50 feet. Regardless of actual physical change to the
Ultimate Right-of-Way Map, it shall be considered to be amended to include
each new street at such time as it is accepted for dedication by the Board
with the appropriate classification based upon its depiction on the approved
final plan.
note stating the following shall be placed on all final plans for
subdivision and/or land development:
All land lying between the existing (legal) right-of-way line and the
ultimate right-of-way line shown on this plan for the entire frontage of
this property on each existing public street or between the ultimate
right-of-way lines of each proposed street is hereby reserved for future
roadway and/or related improvements.
B. This section is not intended to vary or alter the duties of a developer or
owner with regard to construction and dedication of new public roads,
as set forth in Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 151-20 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 151-23
151:301
Chapter 154
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 30.
Building construction — See Ch. 60.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 85.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 89.
Grading, excavating and filling — See Ch. 99.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 143.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 151.
Water — See Ch. 176.
Zoning — See Ch. 182.
§ 151-23 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 151-23
151:302
ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose; Interpretation; Subdivision and Land Development
Control; Waivers; Enforcement
[Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
§ 154-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Upper Providence
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
§ 154-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
§ 154-3. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements
to meet the above-stated purposes. Where the provisions of this chapter
impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or
regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where the provisions
of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions
than those of this chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or
regulation shall prevail.
§ 154-4. Subdivision and land development control.
A. To assist orderly, efficient, integrated and harmonious development of
the Township.
B. To assure the development of sites suitable for building purposes and
human habitation.
C. To coordinate proposed streets with existing streets or other proposed
streets or other features of the Township.
D. To provide adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air
and for proper distribution of the population.
E. To ensure the conformance of subdivision and land development plans
with the public improvements of the Township.
F. To ensure that the layout and arrangement of the subdivision or land
development plan is in conformance with the Upper Providence
Township Comprehensive Plan and with any regulations or maps
adopted in furtherance thereof.
A. Subdivision of a lot or construction, opening or dedication of a street.
No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land
shall be made, and no street, alley, sanitary sewer, storm drain, water
main, gas, oil or electric transmission line or other improvements in
connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed or dedicated for
§ 154-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-4
151:303
§ 154-5. Right to waive certain requirements.
The Board of Supervisors may grant a modification of the requirements of
one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will exact
undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in
question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to the public
interest and that the purpose and intent of the chapter is observed. All
requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany and be
a part of the application for development. The request shall state in full the
grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is
based, the provision or provisions of the chapter involved and the minimum
modification necessary. The Board of Supervisors may refer to the request
for modification to the planning agency for advisory comments. The Board
of Supervisors shall keep a written record of all action on all requests for
modifications.
§ 154-6. Enforcement.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, including,
without limitation, Sections 515.1, 515.2 and 515.3 as now or thereafter
amended.76
public use or travel or for the common use of occupants of a building
abutting thereon, except in strict accordance with this chapter.
B. Sale of lots, issuance of building permits or erection of buildings. No lot
in a subdivision or land development may be sold, and no permit to
erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a subdivision or land
development may be let, unless and until a plat has been approved and,
where required, recorded and until the required improvements in
connection therewith from the lot or building to an existing improved
street have either been constructed or the Township has been assured
that the improvements will subsequently be installed by means of a
proper completion guaranty in the form of a bond or the deposit of
funds or securities in escrow sufficient to cover the cost of the required
improvements as estimated by the Township Engineer.
C. Condominiums. The sale of dwelling or commercial units as
condominiums under the Uniform Condominium Act (68 Pa. C.S.A.
§ 3101 et seq.) shall be permitted in accordance with this chapter, and
no regulation within this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the
condominium form of ownership. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
76.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10515.1, 10515.2 and 10515.3.
§ 154-4 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-6
151:304
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 154-7. Word usage.
Words used in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural
include the singular; words in the feminine gender include the masculine.
The word "person" includes natural persons, corporations, associations and
partnerships. The word "building" includes the word "structure," and both
shall always be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." The
word "occupied" includes the words "designed or intended to be occupied."
The word "used" includes the words "arranged, designed or intended to be
used." The word "may" is permissive, and the words "shall" and "will" are
always mandatory.
§ 154-8. Terms defined. [Amended 6-26-1978 by Ord. No. 204]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated:
ACCEPTED ENGINEERING PRACTICE — That which conforms to accepted
principles, tests or standards of nationally recognized technical or scientific
authorities.
ALLEY — A right-of-way on which no structures front, serving as the
secondary means of access to two or more properties.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building, any change or rearrangement in
the structural parts or in the exit facilities or any enlargement, whether by
extension on any side or by any increase in height or the moving from one
location or position to another.
ANCHORING — The fastening of a mobile home to its home stand in order
to prevent upset or damage due to wind, erosion, flooding or other natural
forces.[Added 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210]
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for approval of a development plan, including his heirs,
successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN — Applications required to be
filed and approved prior to the start of subdivision or development.
BASE FLOOD — The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis
upon which the floodplain management provisions of this chapter have
been prepared; for purposes of this chapter, the one-hundred-year flood,
as referenced in the current Upper Providence Township Flood Insurance
Study and Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).[Amended 12-2-1996 by Ord.
No. 356]
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation, as
referenced in the Upper Providence Township Flood Insurance Study and
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), prepared by the Federal Emergency
§ 154-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-8
151:305
Management Agency (FEMA). Within the general floodplain area (FA) as
delineated in the Flood Insurance Study or other delineated floodplain
outside of the Flood Insurance Study, the base flood elevation shall be
established as defined in § 182-26 of Chapter 182, Zoning. Whenever the
phrase "established flood level or regulatory flood elevation (where
available)" is contained in this chapter, it shall be construed to mean the
"base flood elevation."[Amended 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 356]
BERM — A linear mound or bank of earth, used especially as a barrier or to
provide insulation.[Added 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 535]
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets, public parks, railroad rights-of-way,
watercourses, boundary lines of the municipality or unsubdivided land or by
any combination of the above.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Upper Providence Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
BUFFER[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210] — An area designed
and functioning to separate the elements and uses of land which abut it
and to ease the transition between them. Unless otherwise specified, buffers
may be included as part of the required setbacks and yard areas. Buffers
are divided into three types:
BUILDER — A person who is charged with the responsibility of the
construction of buildings or other structures or of making any construction
improvements on any parcel of land.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof, including mobile homes and trailers, designed,
intended or arranged for the housing, sheltering, enclosure or structural
support of persons, animals or property of any kind.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The maximum horizontal area covered by
buildings at or above grade.
SCREEN BUFFER — A buffer comprised of natural and/or man-made
material arranged in a certain specified depth, height and density to
effectively block the view from one side to another during all seasons of
the year and to reduce the transmittal of noise and odors between the
sides.
A.
SOFTENING BUFFER — A buffer comprised of natural and/or manmade
material arranged in a certain specified depth, height and density
to ease and soften, but not essentially block, the view from one side to
another and to reduce the transmittal of noise and odors between the
sides.
B.
OPEN BUFFER — A buffer normally comprised of grass, ground cover
and/or possibly other landscaping material having a specified depth,
but not necessarily having significant vertical components to achieve a
certain height or density, the purpose of which is to achieve adequate
spacing and attractive landscaping between two or more actively used
areas.
C.
§ 154-8 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-8
151:306
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a property defining the
required distance, as set forth in Chapter 182, Zoning, between any
structure to be erected and the adjacent street (ultimate right-of-way) line.
Such line shall be measured at right angles from the street right-of-way line
which abuts the property upon which said structure is located.77[Amended
12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
CALIPER — Diameter of a tree's trunk measured at 12 inches above the
ground for trees with a diameter of four inches or more and at six inches
above the ground for trees with a diameter of less than four inches.[Added
9-21-1998 by Ord. No. 376]
CARTWAY — The portion of a street or alley intended for vehicular use.
CENTRALIZED WATER SYSTEM — Water supply systems, either publicly or
privately owned, that serve the public, meaning service is not restricted by
the type of user or land use.78
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or a combination of
land and water within a development site, designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents of a development, not including streets, off-street
parking areas and areas set aside for public facilities. "Common open space"
shall be substantially free of structures but may contain such improvements
as are in the development plan as finally approved and as appropriate for
the recreation of residents.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210]
COMMON PARKING — Any parking area used by three or more dwelling
units and having space for six or more motor vehicles.[Amended
12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Upper Providence Township
Comprehensive Plan, consisting of maps, charts and textual matter, as well
as any revisions thereto.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure,
including the placement of mobile homes.
CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL CENTER — A minor commercial facility
generally containing no more than five units and occupying no more than
three acres, designed to serve everyday needs of residents in its immediate
vicinity and whose commercial goods and hours of operation encourage
short stops for specific items rather than extensive shopping trips. Its
primary component is a drugstore or a small food and household goods
store, but not a supermarket, and the center may contain a few other
establishments as well, such as a beauty shop, laundry and dry-cleaning
77.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 151, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. IV.
78.Editor's Note: The definitions of "Code of Regulations" and "common elements," as
amended, which originally followed this section, and the definitions of "condominiums,"
"Council," "declaration," "declaration plan," "declaration of revocation" and "plan," which
appeared later in this section, were repealed 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 301; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I. For current provisions, see the Uniform Condominium Act, 68
Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 154-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-8
151:307
establishment or similar facilities.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No.
210]
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian use across a block, connecting
two of the bounding roads.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street with access at one end from a through street and
terminated at the other end by a paved vehicular turnaround.[Amended
1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
CUT — An excavation; the difference between a point on the original ground
and a designated point of lower elevation of the final grade; also, the
material removed in an excavation.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
development plan.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, the storage of equipment and materials,
excavation or drilling operations.[Amended 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 356]
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for guiding development,
including a plan of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, the location
and bulk of buildings and other structures, the intensity of use or density
of development, streets and parking facilities. The phrase "provisions of the
development plan" shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to
in this definition.
DRIP LINE — The perimeter line on the ground measured from the
outermost edge of the vertical plane established by the branches of the
tree.[Added 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 344]
DRIVEWAY — A private way providing for vehicular and pedestrian access
between a public street and a parking area within a lot or property.
DWELLING — A building designed and constructed for residential
purposes, in which people live.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms arranged for the use of one or more
individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with cooking,
living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
EARTHEN BERM — An elongated and shaped mound of earth used in
conjunction with landscaping, for the purpose of visual screening and/or
physical separation.[Added 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 344]
EASEMENT — The legal right or privilege of a person, persons or entity
to use the land of another person, persons or entity for a special purpose
consistent with the rights of the underlying property owner.[Amended
10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 476]
EASEMENT, PUBLIC — An easement inuring to the benefit of Upper
Providence Township, the Upper Providence Township Municipal Authority,
§ 154-8 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-8
151:308
the County of Montgomery, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the United
States of America, any departments, agencies, instrumentalities and
authorities created thereby, and public utilities such as, but not limited
to, sanitary sewer, public water, cable, gas, electric, telephone.[Added
10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 476]
ENDORSEMENT — The application of the reviewing and/or approving
authority's stamp and the signatures of the appropriate authority on the
record plan.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EQUIVALENT RIGHT-OF-WAY — A theoretical rights-of-way dimension
calculated from the center line of designed private roads, the width of
which corresponds to that of public roads performing the same
function.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210]
EXCAVATION — Any act by which natural materials are dug into, cut,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed, as well as
the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which natural materials are placed, pushed, dumped,
pulled, transported or moved to a new location above the natural surface
of the ground or on top of the stripped surface as well as the conditions
resulting therefrom.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of a
normally dry land area(s).
FLOODPLAIN — See "flood-prone area."
FLOOD-PRONE AREA — That area defined in the Floodplain Conservation
District of Chapter 182, Zoning; the floodplain definition contained therein
is made part of this chapter by reference.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduces or eliminates
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities and structures and their contents. Such measures are set forth in
floodproofing regulations published by the Office of the Chief Engineers,
United States Army, Publication Number EP 1165 2 314 (June 1972 and as
subsequently amended). Floodproofing measures for all new construction
and substantial improvements of structures shall satisfy the requirements
of the Completely Dry Spaces (W1) and Essentially Dry Spaces (W2) Classes
referenced in these regulations. In said publication where reference is made
to "below (or above) the BFD" (base flood datum), it shall be interpreted
as meaning below (or above) the base flood elevation. Regulations for
floodproofing are contained in Chapter 89, Flood Damage Prevention.
GRADE — A slope of a street or parcel of land specified in percent and
shown on plans as specified herein.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total area included within the exterior walls of
a building, exclusive of open courts.
§ 154-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-8
151:309
GROUND COVER — Natural mulch or nondeciduous or low-growing plants
installed or planted in such a manner as to provide a continuous cover over
the ground.
HEIGHT — The "height" of a building shall be measured from the mean
level of the ground surrounding the building to a point midway between the
highest and the lowest points of the roof, provided that chimneys, spires,
towers, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar projections shall not be
included in calculating the "height."
HITCH — A device which is part of the frame or attaches to the frame
of a mobile home and connects it to a power source for the purpose of
transporting the unit.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210]
IMPROVEMENT — Grading, paving, curbing, streetlights and signs, fire
hydrants, wells, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, sidewalks,
parking areas or landscaping.
LAND DEVELOPMENT[Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296] -- Any of
the following activities: —
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land or a
building thereon or a portion of either, including the holder of an option or
contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to
any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under the lease to exercise the
rights of the "landowner" or other person having a proprietary interest in
land shall be deemed to be a "landowner" for the purposes of this chapter.
LOT — A tract or parcel of land intended for separate use, building
development or transfer of ownership. Contiguous nonconforming lots
under common ownership shall be considered one "lot" or
parcel.[Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.79
C.
79.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 154-8 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-8
151:310
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of the individual
parcels of land, excluding any area within any public or ultimate rightsof-
way and any area within driveway entrance strips leading to rear lots,
but including the area of any easement.[Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord. No.
232; 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
MANUFACTURED HOME — A single-family detached dwelling unit
intended for permanent occupancy which meets the standards set by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, contained
in one unit or in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral
unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives
at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations and constructed so that it may be used
with or without a permanent foundation, including any roofed additions
such as extra rooms, covered patios, porches, etc. The term includes park
trailers, travel trailers, recreational and similar vehicles which are placed
on a site for more than 180 days. Any reference throughout this chapter
to "mobile home" shall be construed to mean "manufactured
home."[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210; 12-2-1996 by Ord. No.
35680]
MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210;
repealed 10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 33081] —
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home development
provided with the necessary utility connections, a patio and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home,
and the exclusive use of its occupants, though it may instead be designed,
developed and used for a modular or conventionally built single-family
detached home rather than a mobile home.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord.
No. 210]
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which
has been planned and improved in compliance with the requirements of the
Mobile Home Development District82 for the placement of mobile homes,
conventionally built or modular single-family detached homes or
combinations thereof, for nontransient use, consisting of two or more
mobile home lots and 15 acres or greater in size. Any reference to "mobile
home development" throughout this chapter shall be construed to mean
"mobile home park."[Added 10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 330]
MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of an individual lot which has been
reserved and prepared for the placement of the mobile home.[Amended
12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210]
NONSYSTEM WELLS — On-site well(s) for use by a landowner.
80.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for the replacement of the former definition of
"mobile home" with the definition of "manufactured home."
81.Editor's Note: See now the definition of "mobile home park."
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 182, Zoning, Art. X.
§ 154-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-8
151:311
OFFICIAL STREET MAP — The map of current adoption showing the rightsof-
way and approximate location of the lines of existing and proposed public
streets for the whole of Upper Providence Township.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that has one chance in 100 or
a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any one year; for
the purposes of this chapter, the one-hundred-year flood (base flood) as
defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), in the
Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), Upper
Providence Township. All references to the Flood Insurance Study in this
chapter shall be construed to be to the most current version of said study.
In addition, all references to the "Federal Insurance Administrator" or the
"Federal Insurance Administration" shall be construed to be references to
FEMA.[Amended 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 356]
PARKING SPACE — An open or covered area with a dust-free all-weather
surface, or space in a private garage or other structure, for the storage of
one automobile, accessible from a public way and which must conform to
the setback requirements of the district in which it is situated.[Amended
12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210; 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
PLAN, IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION — A plan showing the
construction details of streets, drains, sewers, bridges, culverts and other
improvements as required by this chapter showing the details required by
Article III of this chapter.
PLAN, LAND DEVELOPMENT — A tentative, preliminary or final plan,
including written and graphic material showing the provision for
development of a tract, when plans of subdivision would not be applicable.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A plan prepared for discussion with the Planning
Commission and Board of Supervisors, showing the proposed street and lot
layout, the deed restrictions, easements and all other items required under
Article III of this chapter for the entire parcel of land being subdivided.
PLAN, RECORD — A plan prepared for recording showing the ultimate
width of streets, the lot lines, easements and all other items required under
Article III of this chapter.
PLAN, TENTATIVE — A draft showing proposed streets, lots or buildings
related to topography, that is to be used as the basis for informal discussion
between the representatives of the Planning Commission and the
subdivider, developer or builder.
PLANTING AREA — Any area designated for landscaping purposes.
PUBLIC NOTICE — A notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall be not
more than 30 days nor less than 14 days from the date of the hearing.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single chassis;
not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
§ 154-8 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-8
151:312
light-duty truck; and not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.[Added 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 356]
RESERVE STRIP — A parcel of land separating a street from adjacent
properties.
REVERSE-FRONTAGE LOT — A lot with frontage on more than one street,
with driveway access on the street of lower classification as defined on the
Township Ultimate Right-of-Way Map.[Added 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 344]
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow, that does not enter the soil but runs
off the surface of land.
RUNOFF FROM A FULLY DEVELOPED AREA UPSTREAM — The surface
water runoff that can be reasonably anticipated upon maximum
development of that area of the watershed located upstream from the
subject tract, as permitted by prevailing zoning or the Township
Comprehensive Plan.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water or gravity. Once this
matter is deposited or remains suspended in water, it is usually referred to
as "sediment."
SEWER CONNECTION — Consists of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances
from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding
sewer riser pipe.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210]
SEWER RISER PIPE — That portion of the sewer lateral which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home
space.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210]
SHRUB — A woody perennial plant having persistent woody stems
branching from the base.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The distance of unobstructed view along the center
line of a street from the driver's sight height to the farthest visible point
four inches above the street surface.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — The area of a triangle whose legs are the sides of the
cartway and an accessway which intersects with it, each being not less than
50 feet long from the point of intersection and whose hypotenuse connects
the two legs.
SKIRTS — Panels specifically designed for the purpose of screening the
underside of a mobile home by forming an extension of the vertical exterior
walls of the mobile home and covering the entire distance between the
bottom of the exterior walls and the ground elevation below.[Amended
12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210]
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. "Slopes" are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100
feet of horizontal distance.
§ 154-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-8
151:313
SOIL STABILIZATION — The chemical or structural treatment of a mass of
soil to increase or maintain its stability or otherwise improve its engineering
properties.
SOIL SURVEY — A report entitled "Soil Survey of Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania," published April 1967, by the Soil Conservation Service,
United States Department of Agriculture, and which is available in the
Township or through the Extension Service, Agricultural Agent, the
Pennsylvania State University in Norristown.
STREET — A right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, serving primarily
as a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel and furnishing access to
abutting properties, which may also be used to provide space for sewers,
public utilities, shade trees and sidewalks.
STREET, HALF — A street of less than the required right-of-way and
cartway width.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the right-of-way of a
street legally open or officially recorded by the Township.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS — A street parallel and adjacent to a primary
street, providing access to abutting properties by a cartway separated from
the primary street by a reserve strip.
STREET, PRIMARY — A street carrying heavy traffic volumes of fast-moving
traffic.
STREET, RESIDENTIAL — A street used primarily as the principal means of
access to local properties and which carries a small volume of traffic.
STREET, RURAL — A street along which at least 75% of all road frontage
consists of lots of more than two acres, with minimum lot widths of 200 feet.
STREET, SECONDARY — A street connecting local residential streets to
primary streets and which carries a lesser volume of traffic.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground, including but not limited to buildings, factories, sheds,
cabins, mobile homes and other similar items.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to an heir or
devisee or transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new streets or easement
of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.[Amended
1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A simplified plan for subdivision meeting the
requirements specified in § 154-10G herein.[Added 7-7-1997 by Ord. No.
364]
§ 154-8 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-8
151:314
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the engineer,
at least 90% based on the cost of the required improvements for which
financial security was posted pursuant to Article V of this chapter, of those
improvements required as a condition for final approval have been
completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the project will be
able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.[Added 4-2-1984
by Ord. No. 243]
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
TENURE — The form of occupancy of a unit, i.e., fee-simple sale, rental,
condominium, cooperative, etc.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210]
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are fertile
soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus debris.
"Topsoil" is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the "A Horizon."
TRACT AREA — The total acreage within the property lines, excluding
that area continuously covered by water and the rights-of-way of existing
public roads and overhead utility lines without regard to any internal lot
lines.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210]
TREE — Any woody plant with a well-defined stem at least four inches in
caliper measured at a height six inches above the natural grade.
TREE MASS — A grouping of three or more trees, each at least 1 1/2 inches
in caliper, within a 100 square foot area.[Added 9-21-1998 by Ord. No.
376]
TREE, SPECIMEN — Any shade tree greater than 24 inches in diameter,
measured 4 1/2 feet above grade; or any evergreen or ornamental tree
greater than 12 inches in diameter above grade.[Added 9-21-1998 by
Ord. No. 376]
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The expected future right-of-way width
computed from the center line of an established right-of-way, as shown on
the Official Street Map of Upper Providence Township.
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The line parallel to the center line of
any public street which defines the boundary of the ultimate right-of-way.
USE AREA — Any area of land that is given to one category of land use and
is used to compute the net density of that use.
VEHICULAR USE AREA — Any paved ground-surface area, except a street,
used by any type of vehicle whether moving or at rest.
WATER CONNECTION — Consists of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances
from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system
within the mobile home.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210]
WATERCOURSE — A permanent stream, intermittent stream, river, brook,
creek or a channel or ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.
§ 154-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-8
151:315
WATER RISER PIPE — That portion of the water service pipe which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at
each mobile home lot.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210]
YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building or
buildings or use, open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except
for vegetation.
§ 154-8 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-8
151:316
ARTICLE III
Plan Submission Requirements and Processing Procedures
§ 154-9. Applicability.
The procedures set forth in this article shall be followed by all applicants
proposing to subdivide or develop land in Upper Providence Township.
§ 154-10. Plans required for approval of subdivision or land
development.
Applicants shall be required to submit the following plans:
A. A tentative sketch plan as described in § 154-11 herein shall be
submitted by an applicant requesting any of the following: a subdivision
of a parcel of land into five or more residential lots, any residential land
development, a subdivision or land development of a parcel of land
involving any nonresidential use, and/or any change of, or to a
nonresidential use. Said tentative sketch plan shall be submitted prior
to the submission of a preliminary plan; applicants requesting to
subdivide a parcel of land and/or develop a parcel of land not requiring
a tentative sketch plan based on the criteria defined herein may
proceed to submit a preliminary plan as described in § 154-12 herein
without submitting a tentative sketch plan. If an applicant is exempt
from a tentative sketch plan submission, based on the criteria defined
herein, the applicant may elect to submit a tentative sketch plan, and if
such is submitted, it shall be processed and approved in the same
manner as a required tentative sketch plan. [Amended 1-15-1990 by
Ord. No. 296; 7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 364; 6-2-2008 by Ord. No.
490]
B. A preliminary plan is required for all subdivisions and land
developments proposed within the Township.
C. A final plan is required for all subdivisions and land developments
proposed within the Township.
(1) A final plan shall consist of two parts:
(a) An improvements construction plan as described in § 154-13A
herein.
(b) A record plan as described in § 154-13B herein.
(2) A plan showing all information required for a final plan, which has
been submitted as a preliminary plan and for which no changes
have been required by the Township, may be approved as a final
plan.
D. A land development plan shall be required whenever the application for
approval shall be construed to be a land development in accordance
with the definition of the same as provided in this chapter. A land
§ 154-9 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-10
151:317
development plan may be required in conjunction with a subdivision
plan or in lieu of a subdivision plan when review of a plan on a lot-by-lot
basis would not be applicable.
E. (Reserved)83
F. Where the Board of Supervisors has approved a multibuilding
development plan, the owner thereof may subdivide, for mortgage
purposes only, the land upon which such buildings are to be
constructed, and the individual lots which are created as a result of
such subdivision shall be exempt from area, setback, buffer, frontage
and other similar requirements which are intended for application to
the development as a whole. [Added 12-2-1985 by Ord. No. 255]
(1) The foregoing shall be approved only if there is provided a duly
executed and acknowledged agreement, to be recorded at the time
of subdivision in a form acceptable to the Township Solicitor,
which:
(a) Requires each of the subdivided lots to be operated and
maintained as an integral part of the previously approved
development plan in accordance with these regulations.
(b) Ensures that each lot will have permanent means of access and
adequate parking.
(c) Prohibits said lots from being treated as separate development
parcels at a future time.
(d) Governs the formation of an association responsible for the
maintenance of all common areas, which shall be jointly owned
by the owners of the individual development parcels.
(2) Where parking areas are included within a lot and are intended to
be used by more than one building or lot, such areas shall be
included within the common area maintenance agreement or shall
be governed by a separate cross-easement agreement. Such
agreement shall further provide that for all purposes, the entire
development shall be treated as one lot subject to all of the
Township's then-enacted ordinances and regulations.
G. The Township may accept a simplified subdivision plan herein to be
considered a minor subdivision in such instances in which a total of no
more than two lots will result and all lots are to have frontage on an
existing street. The only construction on any residentially zoned lot may
involve the erection of a single-family detached structure and incidental
or accessory development or the erection of agricultural structures. On
nonresidentially zoned land, the subdivision cannot include any new
construction. In such instances, a minor subdivision will only be
83.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, regarding plans for construction of or additions to
nonresidential structures, added 6-26-1978 by Ord. No. 204, as amended, was repealed
8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 344.
§ 154-10 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-10
151:318
§ 154-11. Tentative sketch plan.
An applicant submitting a tentative sketch plan shall show the following
information:
accepted if it includes all of the land owned in said location by the
landowner/applicant; it shall not be accepted for only a portion of a
tract. A minor subdivision may also be accepted in cases wherein a lot
line(s) is to be relocated or land is to be added to an existing lot from
an adjacent tract of land, with no additional lot(s) being created and no
new construction proposed except single-family development as herein
above described and/or wherein agricultural use will occur on the lot(s).
In the case of a lot line change or wherein land is to be added from
an adjacent tract, common deeds shall be executed for all lots resulting
from addition of land. For any minor subdivision, the applicant shall be
required to include, at a minimum, those items in § 154-12C, D and E as
may be relevant or necessary to evaluate the proposed plan. Any other
information necessary for adequate plan review may be required by the
Township. [Added 7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 364; amended 10-1-2007
by Ord. No. 476]
A. A location plan showing the relationship of the subject tract to the
surrounding network and major physical features.
B. The tract boundary, a North point and the location by deed plotting.
C. A plan at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet. If the proposed plan
cannot be represented on a single sheet at this scale, the applicant
should also submit a composite plan showing the entire development
proposal at a scale less than one inch equals 200 feet.
D. The existing and proposed road, parking and lot (or building) layout, as
applicable.
E. Significant topographical and physical features, such as floodplains,
steep slopes, woodlands and existing structures.
F. The intended use(s) of the tract.
G. For land development, all the applicable items listed under § 154-14.
[Added 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
H. Topography of the subject tract following the requirements contained in
§ 154-12C(4) herein. [Added 7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 364; amended
6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
I. General locations to be utilized for stormwater management. The
approximate land area to be covered by any detention or retention
basins should be indicated. [Added 7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 364]
J. Parcel number and block and unit number, as assigned by the
Montgomery County Board of Assessment. [Added 7-7-1997 by Ord.
No. 364]
§ 154-10 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-11
151:319
§ 154-12. Preliminary plan.
Applicants submitting a preliminary plan for subdivision shall conform to
the following standards:
K. The six-digit Montgomery County Planning Commission (MCPC) file
number if such has been assigned to the plan in a previous submission.
[Added 7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 364]
A. Drafting standards.
(1) The scale of the plan shall not be smaller than 100 feet to the inch
and shall be accurate to within one part in 300.
(2) Dimensions shall be in feet or meters and decimals and bearings in
degrees, minutes and seconds.
(3) The plan shall show the courses and distances of the boundary line
survey of the entire land to be subdivided.
(4) The sheet or sheets shall be one of the following sizes: 15 by 18
inches, 18 by 30 inches, or 24 by 36 inches. If more than one sheet
is necessary, each sheet shall be the same size and consecutively
numbered to show its relation to the total number of sheets
comprising the plan, i.e., Sheet No. 1 of 5 sheets, etc.
(5) Where there are two or more sheets, a key map shall be provided
sufficient to show their relationship.
(6) All plan lettering, words and numbers shall be at least 0.1 inch in
height. [Added 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
B. Location and identification. Each plan shall provide:
(1) A title consisting of the name and address of the property owner,
subdivider, developer and the preparer of the plan; specifically, the
builder, registered engineer, surveyor, or qualified site planner who
developed the plan. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296;
8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
(2) The name of the subdivision, its location in terms of significant
bounding roads and the name of the municipality.
(3) The date of preparation of the plan, the scale and a North point.
(4) The entire tract boundary with bearings and distances.
(5) A location map drawn to scale relating the subdivision to at least
three existing intersections of Township roads. [Amended
1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(6) Parcel number and block and unit number, as assigned by the
Montgomery County Board of Assessment. [Added 7-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 364]
§ 154-11 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-12
151:320
(7) The six-digit Montgomery County Planning Commission (MCPC)
file number if such has been assigned to the plan in a previous
submission. [Added 7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 364]
C. Existing and proposed features. [Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord. No.
232; 2-16-1987 by Ord. No. 264, 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(1) Topographic mapping; control monuments. [Amended 6-2-2008
by Ord. No. 490]
(a) All applicants for land development or subdivision within the
Township shall be required to utilize topographic mapping
provided to them, at a reasonable cost, by the Township. The
required fees shall be in accordance with the latest "Mapping
Fee Schedule" as adopted by resolution by the Board of
Supervisors. It shall be understood that this mapping will not
be resold by the purchaser.
(b) Said mapping was produced using digital photogrammetric
methods and conforms to National Map Accuracy Standards at
a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with two-foot contour
intervals. Mapping depicts significant topographic features
such as roadways, buildings, driveways, walks, parking areas,
manholes and inlets; contours were plotted as accurately as
conditions permitted. Boundary information will not be
included. All mapping is referenced to Pennsylvania State plan
grid coordinates, NAD 1983 (1992), with elevations based on
NAVD 1988. Mapping was flown in February and March 2002.
(c) Control monuments, in visible pairs, have been set at 25
locations (pairs) throughout the Township. Specific control
information is available from the Township Engineer.
(2) Within 100 feet of any part of the land being subdivided or
developed, the plan shall show the location, names, widths (both
cartway and right-of-way) and surface conditions of all existing
roads, as well as the location of watercourses, bodies of water,
floodplains, wetlands, steep slopes, sanitary and storm sewers, onlot
sewage systems and wells, utilities above and below ground and
any other man-made or natural features having an impact on the
ability of the applicant to subdivide the land in question and areas
subject to deed restrictions. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No.
490]
(3) Within land to be subdivided. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No.
490]
(a) Within the land to be subdivided, the plan shall show the
location, names, widths and other dimensions, including
center-line courses, distances and curve data, paving widths,
curblines, rights-of-way and curbline radii at intersections and
street location tie-ins by courses and distances to the nearest
§ 154-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-12
151:321
intersection of existing and planned roads and alleys, as well
as the location of watercourses, bodies of waters, floodplains,
wetlands, steep slopes, sanitary and storm sewers, on-lot
sewage systems and wells, utilities above and below ground
and any other man-made or natural features having an impact
on the ability of the applicant to subdivide the land in question
and areas subject to deed restrictions.
(b) In addition, the plan shall show the location and character of
existing buildings, the locations, species and sizes of trees
standing along the outer limits of tree masses and the location
of quarries, marshland, and other topographical features
which may affect the location of proposed roads or buildings.
(4) The plan shall show contours at vertical intervals of two feet. These
contours may be established by field survey or taken from aerial
photography. In locations where the contour intervals exceed 100
feet horizontally, spot elevations shall be used. The use of contours
from United States Geological Survey maps or other sources may
be allowed only upon Township approval. Contours shall extend at
least 50 feet beyond the property lines of the proposed subdivision
or development. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
(5) All plans shall be drawn to assure that:
(a) Proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
(b) Public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(d) The developer has reviewed the site for wetland area
constraints and designed the plans to protect the wetlands or
applied for permits as needed to intrude upon the wetlands.
(6) The developer shall provide a document which is certified by a
qualified engineer which states that adequate precautions against
flood damage have been taken with respect to the design of any
buildings or structures located wholly or partially within the floodprone
area. The document shall contain any and all data and
calculations the Township Engineer shall deem necessary.
(7) The developer shall submit the required plans and supplemental
data to the following agencies when applicable: The Department of
Environment Protection, the Corps of Engineers, the Montgomery
County Conservation District, the Township Municipal Authority
Engineer and the Township Fire Marshal. [Amended 6-2-2008 by
Ord. No. 490]
§ 154-12 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-12
151:322
(8) The plan shall show the measured distances from the ultimate
rights-of-way of existing and proposed roads to existing and
proposed buildings and parking areas.
(9) The depth of the water table shall be noted on the plan or in a
separate report, along with the location of test borings. For on-site
sewage disposal systems, the plan shall show the location of
percolation and deep-hole tests, as well as the date(s) and results of
the tests.
(10) The plan shall include zoning district boundaries and zoning data
requirements and the requirements of any other Township
ordinance or Zoning Hearing Board decisions, if any, on both the
land to be subdivided and the adjacent land.
D. Proposed road and lot layout.
(1) The plan shall show the layout of all streets, alleys and walkways,
including the names and widths of cartways and rights-of-way.
(2) The plan shall show the layout and dimensions of all lots and the
net lot area of each.
(3) The plan shall reference any land to be dedicated for public or
common use.
(4) The plan shall show preliminary profiles for all new roads and
existing roads which are adjacent to the tract. Profiles shall extend
onto adjacent land at least 200 feet when the roadway is proposed
to the property line. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(5) The plan shall show the location and size of the sanitary sewers,
water systems and storm drains proposed to serve the subdivision.
Drainage computations and a drainage area plan shall be provided
for review by the Township. Profiles shall be provided for sanitary
and storm sewers when the roadway profiles cannot be utilized.
[Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(6) The plan shall show all building setback lines with distances from
the right-of-way line.
(7) The plan shall indicate those lots or areas which shall contain a use
or uses other than residential.
(8) When there are existing buildings located on the land being
subdivided, the buildings to be demolished, as well as those to be
retained, shall be indicated.
(9) The plan shall include a statement showing the number of acres
being subdivided, the number of lots created, the type and number
of buildings and their character, the linear feet of new roads; the
linear feet of roads to be widened, the minimum, maximum and
§ 154-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-12
151:323
average lot sizes and the type of sanitary sewer and water facilities.
[Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
E. Proposed improvements.
(1) The plan shall contain a tentative cross-section for each proposed
or widened roadway shown on the preliminary plan. [Amended
1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(2) The plan shall show preliminary design of any bridges, culverts or
other structures and appurtenances which may be required.
F. Certificates. Upon approval, the preliminary plan must show:
(1) The signature of the subdivider, developer or builder certifying his
adoption of the plan and any changes thereto.
(2) The signature of the Township Secretary certifying that the Board
of Supervisors has approved the plan and any changes thereto on
the date shown.
G. Landscape plan requirements. Where required, a landscape plan,
complying with all landscaping requirements of this chapter, shall be
submitted along with all preliminary land development plans. The
minimum requirements for all landscape plans are as follows: [Added
9-21-1998 by Ord. No. 376]
(1) The plan shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect or
other qualified professional recognized by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(2) The plan shall show the following:
(a) All existing specimen trees located by survey, with type, caliper
and general health noted.
(b) The location and type of proposed plant material, keyed to a
plant list.
(c) Trees and shrubs graphically shown at 10 years' growth.
(d) A plant list to include: key, quantity, common name, botanical
name, size (in accordance with current American Standard for
Nursery Stock), spacing, root ball specifications (balled and
burlapped, bare root, container, etc.), and mature growth
heights and widths. [Amended 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
(e) Plant species with hardiness of Zone 5 (if based on Arnold
Arboretum chart) or Zone 6 (if based on United States
Department of Agriculture chart) or species generally grown in
the vicinity of Upper Providence Township.
(f) Existing trees to remain.
§ 154-12 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-12
151:324
(g) The limit of the clearing line.
(h) The tree protection zone and detail.
(i) Deciduous and evergreen tree, shrub and ground cover
planting details.
(j) The proposed berm grading.
(k) The location of existing and proposed sewer and water lines.
(l) Areas to be seeded or sodded.
(m) The location of bed lines.
(n) The location of all proposed pedestrian paths or sidewalks on
the site and in the parking areas; in the parking areas,
pedestrianways shall be distinguished by striping or change in
color and/or material.
(o) The location of existing and proposed utilities, including
transformers, boxes, and other equipment related to existing
and proposed utilities. [Added 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
(p) Landscape plans shall include match lines and any phasing
information. [Added 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
(3) The plan shall include the following notes:
(a) All beds shall have three inches of shredded hardwood mulch
or equal.
(b) Tree wrap shall be removed at the end of the guaranty period.
(c) Do not cut the leader of deciduous trees.
(d) No deciduous shade trees will be located closer than 10 feet to
sanitary and water utilities.
(e) No plants, except ground cover, shall be planted less than five
feet from a structure, walks or curblines.
(f) All plant materials shall be of nursery stock, balled and
burlapped. It shall be of symmetrical growth, typical of its
species or variety, certified free of insects, pests and disease,
have a normal growth habit, and a vigorous healthy root
system. [Amended 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
(g) All plant material shall be guaranteed for a period of 18 months
in the same manner as other required improvements,
according to § 154-56C of this chapter.
(h) All planting materials shall meet the minimum standards of the
most recent edition of the American Standard for Nursery
Stock by the American Nursery and Landscape Association for
§ 154-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-12
151:325
health, form, and root condition. [Added 8-1-2011 by Ord.
No. 517]
(i) All trees and shrubs shall have been grown under climatic
conditions similar to those in the Township. [Added 8-1-2011
by Ord. No. 517]
(j) Plant material shall not be planted until the finished grading
has been completed. [Added 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
(k) Trees and shrubs shall bear the same relationship to the
finished grade in the new development as they did in the
nursery. [Added 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
(l) The landscape contractor shall provide all plant materials as
specified in the plant schedule and shall install all material in
accordance with the planting details, notes and specifications
in the approved landscape plans. [Added 8-1-2011 by Ord.
No. 517]
(m) Any substitutions of plant materials must be reviewed and
approved by the Township before installation. [Added
8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
(n) It shall be the responsibility of the developer to adequately and
properly maintain the landscape areas, including watering,
fertilizing to maintain healthy growth, pruning, weeding, and
cleaning debris prior to the end of the guarantee period.
[Added 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
(4) In order to comply with the specific requirements of this section, it
is intended that the exact number and location of plant materials is
to be determined through the preparation of the required
landscape plan. Any modifications to account for specific site
conditions shall be recommended during the review of this plan.
Township staff and appropriate Township consultants shall review
the landscape plan along with the preliminary land development
plan.
H. A lighting plan for all facilities other than streetlighting shall be
prepared and provided to the Township Lighting Consultant and the
Township Engineer and must include: [Added 6-3-2002 by Ord. No.
416]
(1) Fixture cut sheets.
(2) Overall point by point isocandle layout.
(3) Individual isocandle curve.
(4) Individual isocandella curves.
§ 154-12 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-13
151:326
§ 154-13. Final plan.
Applicants submitting a final plan for subdivision shall conform to the
following standards:
A. Improvements construction plan.
(1) Drafting standards. The same standards shall be required for an
improvements construction plan as for a preliminary plan, except
that the horizontal scale of the plan and profile shall be at least 50
feet to the inch and the vertical scale shall be five feet to the inch.
[Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(2) Information to be shown. The plan shall contain sufficient
information to provide working plans for the construction of the
proposed roads or any portion thereof, including all appurtenances,
sewers and utilities, as shown on the approved preliminary plan
from one existing or approved road to another or, in the case of a
cul-de-sac, to its turnaround. Said information shall include:
(a) Horizontal plan. The horizontal plan shall show details of the
horizontal layout as follows:
[1] Information shown on the approved preliminary plan.
[2] The beginning and end of the proposed immediate
construction.
[3] Stations corresponding to those shown on the profile.
[4] The curb elevation at tangent points or horizontal curves
at road or alley intersections and at the projected
intersections of the curblines.
[5] The location and size of sanitary sewers and lateral
connections with distances between manholes, water, gas,
electric and other utility pipes or conduits and of storm
drains, inlets and manholes.
[6] The location, type and size of curbs and all paving widths.
[7] The location and species of all shade trees and the location
and types of fire hydrants and streetlights.
[8] All utilities shall be shown together on the same sheet.
[Added 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(b) Profiles. Profiles shall be provided for the following:
[Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
[1] Profiles of sanitary sewers with a profile over the sewer of
the present and finished ground surface, showing manhole
locations beginning at the lowest manhole.
§ 154-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-13
151:327
[2] Profiles of all existing and proposed roadways with grades
at least every 50 feet of the original ground and finished
grade. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
[3] Profiles of storm drains showing the location of endwalls,
inlets, manholes and all other structures. [Amended
1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(c) Cross-section. The cross-section shall comply with the
Township Engineer's standards and specifications as minimum
requirements. It shall show a typical cross-section across the
road with details of grading and construction as follows:
[1] The road and the location and width of paving within the
road.
[2] The type, depth and crown of paving.
[3] The type and size of curb.
[4] When sidewalks are required, grading of the sidewalk area
should be carried to the full width of the road, and slopes
of cut or fill extended beyond the road.
[5] The location, width, type and depth of sidewalks, when
required.
[6] The typical location, size and depths of sewers and
utilities.
[7] A note shall be placed on the plan which indicates that on
underdrain, extra-depth stone base or fabric may be
required by the Township when field conditions indicate a
need for such requirements. [Added 1-15-1990 by Ord.
No. 296]
B. Record plan.
(1) Drafting standards. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(a) The same standards shall be required for the record plan as for
a preliminary plan.
(b) The plan shall be placed on sheet sizes of 15 by 18 inches, 18
by 30 inches or 24 by 36 inches.
(c) All plan lettering, words and numbers shall be at least 0.1 inch
in height.
(d) The plan shall have a written and graphic scale, and a listing of
all the plan sheets which are a part of the construction design.
§ 154-13 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-13
151:328
(e) The plan shall have a two-inch-wide margin on the left edge of
the plan to allow for binding in a record volume. [Added
7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 364]
(2) Information to be shown. The plan, which shall include all portions
of an approved preliminary plan, shall show:
(a) A title, as required for a preliminary plan.
(b) Courses and distances sufficient for the legal description of all
the lines shown on the plan. The error of closure shall not be
greater than one part in 10,000. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord.
No. 490]
(c) The names of abutting owners, the names, locations, widths
and other dimensions of all roads, including center line
courses, distances and curve data, and descriptive data of
ultimate right-of-way lines so that a single deed may be drawn
to the appropriate authority for the dedication of roads by the
subdivider, developer or builder.
(d) Evidence should be provided that the plans are in conformance
with Chapter 182, Zoning, and other applicable Township
ordinances and regulations. In any instance where such plans
do not conform, evidence shall be presented that an exception
or variance has been officially authorized.
(e) The location, material and size of all monuments with
reference to them.
(f) Building envelope with distances from the ultimate right-ofway
line and/or property lines. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord.
No. 296]
(g) Restrictions in the deed affecting the subdivision of the
property.
(h) One of the following requirements shall be placed on the plan
as designated by the Township: [Added 1-15-1990 by Ord.
No. 296]
[1] The ultimate right-of-way for existing roads and new road
rights-of-way shown on this plan are hereby offered for
dedication to the applicable governmental agencies.
[2] The placement of the applicable note and other
requirements outlined in Article IV of Chapter 151, Streets
and Sidewalks.
(i) The plan should indicate all easements and their dimensions,
limits of the floodplains, steep slopes, and wetlands and all
other restrictions to the building areas. [Added 1-15-1990 by
Ord. No. 296]
§ 154-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-13
151:329
(3) Certificates. Before approval, the following applicable
certifications shall appear on the record plan. All certifications
shall be properly signed and sealed. [Amended 9-20-1982 by
Ord. No. 232; 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(a) Owner's certification.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
County of Montgomery
On the day of _________________ ____, before me, the subscriber,
a Notary Public of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
residing in _______________________________, personally
appeared _______________________, who acknowledged himself
(themselves) to be the owner(s) of the land shown hereon.
All necessary approvals of this plan have been obtained and
is endorsed thereon and I (we) desire that this plan be duly
recorded.
Notary Public
My Commission Expires
I (We) do hereby certify that I am (we are) the sole registered
owner(s) of the land herein subdivided and that there are no
suits pending affecting the title of the same and that I (we)
do hereby adopt this plan and desire the same to be recorded.
I (We) do further save the Township harmless and indemnify
the Township of Upper Providence against any liability or loss
resulting from the subdivision or development of this plat, for
whatever reason present or future.
Owner
Owner
(b) Corporate certification.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
County of Montgomery
On the _______ day of ______________________ before me, the
subscriber, a Notary Public of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, residing in ____________________ personally
appeared _____________________________, who acknowledged
himself to be the _____________ of_________________________, a
corporation, and that as such being authorized to do so, he
executed the foregoing plan by signing the name of said
corporation by himself as that said corporation is the owner
of the land shown hereon. All necessary approvals of this
plan have been obtained and is endorsed thereon and said
corporation desires that this plan be duly recorded.
§ 154-13 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-13
151:330
Notary Public
My Commission Expires
I, ___________________________, acknowledge myself to be the
_________________________ of
_______________________________________, a corporation, and
that as such being authorized to do so, hereby certify that the
corporation is the sole registered owner of the land herein
subdivided and that there are no suits pending affecting the
title of the same and that I do hereby adopt this plan and
desire the same to be recorded. I do further save the Township
harmless and indemnify the Township of Upper Providence
against any liability or loss resulting from the subdivision
or development of this plat for whatever reason present or
future.
Corporate Official
Office
(c) Surveyor's certification.
I hereby certify that the plan shown and described hereon, as
well as all other drawings which are a part of this plan set,
are true and correct to the accuracy required by the Upper
Providence Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance and were prepared by me or under my direction,
for which I accept full responsibility, and represent a field
survey performed by me or under my direction. The existing
perimeter monuments shown hereon have been located as
part of the survey and all other proposed perimeter
monuments shall be set.
Date
Surveyor
(d) Township Supervisor's certification.
This plan has been approved by Upper Providence Township
Board of Supervisors this ____ day of ___________________, ____.
Chairman
Attested: Township Manager
(e) Wetlands certification.
§ 154-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-13
151:331
§ 154-14. Land development plans. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord.
No. 296]
Applicants submitting a land development plan shall be required to show
the following information as part of the tentative sketch plan submission
or the preliminary plan if such is the first submission, in addition to the
applicable information in §§ 154-12 and 154-13 of this article.
I do hereby certify that the delineation of the wetlands shown
on this plan is in accordance with the findings of my field
investigation and that I have determined these limits based
upon the Corps of Engineer guidelines.
Date
Signature
(f) County recording note.
Recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in Norristown,
Pennsylvania, in Plan Book ________, Page _________, on the
_____ day of _________________, ____.
(g) A block at least 3 1/2 inches by two inches shall also be
provided for placement of the stamp and seal of the
Montgomery County Planning Commission; this block shall be
located within one inch of the right hand plan border.
[Amended 7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 364]
(h) Permits. The developer shall obtain all necessary permits and
approvals from all governmental agencies which have
jurisdiction over this project unless a waiver is granted by the
Board of Supervisors. This would include such agencies as
follows: the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, United
States Army Corps of Engineers, etc. [Added 1-15-1990 by
Ord. No. 296; amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
(i) The plan should indicate all easements and their dimensions,
limits of the floodplains, steep slopes, and wetlands and all
other restrictions to the building area. The record plan shall
also include a note detailing the nature of the easement
restriction and a reference to the easement regulations within
Chapter 182, Zoning Code, of Upper Providence Township.
[Added 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
A. Man-made features for the use of two or more prospective occupants.
B. The lot size, floor area or gross leasable area, as applicable.
C. The present and requested zoning classification and applicable
standards with which compliance is necessary for granting final
approval.
§ 154-13 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-14
151:332
§ 154-15. Plan processing procedures.
The following plan processing procedures shall be followed by all applicants
for approval of a subdivision or land development plan:
D. The density and/or intensity of use, including the bedroom mix, if
applicable.
E. The total building coverage and the area of the total tract devoted to
each use or group of uses, if applicable.
F. The location and placement of accessory structures and facilities.
G. All roads, parking facilities and pedestrianways, including the total
number of parking spaces.
H. The areas of proposed common open space, if any, or recreation or
other community facilities.
I. A conceptual site utilization layout defining the general location of all
proposed uses and activities.
J. Specifications for required improvements and changes to be effected
upon the existing terrain or existing structures thereon.
K. All covenants relating to use.
L. Parcel number and block and unit number, as assigned by the
Montgomery County Board of Assessment. [Added 7-7-1997 by Ord.
No. 364]
M. The six-digit Montgomery County Planning Commission (MCPC) file
number if such as been assigned to the plan in a previous submission.
[Added 7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 364]
A. All plans filed for approval shall be submitted in the following order:
(1) Tentative sketch plan (as required).
(2) Preliminary plan.
(3) Final plan.
B. An applicant shall submit not less than 15 copies of each plan to the
Township Manager.
C. Each plan, whether tentative, preliminary or final, shall be filed one at a
time; no subsequent plans shall be filed until a decision on the
preceding plan has been reached.
D. When the decision reached concerning an application for approval of a
specific plan results in a denial of the plan, then the applicant, when
and if he should reapply requesting approval of the plan, shall do so in
accordance with the plan sequence outlined in Subsection A herein and
the additional procedures below.
§ 154-14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-15
151:333
E. Applications for approval of a subdivision or land development plan
shall be received by the Township Manager or his designated agent.
Submittal and processing of plans and specifications for such plans
shall accompany the applications.
F. The applicant or his agent shall be required to appear in person at the
Township Building in order to make application for approval of a plan
and file plans therewith.
G. Formal application shall be received on the first Monday of each month,
from which time all applications for approval of a plan, whether
preliminary or final, shall be acted upon by the Board of Supervisors,
and such decision shall be communicated to the applicant, in writing,
not later than the prescribed time period after the date of formal
application as is required for such response.
H. Any application for approval of a subdivision or land development plan
shall not be received until the required fees and subdivision and land
development plan checklist requirements have been met.
I. From the time an application for approval of the plan is received, and
while such application is pending approval or disapproval, no change or
amendment of zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan
shall affect the decision on such application adversely to the applicant.
The applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the
provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the
time the application was received. [Added 4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 243]
J. Schedule of plan processing steps.
(1) Applications for subdivision or land development, accompanied by
15 copies of the proposed plan, shall be received at the Township
Building by the Township Manager.
(2) The date shall be stamped on each copy of the plan, and two fees
shall be received:
(a) The Township filing fee.
(b) The Montgomery County Planning Commission Act 247 review
fee.
(3) A cursory examination of the plan will be conducted to ensure basic
compliance with the plan submission requirements of this article.
(4) The Township Manager shall distribute copies of the plan to the
following persons, agencies or groups:
(a) The Montgomery County Planning Commission.
(b) The Township Engineer.
(c) The Township Park and Recreation Committee.
§ 154-15 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-15
151:334
(d) The Township Sewer Authority Secretary.
(e) The Board of Supervisors (three copies).
(f) The Township Manager.
(g) The Township Planning Commission (five copies).
(h) The Township Fire Commission.
(i) The Zoning Officer.
(5) The application for approval of a subdivision or land development
plan shall be placed on the next meeting agenda of the Township
Planning Commission. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(6) Recommendations of the Montgomery County Planning
Commission, the Township Planning Commission, the Township
Engineer and others shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors
no later than 30 days from the date stamped on the plan.
[Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(7) The Board of Supervisors shall act on the plan not later than 90
days following the date of the regular meeting of the Planning
Commission next following the date the application is filed (the
date stamped on the plan), provided that, should said next regular
meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of the
application, said ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th
day following the day the application has been filed. The decision of
the Board shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the
applicant personally or mailed to him at his last known address not
later than 15 days following the decision. The following optional
consequences shall result from action by the Board: [Amended
12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 213]
(a) If the Board approves the plan, the Township Manager will so
certify thereon and two copies of the approved plan will be
forwarded to the applicant. The applicant would then resubmit
four copies of the approved plan, one paper copy and three
linen copies for seal and signatures.
(b) The Township may elect to grant approval of a plat, whether
preliminary or final, subject to conditions acceptable to the
applicant. If such conditional approval is given by the
Township, the applicant shall be required to accept or reject
the conditions by giving written notice of the applicant's
acceptance or rejection within 10 days after notice of the
Township's conditional approval has been communicated to the
applicant personally or mailed to him at his last known
address. Any such conditional approval shall be rescinded
automatically upon the applicant's failure to accept or reject
§ 154-15 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-15
151:335
the conditions within such ten-day period. [Amended
1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(c) If the Board disapproves the plan, the Township Manager will
notify the applicant, in writing, of the defects in the
application, will describe the requirements which have not
been met and shall cite the provisions of state law or Township
ordinance relied upon.
(8) When an approval or conditional approval of a plan is granted, no
subsequent change or amendment in zoning, subdivision or other
governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to adversely affect the
right of the applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of
the approved development in accordance with the terms of such
approval within five years from such approval unless said period is
extended by the Board of Supervisors. Where final plan approval is
preceded by preliminary approval, the five-year period shall be
counted from the date of preliminary approval. [Amended
4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 243; 7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 364]
(9) In addition, where the landowner has substantially completed the
required improvements as depicted on the final plat within the fiveyear
limit or any extension thereof as may be granted by the Board
of Supervisors, no change of municipal ordinance or plan enacted
after the date of the filing of the preliminary plan shall modify or
revoke any aspect of the approved final plan pertaining to zoning
classification or density, lot, building, road or utility location.
[Amended 4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 243]
(10) (10) If the development is proposed in phases in which the
installation of improvements shall extend beyond the five-year
period, then the following shall be done: [Added 4-2-1984 by Ord.
No. 243]
(a) The landowner shall file a schedule along with the preliminary
plan. Said schedule shall depict the proposed development
sections and include deadlines within which application for
final plan approval of each section is intended to be filed. The
schedule shall be updated annually by the applicant on or
before the anniversary date of preliminary plan approval. The
schedule update must be done until final plan approval for the
final section is granted. Said schedule and its modifications are
subject to approval of the Board of Supervisors.
(b) In the case of residential subdivision or land developments
which are to be developed in sections, each section except the
final section must contain at least 25% of the total number of
dwelling units in the entire development. However, the Board
of Supervisors may approve a lesser percentage.
§ 154-15 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-15
151:336
§ 154-16. Recording the plan. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
Within 90 days following final plan approval, the applicant shall record the
final plan in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery County.
(c) If the landowner does not adhere to the schedule of submission
of final plans for the various sections, then any changes in
zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinances enacted
after the date of the initial preliminary plan submission shall
affect his property.
(d) If the landowner does not default with regard to the schedule
of submission of the final plan for the various sections, has not
violated any conditions of preliminary approval and has
substantially completed the initial section of the development
within the five-year period, then an additional term or terms of
three years shall be extended to the applicant to complete each
of the other sections. The extended term or terms shall begin
from the date of final plan approval for each section. During
this three-year period no change in municipal ordinance or
plan enacted subsequent to the date of filing of the preliminary
plan shall modify or revoke any aspect of the approved final
plan pertaining to zoning classification or density, lot, building,
road or utility location.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
whenever final plan approval is required by a municipality, the
Recorder of Deeds shall not accept any plan for recording unless it
contains the official approval of the municipal governing body and
certification of review by the County Planning Commission.
B. Prior to recording, the applicant should present the municipalityapproved
plan to the Montgomery County Planning Commission for its
stamp and seal, with one paper copy made available to the County
Planning Commission for its files.
§ 154-15 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-16
151:337

ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 154-17. General principles and requirements.
The following principles of subdivision and land development, general
requirements and minimum standards of design shall be observed by the
applicant in all instances.
A. All portions of a tract being subdivided shall be taken up in lots, streets,
public lands or other proposed uses so that remnants and landlocked
areas shall not be created.
B. When a portion of a tract is being reviewed relative to subdivision and
land development, but where future subdivision or development is
imminent, the applicant shall demonstrate that the remainder of the
tract or parcel may be subdivided or developed in conformance with the
existing zoning classification of land use in a logical and satisfactory
manner, as a condition of approval of his plan.
C. Whenever possible, applicants shall preserve trees, groves, waterways,
scenic points, historic spots and other community assets and
landmarks.
D. Subdivisions and land developments should be laid out so as to avoid
the necessity for excessive cut or fill unless specifically warranted by
terrain or location.
E. Low-lying land subject to periodic flooding shall not be subdivided or
developed for residential development or for such other uses as may
involve danger to health, safety, morals and general welfare.
F. Where no centralized water supply is available to the subdivision or
land development, the Board of Supervisors shall require the
subdivider, developer or builder to obtain from the Montgomery County
Health Department certificates of approval as to the quality and
adequacy of the water supply proposed to be utilized by the subdivider,
developer or builder and approval of the type and construction methods
to be employed in the installation of the individual water supply system,
in accordance with current state regulations and those of the Township.
Consideration should be given to the probability of an eventual
interconnection with a centralized water system in the future.
[Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
G. Where the subdivision or land development is inaccessible to sanitary
sewers, the Board of Supervisors shall require the subdivider,
developer or builder to obtain from the district sanitarian of the
Department of Environmental Resources certificates of approval of the
sewage disposal facilities to be provided by the subdivider, developer or
builder, in accordance with current state regulations.
§ 154-17 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-17
151:339
§ 154-18. Streets.
In accordance with the Second Class Township Code,85 all new streets
and widened portions of all existing rights-of-way intended for public use
shall be dedicated to the Township, subject to final acceptance based on
compliance with the following requirements:
H. Applicants shall observe the ultimate rights-of-way for contiguous
existing streets as prescribed by the Ultimate Right-of-Way Map for the
Township.84 Additional portions of the corridors for such streets shall be
offered, when required by the Township, to the governmental agency
having jurisdiction. Applicable building setback lines, as defined by
Chapter 182, Zoning, shall be delineated as measured from the ultimate
right-of-way. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
I. Proposed subdivision and land development shall be coordinated with
the existing nearby neighborhood so that the community as a whole
may develop harmoniously.
J. Improvement construction requirements will be completed under
specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
Department of Environmental Protection, the Montgomery County
Conservation District or other appropriate agencies or the
specifications included herein, whichever specifications shall result in
the more favorable interpretation of this chapter. [Amended 6-2-2008
by Ord. No. 490]
K. Construction of facilities. The subdivider, developer or builder shall,
where specified by the governing body, construct and install with no
expense to the Township the streets, curbs, sidewalks, water mains,
sanitary and storm sewers, streetlights, fire hydrants, street signs,
shade trees, monuments and other facilities and utilities specified in
this article. The construction and installation of such facilities and
utilities shall be subject to inspection by appropriate Township officials
during the progress of the work, and the subdivider shall pay for
inspection.
L. Upper Providence Engineering Construction Standards and
Improvement Procedures, as adopted by resolution and as may be
amended from time to time by resolution of the Upper Providence
Township Board of Supervisors. [Added 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
A. Street system.
(1) Conformance with adopted plans. The proposed street pattern shall
be properly regulated to existing streets, to the Township plan of
streets and to such county and state road and highway plans as
have been duly adopted by that agency.
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. 151, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. IV.
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 66101 et seq.
§ 154-17 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-18
151:340
(2) Arrangement. Streets shall be arranged in a manner to meet with
the approval of the governing body, considered in relation to both
existing and planned streets, and located so as to allow proper
development of surrounding properties. Secondary and through
highways shall be connected with such existing streets and
highways so as to form continuations thereof. Residential streets
shall be laid out to discourage their use as secondary streets or
through highways.
(3) Conformity with topography. Streets shall be adjusted to the
contour of the land so as to produce usable lots and streets of
reasonable grade, alignment and drainage.
(4) Grading. The street shall be graded to the full width of the right-ofway
and provision made for slopes beyond the right-of-way, in
conformance with municipal specifications.
(5) Provisions of streets for future development. Access shall be given
to all lots and portions of the tract in the subdivision and to
adjacent unsubdivided territory. Streets giving such access shall be
improved to the limits of the subdivision when required by the
Township. Remnants, reserve strips and landlocked areas shall not
be created. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(6) New streets. New streets shall be laid out to continue existing
streets at equal or greater right-of-way and cartway widths, where
practical.
(7) Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets are prohibited, unless designed
as culs-de-sac or designed for access exclusively to neighboring
tracts.
(8) Street names. Continuations of existing streets shall be known by
the same name. Names for new streets shall not duplicate or
closely resemble names of existing streets. All street names are
subject to the approval of the Township Planning Commission and
governing body.
(9) Half street. The dedication of half streets at the edges of a new
subdivision is prohibited. If circumstances render this
impracticable, adequate provision for the concurrent dedication of
the remaining half of the street must be furnished by the
subdivider, developer or builder. When there exits a half street in
an adjoining subdivision, the remaining half shall be provided by
the proposed development.
B. Street alignment.
(1) Sight distance on horizontal and vertical curves. Proper sight
distance should be provided with respect to both horizontal and
vertical alignments. Measured along the center line, this should be
800 feet for primary roads, 400 feet for secondary roads and 200
§ 154-18 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-18
151:341
feet for local residential streets, measured at the center line and at
the driver's eye height of four feet.
(2) Horizontal curves shall be used at all changes in excess of 2°. Long
radius curves shall be used rather than a series of curves
connected by short tangents. Minimum radius curves at the end of
long tangents will not be approved. Flatter or longer curves shall
be used when required by the Township. [Amended 1-15-1990 by
Ord. No. 296]
(a) Curvature. The minimum radius at the center line for
horizontal curves on primary streets shall be 300 feet; for
secondary streets, 200 feet; and for all other streets, 150 feet.
(b) Tangents between curves. For all streets there shall be a
tangent of at least 100 feet, measured at the center line
between reverse curves. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No.
296]
(3) Vertical curves. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(a) Vertical curves shall be used at changes in grade of 1% or
more. The minimum length of vertical curves for each 1% of
change in grade shall be as follows:
[1] Controlled access streets: 150 feet.
[2] Collector streets: 50 feet.
[3] Residential streets: 25 feet.
[4] Within 150 feet of the intersection (stop condition): 10
feet.
(b) Crest and sag vertical curves shall not produce excessive
flatness in grade. The minimum vertical curve factors shown
above shall be used.
(4) Street grades.
(a) There shall be a minimum grade of at least 1% on all streets.
(b) Maximum grades. There shall be maximum grade of 7% on
primary and secondary streets and 10% on all other streets for
distances of not more than 1,500 feet. However, grades in
excess of 5% shall be avoided wherever possible. The grade
shall be measured along the center line.
(c) Curve-grade combinations. A combination of minimum radius
horizontal curves and maximum grades will not be approved.
(d) Street intersections. The grade within 50 feet of any side of an
intersection or the outer perimeter of a cul-de-sac shall not
§ 154-18 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-18
151:342
exceed 3%. The grade will be measured along the curbline of
the street.
(e) Street grading. All streets shall be graded to the grades shown
on the street profile and cross-section plan submitted and
approved with the preliminary plan of subdivision and land
development. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(f) The pavement cross slope shall be 1/4 inch (0.021 foot) per
foot. Superelevation shall not be used on any residential roads
unless required by the Township Engineer. [Added 6-2-2008
by Ord. No. 490]
C. Roadway classifications. All roads within the Township, either public or
private, shall be classified as one of the following: limited-access,
controlled-access, semicontrolled-access, collector, feeder, residential
or village roads. These roadway classifications have been shown on the
Township Ultimate Right-of-Way Map.86 [Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord.
No. 232; 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(1) Limited-access, controlled-access and semicontrolled-access roads
are roads under the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or the federal government. As such, the roadway
width will be established by their criteria and approval. The
ultimate right-of-way width shall be established as shown on the
Township Ultimate Right-of-Way Map.
(2) Collector roads. These roads are designed to serve as connections
between feeder roads and residential roads to other feeder roads,
community facilities and major highways with medium traffic
volume. Additionally, collector roads may also serve business or
industrial areas. This type of road shall have a minimum right-ofway
width of 80 feet and a minimum pavement width of 40 feet.
(3) Feeder roads. These roads shall be used as connecting and through
roads to serve residential areas and to connect residential streets
to collector roads and community facilities with light traffic
volumes. This type of road shall have minimum widths of right-ofway
of 60 feet and minimum pavement widths of 38 feet.
(4) Residential roads. These roads shall be used to serve residential
areas. They shall have minimum right-of-way widths of 50 feet and
pavement widths of 32 feet.
(5) Village roads. These roads shall be used in the densely populated
village areas. These roads only apply to the existing village roads,
and the extensions or new roads shall comply with residential road
criteria. The Township retains the right to require the widening of
any existing roads and the offer of dedication of additional rightsof-
way as it deems necessary.
86.Editor's Note: See Ch. 151, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. IV.
§ 154-18 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-18
151:343
D. Other roadway types. The following roads may be used in various
locations throughout the Township to fulfill roadway design needs:
[Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 232; 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 266;
1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(1) Marginal-access roads. These roads shall be used as minor roads to
serve adjacent properties which have roadway frontage along
limited-access, controlled-access and semicontrolled-access roads.
This type of roadway runs parallel with and adjacent to the limitedaccess
roadway and serves to reduce the number of roadway
access points to the major roads. These roads shall have minimum
right-of-way widths of 50 feet and minimum pavement widths of 32
feet.
(2) Cul-de-sac streets shall be those streets with one end open for
vehicular access and the other terminating in a vehicular
turnaround. All culs-de-sac, whether considered permanent (serve
only the tract to be developed) or temporary (terminated at an
adjacent property line), shall be designed under the following
criteria:
(a) No cul-de-sac shall be approved when a through street is
possible for the tract under consideration. All culs-de-sac must
be approved by the Supervisors, with the Township reserving
the right to reject any and all culs-de-sac proposed. The
following items shall be used in determining the necessity of
the cul-de-sac:
[1] Adverse topography such as a steep terrain, floodplain,
streams, etc.
[2] The shape of the tract does not lend itself to a through
street.
(b) At the request of the Township, the developer shall provide
roadway access to adjacent parcels of land. The Township also
reserves the right to accept or reject any cul-de-sac which is
placed adjacent to an adjoining property line at the request of
the developer. All temporary culs-de-sac must provide
sufficient data to prove the feasibility of such road extension
onto other lands.
(c) All culs-de-sac shall be constructed to the same street and
right-of-way widths and construction improvement
specifications as they relate to the intensity of land use in
which they exist.
(d) Cul-de-sac streets shall have a minimum right-of-way of 50
feet, and additional width shall be provided when required by
the Township. The turnaround at the end of the cul-de-sac shall
have a pavement/curb radius of 50 feet and a right-of-way
radius of 60 feet. The turnaround radius shall be centered on
§ 154-18 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-18
151:344
the proposed road center line. A permanent turnaround may
be provided by the developer with a center island minimum
radius of 78 feet and an outer pavement/curb minimum radius
of 100 feet. The road width may be reduced as the radius is
increased, upon approval by the Township. Maintenance of this
island shall be as required by the Township, and the record
plan and the deed of each lot abutting the turnaround shall
note such requirements. The turnaround shall be posted for
one-way operation, and no parking shall be allowed on the
turnaround.
(e) The length of culs-de-sac shall not be more than 600 feet from
the near right-of-way line of the intersecting street to the back
of the right-of-way of the turnaround unless approved by the
Board of Supervisors. The developer must provide justification
for lengths longer than 600 feet.
(f) A cul-de-sac street shall be at least 300 feet in length from the
right-of-way of the near side of the intersecting street to the
farthermost right-of-way of the cul-de-sac turnaround.
(g) Driveways on cul-de-sac streets shall be located, designed and
constructed in such a manner as to not interfere or be
inconsistent with design, maintenance, and drainage of the culde-
sac street. Drive access points in the turnaround area shall
also be combined along property lines when required by the
Township. No more than two drives may be combined at any
one access point. [Amended 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
(h) The Township may request the developer to provide a
permanent easement for snow removal from the turnaround
area of the cul-de-sac. The location of this easement shall be
provided by the Township. The easement shall have a minimum
length along the right-of-way line of 40 feet and a depth of 15
feet. When curbing is required, a curb depression shall also be
placed in this easement area. No shrubbery, fence, mailbox or
any other obstruction shall be placed within the easement to
hinder the placement of the snow.
(i) Existing temporary culs-de-sac and rights-of-way located on
adjacent parcels, whether open (improved) or not, shall be
used by the developer to tie in their proposed roadway system.
It shall be the responsibility of the developer to complete all
roadway improvements at his expense within the existing
rights-of-way of adjacent parcels to service his tract.
(j) All subdivisions which contain unimproved street rights-of-way
for future extension onto adjacent property shall dedicate such
areas to the Township along with other roadway dedications.
The record plan and adjacent lots shall note that this area has
§ 154-18 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-18
151:345
been set aside for future road extension and that the area shall
remain only in a grass cover until needed by the Township.
(k) A note shall appear on the record plan which indicates that the
temporary culs-de-sac and improved street rights-of-way to the
adjacent property shown on the plan may be extended as
through streets when the adjacent property is developed.
(3) Alleys. Alleys are prohibited in residential developments. In
commercial or industrial districts without expressly designed
loading areas, alleys with a minimum width of 25 feet shall be
required. Where such alleys dead-end, they shall be provided with a
turnaround having a radius of not less than 25 feet The cartway
shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
(a) Paving. The paving requirements shall be the same as for
street paving.
(b) Intersections of right-of-way lines shall be rounded by a
tangential arc, the minimum radius of which shall be 10 feet,
and the edge of the paving at intersections shall be rounded by
a tangential arc, the minimum radius of which shall be 15 feet.
(c) Obstructions. No fences, hedges, trees, shrubbery, walls,
plantings or other obstructions shall be located within the
right-of-way. Reasonable sight distance shall be provided at
intersections with streets.
E. Street width. The following general standards shall apply to street
widths:
(1) The minimum widths of the right-of-way and paving and the
requirements for curbing shall not be less than those of an existing
street of which the new street is to be a continuation, nor less than
as required above under classification.
(2) The minimum right-of-way width for development along existing
streets shall correspond with the ultimate right-of-way for these
streets, as defined on the Township Ultimate Right-of-Way Map.87
(3) The area between an existing right-of-way line and the ultimate
right-of-way line should be offered for dedication to the authority
having jurisdiction over the road when land is subdivided or
developed along an existing right-of-way.
(4) Islands, medial strips and channelization may be required in any
area where traffic volumes warrant their use for safety and
efficiency and may be permitted in any area at the discretion of the
Board of Supervisors. Such devices on state roads must meet or
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 151, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. IV.
§ 154-18 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-18
151:346
exceed the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(5) Additional width requirements. Additional widths may be required
by the Township:
(a) Where necessary for public safety and convenience.
(b) For parking in commercial or industrial areas.
(c) Where old roads do not provide the proper width and
additional dedication is necessary.
(d) Where necessary at approaches to major intersections or at
approaches to interchanges of the Route 422 Expressway.
[Added 7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 364]
(6) No fences, hedges, trees, shrubbery, walls, plantings or other
obstructions shall be located or be permitted within the right-ofway,
except for ground covers such as grass, ivy, crown vetch or
horizontally spreading shrubs less than one foot high or retaining
walls necessitated by road widening and constructed by the
authority having jurisdiction over the road.
F. Street construction. All street construction must conform to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications, Publication
408, latest edition, and/or the Upper Providence Engineering and
Construction Standards and Improvement Procedures, latest edition,
whichever is more restrictive. All construction must be approved by the
Township Engineer prior to acceptance by the governing body. All
grades, horizontal and vertical curves, intersections, sight distances
and tangents shall conform to the requirements established by this
chapter and shall be subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
[Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 232; 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296;
6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
G. Street intersections.
(1) Number of intersections. No more than two streets shall cross at
the same point. Four-way intersections are to be avoided in the
layout when three-way or T intersections can be utilized. When
existing streets intersect at odd angles or have more than four
approaches, the subdivider, developer or builder shall be required
to make corrective changes to eliminate the odd angle or reduce
the number of approaches to the intersection by curing the lesser
street.
(2) Minimum angle of intersection. Right angle of intersections shall
be used whenever practicable, especially when local streets empty
into major or secondary streets; there shall be no intersection
angle, measured at the center line, of less than a 60° minimum.
§ 154-18 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-18
151:347
(3) Center line. Where center lines of residential or secondary streets
open into opposite sides of a major street within 100 feet of each
other, they shall be made to coincide by curving the minor street or
streets.
(4) Primary thoroughfare. Wherever practicable, intersections with
through highways shall be kept to a minimum and shall be located
at least 800 feet apart.
(5) Sight triangles. No building, trees, hedge, shrubbery, or other
obstruction whatsoever will be permitted in the sight triangles
defined below. Any obstruction to sight triangles shall be removed
at the time a building or structure is erected, whichever shall first
occur. [Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 232; 6-2-2008 by Ord.
No. 490; 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
(a) A road defined as a collector or arterial within the Upper
Providence Township Ultimate Right-of-Way Map, and any
multi-lane intersection approach, shall have a minimum clearsight
triangle of 125 feet, measured along the center line from
the point of the intersection.
(b) Any other road not classified as a collector or arterial as
defined within the Upper Providence Township Ultimate Rightof-
Way Map shall have a minimum clear-sight triangle of 75
feet, measured along the center line from the point of the
intersection.
(c) Driveway and intersection sight distances shall conform to the
currently accepted Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
standard.
(6) Maximum grade. The maximum grade within any intersection shall
not exceed 4%, and approaches to an intersection shall follow a
straight horizontal course for 100 feet. [Amended 6-2-2008 by
Ord. No. 490]
(7) Approach grades. All approaches to an intersection shall not
exceed 4% for a distance of 50 feet, measured from the nearest
pavement edge of the intersecting street. [Amended 6-2-2008 by
Ord. No. 490]
(8) Radii of pavement and right-of-way at intersections. Street
intersections shall be rounded with tangential arcs at pavement
edge (curbline) and right-of-way lines as listed below. Where two
streets of different right-of-way widths intersect, the radii of
curvature for the widest street shall apply. When possible, the radii
for the right-of-way line and the curbline should be concentric with
each other. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
§ 154-18 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-18
151:348
§ 154-19. Driveways.
Type of Street
Minimum Radius
of Arc at
Intersection of
Pavement Edge or
Curbline
(feet)
Minimum Radius of
Arc at Intersection
of Right-of-Way
Line
(feet)
Primary 40 (or more as may
be required)
20
Secondary 30 20
Residential 25 15
Rural 25 15
Cul-de-sac 25 15
Marginal-access 25 15
(9) Streets and driveway intersections. The general design criteria for
the access of all driveways and streets to a Township road with
respect to locations, sight distances, angle of approach,
maintenance, restoration of damaged areas and general conditions
shall be in conformance with PennDOT Title 67, Chapter 441,
Access to and Occupancy of Highways by Driveways and Local
Roads, latest edition. [Added 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
A. Location and design.
(1) Location. Driveways shall be so located as to provide a reasonable
sight distance at intersections with streets. A stopping area
measured 20 feet behind the right-of-way line shall be provided, not
to exceed a grade of 4%.
(2) Intersections. Driveways shall be located not less than 40 feet from
the street intersection and shall provide access to the street of a
lesser classification when there are streets of different classes
involved.
(3) Pavement widths and grades. Driveway paving widths and grades
shall be as follows: [Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 232]
§ 154-18 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-19
151:349
Land Use
Minimum
Paving
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Radius at
Curb
(feet)
Maximum
Grade
(percent)
Single-family
residential
10 5 12
Multifamily
residential
12 (1-way) 24
(2-way)
10
10
10
10
Commercial and
industrial
12 (1-way) 24
(2-way)
15
15
7
7
(4) When curbing is used, two feet shall be added to the width of
pavement. Multifamily residential land use shall include the
definition provided in Chapter 182, Zoning, and the driveway
service to two or more lots. [Added 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(5) All driveways shall be located, designed, and constructed in such a
manner as not to interfere or be inconsistent with the design,
maintenance, and drainage of the highway. Additionally,
nonresidential driveway intersections with adjacent roadways will
be considered streets and must meet the intersection requirements
as stipulated herein. [Amended 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
(6) Access driveways should be located in such a manner that they will
not cause the following:
(a) Interference to the traveling public.
(b) A hazard to the free movement of normal highway traffic.
(c) Areas of undue traffic congestion on the highway.
(7) Frontages of 100 feet or less shall be limited to one driveway.
Normally, not more than two driveways need to be provided to any
single property tract or business establishment. Exceptions may be
made where the frontage exceeds 300 feet in length.
(8) Where subdivision or land development will allow or require a
series of driveway intersections with primary or secondary streets
only 200 feet apart or less, a marginal-access street should be used;
however, the Board of Supervisors shall have discretion if in its
opinion hazards exist to require a marginal-access street for
driveways more than 200 feet apart.
(9) The Board of Supervisors shall have the authority to approve
driveways intended for the use of two or more families, apartment
developments and commercial and industrial projects where usage
by the occupants constitutes essentially a private street. Driveways
constituting private streets are those accessways used by two or
§ 154-19 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-19
151:350
more families daily or 10 or more workers daily for vehicular
circulation. Driveways serving as private streets shall not be
dedicated to the municipality, nor does the municipality assume any
responsibility for their maintenance.
(10) Private streets. The location and placement of driveways serving as
private streets shall comply with Subsection A(1) and (2) of this
section. Additionally, provisions for drainage and stormwater runoff
shall be approved by the Township Engineer. The Board of
Supervisors shall evaluate the location, placement and alignment
of driveways serving as private streets based upon the ease of
accessibility to and efficient maneuverability through the
development for the protective service of fire and police.
[Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
(a) Construction. Construction of driveways to be used as private
streets shall conform to the pavement structure of the
applicable use as required for public streets: residential,
commercial or industrial. Curbing shall be required.
(b) Maintenance. The owner and all successors of any property
which is to abut any driveway serving as a private street shall
be fully responsible for the permanent improvements of the
driveway(s) and for the maintenance thereof in a good and safe
condition and enter into a written agreement requiring the
same.
(c) Design. The private street design shall be based on a twentyfive-
mile-per-hour vehicle speed.88
B. Construction. All driveway construction must conform to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications, Publication
408, latest edition, and/or the Upper Providence Township Engineering
and Construction Standards and Improvements Procedures, latest
edition, whichever is more restrictive. [Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord.
No. 232; 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296; 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
(1) Streets and driveway intersections. The general design criteria for
the access of all driveways, private and new streets to a Township
road with respect to locations, sight distances, angle of approach,
maintenance, restoration of damaged areas and general conditions
shall be in conformance with PennDOT Tide 67, Chapter 441,
Access to and Occupancy of Highways by Driveways and Local
Roads.
(2) The owner and all successors of any property which is to abut any
driveway serving as a private street shall be fully responsible for
88.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(11), concerning Board of Supervisors evaluation of
driveways, serving as private streets, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 6-2-2008 by Ord No. 490. See now Subsection A(10).
§ 154-19 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-19
151:351
§ 154-20. Parking areas.
the permanent improvement of the driveway(s) and for the
maintenance thereof in a good and safe condition.
(3) Driveways for single-family dwellings shall be constructed of either
six-inch depth crushed stone or two-inch depth ID-2 on four-inch
crushed stone.
C. Driveway apron. The sloped portion of the driveway apron on all new
construction shall extend from the street side edge of the sidewalk to
the inside face of the depressed curb. [Added 6-2-2008 by Ord. No.
490]
(1) Construction. All driveway apron construction must conform to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications,
Publication 408, latest edition, and/or the Upper Providence
Township Engineering and Construction Standards and
Improvements Procedures, latest edition, whichever is more
restrictive.
A. Automobile parking facilities shall be provided off-street in accordance
with requirements of Chapter 182, Zoning, and this chapter.
B. At no time shall angle or perpendicular parking along the curbs of local,
public or private access roads or streets be permitted. All parking lots
and bays allowing any parking other than parallel shall be physically
separated from the cartway by a minimum of seven feet and confined by
barrier curbing.
C. No one area for off-street parking of motor vehicles in residential areas
shall exceed 36 cars in capacity. Separate parking areas on a parcel
shall be physically separated from one another by ten-foot planting
strips.
D. No less than 20 feet of open space shall be provided between the
curbline of any parking area and the outside wall of the dwelling unit in
residential areas.
E. Parking may be permitted within side and/or rear yards when the side
and/or rear yards abut a district zoned industrial and/or commercial.
However, no parking shall be permitted within five feet of a side or rear
property line unless formal arrangements satisfactory to the Township
have been made for the establishment of common parking facilities.
F. In commercial and industrial districts, the provision of common parking
facilities is hereby encouraged in recognition of their increased
flexibility and efficiency. Subject to the formal arrangements between
the proposed users of the common parking facilities, satisfactory to the
Township, the Zoning Hearing Board may reduce the aggregate amount
of required parking space upon determination that greater efficiency is
affected by the joint use of the common parking area. When common
§ 154-19 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-20
151:352
parking facilities are approved, side and/or rear yard parking
requirements may be waived in order to establish unified and
continuous parking areas. In such cases, access drives and sidewalks
shall be so aligned as to maximize parking efficiency and minimize
traffic congestion. Entrances and exits must have good visibility so that,
both going in and coming out, drivers can see and cars can be seen.
G. All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient backup
area for the end stalls.
H. No less than a five-foot radius of curvature shall be permitted for all
curbline in all parking areas.
I. Parking lot dimensions shall be no less than those listed in the following
table: [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 29689]
Parking Stall Aisle Width
Angle of
Parking
Depth
(feet)
Width
(feet)
1-Way
(feet)
2-Way
(feet)
90° 18 9 25 25
60° 19 9* 18 --
45° 17 9* 15 --
*NOTE: Width is measured perpendicular to the side lines.
J. (Reserved)90
K. In any instance in which parallel parking spaces are permitted in offstreet
parking facilities pursuant to an approved subdivision or land
development plan, each such space shall be a minimum of nine feet by
22 feet in size. [Added 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
L. In order to reduce runoff and/or provide more landscaped area, the
length of parking spaces within a parking lot, excluding parallel parking
spaces, may be reduced to 16 feet where an overhang area of grass or
other pervious material is installed. Such area shall not be less than two
feet in depth for each parking space and shall be separated from the
paved area by a curb stop. Allowance for said reduction in parking
space length shall be at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission and Township Engineer,
and shall be in addition to any required landscaped area/green space
required in the parking lot by this chapter and/or Chapter 182, Zoning.
[Added 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
M. Parking areas shall be constructed of two-and-one-half-inch depth ID-2
or six-inch depth crushed aggregate base course, in accordance with
89.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Section 403.7, Parking stall
dimensions, as amended 12-2-1985 by Ord. No. 254.
90.Editor's Note: Former Subsection J was redesignated as Subsection M 12-16-1991 by Ord.
No. 307.
§ 154-20 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-20
151:353
§ 154-21. Sidewalk design and construction. [Amended 1-15-1990
by Ord. No. 296; 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation requirements. [Added
9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 232; amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No.
307]
A. Where required.
(1) Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of all streets
excepting where, in the opinion of the governing body, they are
unnecessary for the public safety and convenience.
(2) In land development with common areas, sidewalks should be
located appropriately to serve as accesses between parking areas
and buildings and in common areas to serve as internal site
circulation.
(3) Handicapped ramps shall be constructed at all roadway
intersections and at other locations designated by the Township.
B. Design standards.
(1) Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet wide or as shown on the
approved plan. A greater width may be required in areas in which
apartments or business buildings are located or deemed necessary
at the discretion of Board of Supervisors.
(2) Location. On public streets, sidewalks shall be located behind the
curbline a minimum distance of 4 1/2 feet for residential roads and
five feet for all other roads. The grade of the sidewalk shall be
continuous across driveways except in certain cases where heavy
traffic volume dictates special treatment.
C. Crosswalks. Crosswalks shall be not less than six feet wide and with
concrete ADA ramps not less than four feet wide where necessary. They
shall be maintained by the abutting property owners in the same
manner as sidewalks on public streets.
D. Construction methods. All sidewalk construction must conform to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications, Publication
408, latest edition, and the Upper Providence Township Engineering
and Construction Standards and Improvement Procedures, latest
edition, whichever is more restrictive.
E. Curb ramps. Curb ramps required to comply with the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act for accessible path construction must be
installed at all intersections and elsewhere when required by the Board
of Supervisors. All accessible features must be constructed in
accordance with ANSI Standard Al17.1-2003 or its state-approved
replacement standard.
§ 154-20 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-21
151:354
§ 154-22. Curbs. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296; 6-2-2008 by
Ord. No. 490 ]
§ 154-23. Blocks.
F. Trail construction methods. All trail construction must conform to the
Upper Providence Township Engineering and Construction Standards
and Improvement Procedures, latest edition. [Added 8-1-2011 by
Ord. No. 517]
A. Where required. Concrete curbs shall be installed along each side of all
new and widened roads.
B. Belgian block curbing. Belgian block curbing is allowed only by waiver
from the Board of Supervisors and shall be designed and constructed
according to the Upper Providence Township Engineering and
Construction Standards and Improvements Procedures, latest edition.
C. The Board of Supervisors may waive the curbing requirement if the
developer can prove to the Township that a proposed system of welldesigned
swales can perform the drainage function comparable to a
system of curbs and inlets and that the appearance and functioning of
the roadway and parking lot system shall not be impaired by the lack of
curbing.
D. Construction. All curb construction must conform to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Specifications, Publication 408, latest
edition, and/or the Upper Providence Township Engineering and
Construction Standards and Improvements Procedures, latest edition,
whichever is more restrictive.
A. Length. In general, all blocks in a subdivision shall have a minimum
length of 500 feet and a maximum length of 1,200 feet unless special
conditions warrant a variance.
B. Width.
(1) Whenever practicable, blocks shall be of such width as to provide
two tiers of lots of the minimum size permitted under the
applicable zoning classification, except in the case of lots along a
major thoroughfare where the lot fronts on an interior street.
(2) Through lots. Double-frontage lots are to be avoided and generally
will not be permitted except where reversed frontage is desired
away from a major thoroughfare to a street of a lesser traffic
volume.
C. Variations. Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from
the elements of design contained in this section if the nature of the use
requires other treatment. In such cases, off-street parking for
employees and customers will be required along with safe and
convenient limited access to the street system. Space for off-street
§ 154-21 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-23
151:355
§ 154-24. Lots.
loading will also be required with similar access. The extension of
streets, railroad access rights-of-way and utilities shall be provided. The
amount of parking space shall be as required by Chapter 182, Zoning.
A. Area. All lots shall be no smaller than the minimum lot area
requirements of the applicable zoning classification.
B. Depth. Lots excessively deep in relation to width are to be avoided. A
proportion of 2 1/2:1 is generally regarded as the proper maximum for
lots 60 feet or more in width.
C. Width. The minimum width of a lot shall be that width specified for the
applicable zoning district and which is measured along the building
setback line. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
D. Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a minimum lot width of the width
required for the applicable zoning district, plus the front yard
dimension along all roads. This requirement does not apply to lots
which have a minimum lot area of 40,000 square feet or larger.
[Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
E. Frontage. The frontage shall not be less than the minimum
requirements of Chapter 182, Zoning, except that on the outside of
curved residential streets and on the turnaround of culs-de-sac, a
minimum frontage of 50 feet may be acceptable, provided that proper
lot width is attained at the building setback lines.
F. Side lines. Whenever practicable, the side lines of a lot shall be set at
right angles or radial to the right-of-way line for the full length of the
side lines. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
G. Building lines. Building lines for all lots shall be in conformance with
the minimum front, side and rear yard line requirements of the
applicable zoning district.
H. Lot numbers. For the purpose of development, each subdivision may
have an overall system of lot numbers, the number one being assigned
to a lot in the first section to be developed. (Such system of lot numbers
shall not be confused with the regular house or building numbering
system based on a Township-wide plan.91)
I. Building numbers. House or building numbers shall be assigned by the
municipality based on an overall street plan. Numbers will be assigned
in such a way as to allow for vacant parcels and future developments.
J. Rear lots. When rear lots are utilized in any subdivision, the following
requirements shall apply: [Added 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
91.Editor's Note: See Ch. 64, Buildings, Numbering of.
§ 154-23 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-24
151:356
(1) The lengths of the access strip shall be no longer than 300 feet
from the ultimate right-of-way of the frontage road.
(2) There shall be no bend in the access strip greater than 45°.
(3) No more than two rear lots shall be allowed adjacent to each other.
In such instances, the access strips shall abut each other unless the
applicant can demonstrate that there is a natural or design
constraint dictating otherwise. In instances where the access strips
for two rear lots abut each other, the Board of Supervisors may
require that they share a common access point when such is
warranted for protection of the traveling public's health and safety,
due to circumstances such as, but not limited to, inadequate sight
distance, poor vertical and/or horizontal alignment and high traffic
volumes on the intersecting roadway. In making such a
determination, the Board of Supervisors shall obtain the
recommendations of the Township Planning Commission and
Township Engineer. When a common access point is required, a
common driveway shall also be required, from the edge of the
pavement to a point 50 feet beyond the ultimate right-of-way line,
and from that point either one common driveway can continue or
two individual driveways may be used. At a minimum, the required
length of a common driveway shall be paved in accordance with
§ 154-19B(3) of this chapter. For the entire length of any common
driveway, legal guaranties and cross easements shall be recorded,
assuring perpetual maintenance and right of passage by both
parties. Said guaranties and cross easements shall be as approved
by the Township Solicitor.
(4) Construction easements shall be provided along the access strips
on adjacent parcels when it is determined by design that such
easements would be required.
(5) When a rear lot is subdividable, the Board of Supervisors, at the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall require a
roadway profile through the entire length of the access strip. Said
profile shall be in accordance with the requirements for a
residential road contained in this chapter.
(a) A legal guaranty, to the satisfaction of the Township Solicitor,
shall be provided to assure the future construction of said road
and to indemnify the Township of any financial liability for
installation of the road. Said road shall be constructed or
financially guaranteed by the applicant at the time
construction is necessitated.
(b) An overall tentative sketch plan shall be submitted as part of
the original subdivision submission to show how the proposed
rear lotting forms a logical and appropriate first phase in the
subdivision of the entire tract and/or how it will allow
interconnection with adjacent tracts.
§ 154-24 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-24
151:357
§ 154-24.1. Reverse-frontage lot requirements. [Added 8-7-1995 by
Ord. No. 344]
(c) When the road is constructed, any access strips or portions
thereof which are no longer needed shall revert to the owners
of the abutting lots, in accordance with the conditions of
approval for the preliminary plan which created the access
strips.
(d) In any instance in which two abutting rear lots are created in
which either one or both are capable of further subdivision, the
requirements of this section are applicable. The roadway
profile may be located in one access strip or split between the
two strips.
A. Applicability. This section requires visual buffering for reverse-frontage
lots within residential developments containing at least five such lots
which are contiguous to one another, wherein such developments front
on roads of feeder or greater classification, as shown on the Upper
Providence Township Ultimate Right-of-Way Map. It is the intent of this
section to allow for the preservation of the existing rural character of
these roads and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the
residents who live along them. Reverse-frontage lots which are also
corner lots having a side yard abutting a road of lesser classification
shall be included in determining the applicability of this section and
shall be buffered as described herein.
B. Buffer landscape requirements.
(1) Buffer setback area requirement. For any reverse-frontage lot
qualifying under this section, a buffer setback area shall be
provided on the final subdivision plan, in which the buffer shall be
placed. The minimum width of the setback area shall be 25 feet,
measured from the ultimate right-of-way line. The buffer setback
area shall be part of the lot on which it is located and shall be
provided in addition to the required rear yard setback for the
district in which the lot is located. No structures shall be permitted
in the buffer setback area, with the exception of retaining walls and
privacy fences permitted pursuant to Subsection D(2) herein.
(2) General requirements. The developer shall install landscaping in
accordance with the provisions herein in any buffer for reversefrontage
lots which meet the qualifications of Subsection A of this
section. Berming, in accordance with the requirements of
Subsection D herein, shall also be encouraged to be included within
the buffer.
(3) Buffer type. All reverse-frontage lots shall incorporate a Type 2
buffer on the properties bordering the roads of feeder or greater
classification as defined herein. In the case of other required
§ 154-24 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-24.1
151:358
buffers, the widest and/or most opaque buffer will take precedence.
[Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 535]
C. Design standards. The following design standards shall apply to
landscape buffering for reverse-frontage lots:
(1) Where possible, buffer plantings shall meander within the buffer
setback area set aside for the buffer, as required in Subsection B(1)
herein. Straight lines of plant material shall be avoided.
(2) All landscaping to be installed in the buffer shall conform to the
requirements specified in Subsection B of § 154-36, Planting.
[Amended 9-21-1998 by Ord. No. 376]
(3) Existing trees and shrubs should be integrated into the design of
buffers wherever feasible. Section 154-35B, Tree preservation, of
this chapter, shall be enforced for any reverse-frontage buffer when
existing trees are deemed of good health and reasonable character
by a qualified individual, and determined to be appropriate for their
intended use by the Township.
D. Berms. Earthen berms shall conform to the following requirements
when included in the buffer design:
(1) Design standards.
(a) The berms shall conform to the requirements specified in
Subsection D of § 154-36, except that it is recommended that
the length of any berm segment be a maximum of 200 feet;
provided, however, that the length and location of any berm or
berm segment shall be modified if necessary to accommodate
proper stormwater flow and management as prescribed by the
Township Engineer. [Amended 9-21-1998 by Ord. No. 376]
(b) In any design in which a berm is constructed against a
retaining wall, 1/2 of a typical berm section shall be sufficient.
Said arrangement would therefore provide for the high point of
the berm to rest against the wall.
(2) Retaining walls and privacy fences.
(a) When a retaining wall within a berm section is deemed
necessary by the Township Engineer, drainage must be
provided to avoid the collection of water against the wall;
drainage design shall be to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer.
(b) If the individual lot owner places any privacy fencing within the
buffer setback area, landscaping shall be provided within the
buffer setback area on the street side of the fence. Any fencing
for privacy or security shall also comply with § 182-169.1 and
all other applicable requirements of Article XX, Fences, of
Chapter 182, Zoning. [Amended 2-7-2000 by Ord. No. 389]
§ 154-24.1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-24.1
151:359
§ 154-25. Land with existing structures.
No subdivision or land will be approved with the property line extending
through any portion of any existing structure.
E. Landscape plan. For all reverse-frontage lots qualifying Subsection A
herein, a landscape plan shall be prepared for approval by the Township
and shall be submitted with the preliminary plan for the subdivision.
The preparation of said plan shall follow the requirements in
Subsection G of § 154-12. [Amended 9-21-1998 by Ord. No. 376]
F. Maintenance. All efforts shall be made in the planting design to reduce
the maintenance needed for buffer plantings.
(1) Access for maintenance. The following criteria must be provided
for ease in maintenance:
(a) A break in a fence or a gate, either with a minimum width of
three feet, must be provided on each lot on which the owner
has installed a privacy or security fence, to allow access by the
lot owner for maintaining the landscaping within the buffer
area. Any gate must open inward, toward the lot, to allow for
equipment to access the buffer. Gates may be installed on a
property line to allow use by two properties; any required
cross-easements shall be provided.
A. If structure(s) is to remain.
(1) In residential zoning districts of the Township, the lot size and the
lot dimensions of the newly created lot containing the structure(s)
must be in scale with the height and bulk of the structure, even if
this requires a lot area and/or dimensions exceeding the minimum
zoning requirement for that district. Structures proposed on the
vacant portions of lands being subdivided shall conform to the
extent possible to the height, bulk, building material and
architectural character of the existing structures in the immediate
vicinity, and the subdivision plans shall show building plans at
suitable detail.
(2) In other zoning districts of the Township (especially commercial
and industrial districts), the subdivision of the land must provide
adequate service and parking facilities, etc., in keeping with the
minimum requirements of Chapter 182, Zoning, for each lot and
cumulatively for all lots in the subdivision. No subdivision will be
approved in such instances if the servicing and/or parking facilities,
etc., attendant to the existing structure are deemed inadequate or
would be considered to become inadequate with the development
of the now vacant lands. Any new structures contemplated on the
newly subdivided parcels shall be in conformity with the existing
structures in the immediate vicinity to the extent possible in
regards to height, bulk, building material and architectural
§ 154-24.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-25
151:360
§ 154-26. Grading.92
character, and the subdivision plans shall show building plans at
suitable detail.
(3) Alterations and replacements will be permitted within the existing
structure, but exterior extensions of the building must conform to
the requirements of Chapter 182, Zoning.
B. If existing structure(s) is to be removed. Subdivision approval will be
issued "conditional" upon the expeditious removal of existing structures
in complete conformity with all other pertinent Township procedural
requirements. The subdivision plans shall furthermore show in detail
the proposed development of each parcel of ground and the proposed
development shall not provide less service and parking facilities, etc.,
than now exist. In commercial and industrial areas, plots of land that
have been cleared, as well as the existing vacant portions of such lands,
should be developed in conformity with the long-range needs of the
area to the extent possible, and all developmental requirements
embodied in this chapter and Chapter 182, Zoning, shall be adhered to.
If roadway realignments and other similar requirements are deemed
necessary in the immediate vicinity of the plot being subdivided, they
shall be corrected as part of the subdivision design to the utmost of the
subdivider's ability.
C. If existing structure is to be partly replaced or is to be added on to.
Demolition plans and/or construction plans must be detailed as part of
the subdivision plan review, and subsequent subdivision approval will
be conditional upon compliance with said proposed details. Additions to
existing structures shall be in harmony with existing structures in the
immediate vicinity, especially in respect to height, bulk, building
materials and architectural characteristics. In the case of the partial
demolition of existing structures, the remaining structure must be in
keeping with the existing buildings in the immediate vicinity in relation
to type, bulk, building materials and architectural characteristics.
Renovation work to the remaining portion of a structure following
partial demolition must be completed promptly and expeditiously.
A. Excavation and fill. No permanent excavation or fill shall be made with
a face steeper in slope than three horizontal to one vertical, except
under one or more of the following conditions: [Amended 9-20-1982
by Ord. No. 232]
(1) The material in which the excavation or fill is made is sufficiently
stable to sustain a slope of steeper than three horizontal to one
vertical, and a written statement of a civil engineer in erosion
control, to that effect, is submitted to the Township Engineer and
approved by him. The statement shall state that the site has been
92.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 99, Grading, Excavating and Filling.
§ 154-25 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-26
151:361
§ 154-27. Drainage. [Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 232;
1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296; 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307; 6-2-2008 by
Ord. No. 490]
inspected and that the deviation from the slope specified herein
before will not result in injury to persons or damage to property.
(2) A concrete or stone masonry wall constructed according to present
or future designs of the Township of Upper Providence is provided
to support the face of the excavation or fill.
B. Slopes and fences. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a minimum
of three feet from property or right-of-way lines of streets or alleys in
order to permit the normal rounding of the edge without encroaching
on the abutting property. All property lines where walls or slopes are
steeper than one horizontal to one vertical and five feet or more in
height shall be protected by a chain link fence four feet in height
approved by the Township. The fence shall be an integral part of the
wall.
C. Site grading plan. The Township Engineer shall require a grading plan
in conjunction with the plan of subdivision or land development in order
to ensure compliance with the above standards.
D. When the approved grades and finish contours are not consistent with
those shown on the construction drawings, they shall be corrected as
required by the Township. [Added 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296;
amended 7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 364]
A. General. All stormwater management design shall be in accordance
with this chapter, Chapter 150, Stormwater Management, latest
edition, and/or the Upper Providence Township Engineering and
Construction Standards and Improvements Procedures, latest edition,
whichever is more restrictive.
(1) Lots. All lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage away from
all buildings and to allow the collection of stormwater in water
detention basins or other approved locations. A minimum slope of
2% shall be used for directing water away from structures.
(2) Stormwater runoff. Stormwater runoff shall not be increased above
the predevelopment condition. This discharge shall also take into
consideration point discharge from the tract. Stormwater detention
must be provided unless waived by the Township Supervisors upon
recommendation by the Township Planning Commission and the
Township Engineer.
(3) Unnatural drainage. Whenever construction stops or concentrates
the natural flow of storm drainage in such a way as to affect
adjoining properties, approval of the adjacent property owners
should be obtained in writing and a copy filed with the Township.
§ 154-26 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-27
151:362
Approval of plans by the Township does not authorize or sanction
drainage adversely affecting adjoining properties.
(4) Drainage from nonnatural sources. Water originating from other
than natural sources, such as air conditioners, sump pumps or
other dry weather sources, wherever practicable shall be
discharged into natural watercourses on the property. These types
of facilities shall not discharge water under the sidewalk and to the
curbline.
(5) Storm drainage system. The storm drainage system shall be
designed and constructed to adequately control the drainage on
and from the subdivision or land development. The use of pipes,
underdrains, inlets, headwalls, swales, natural drainage channels
or ditches and water detention basins shall be used for such
improvements. Such design and construction shall be approved by
the Township Engineer.
(6) Any development which creates a significant change in the
characteristics of the watershed, thus increasing the volume and
velocity of surface water runoff, shall not be permitted until
methods have been proposed which will reduce the likelihood of
erosion, sedimentation and stormwater drainage. Such
improvements must satisfy the requirements and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
B. Design submission.
(1) All plans showing the proposed storm sewer construction must be
accompanied by one set of storm drainage computations which
includes a drainage area map. The design shall be completed by a
registered engineer.
(2) When subdivisions or land developments are submitted to the
Township for approval in sections, a complete storm sewer design
for the proposed subdivision and land development shall be
submitted. The proposed design must include the entire tract and
not a portion.
(3) If only a section of a subdivision or land development is
contemplated for construction, the engineer shall show how he
proposes to handle stormwater from this section in order to
prevent damage to adjacent properties. If temporary construction
is required, the engineer shall include such structures in the plan
submitted.
(4) In the event that such temporary measures cannot ensure
protection to the adjacent properties, then the main outfall line of
the storm sewer shall be included as part of the construction for the
proposed section.
§ 154-27 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-27
151:363
§ 154-28. Reserve strips, rights-of-way, easements and utility
construction. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
C. The following note shall appear on the record plan whenever
permanent water detention basins are required:
The property owner shall have the responsibility for the perpetual
maintenance of the permanent water detention basin, basin outlet
structures and pipes which are located on his property. No changes
shall be made to the structures, pipes or finish grading without prior
written approval from the Township. The Township has the right to
enter the lot to perform any required maintenance which has not been
properly performed or carried out in a timely manner. The property
owner shall be responsible for the cost of any maintenance which is
performed by the Township. The Township shall lien the property for
said costs until the Township has been reimbursed in full.
A. Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys, subdivisions or
adjacent areas are prohibited.
B. Rights-of-way and easements. Rights-of-way or easements required for
roadway construction and maintenance, sanitary sewer systems, storm
drainage systems, water systems and any other utilities and for any
other specific purpose shall be required by the governing body as
needed, with the location and width in each case to be determined by
the governing body.
(1) The setback shall be 40 feet from all existing and proposed fuel
easements or rights-of-way and 20 feet for all other utilities. The
total setback shall not be less than that required by the applicable
zoning district. The setback shall be 40 feet for existing and
proposed fuel lines and 20 feet for all other utilities. The total
setback shall not be less than that required by the applicable
zoning district.
(2) The placement of any improvements within an easement shall be
regulated by § 182-21.5 of Chapter 182, Zoning. [Amended
10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 476]
(3) The owner of any lot, upon written request by the Township and at
the owner's sole expense, shall remove unauthorized items which
have been placed, planted, set or put (with or without prior
knowledge of this regulation) within the area of any easement.
(4) To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be adjacent to rear
and side lot lines.
(5) Minimum easement widths.
(a) Drainage easements shall be required along natural
watercourses with a minimum width of 50 feet. Such easement
may be used for storm drainage systems, sanitary sewer lines
§ 154-27 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-28
151:364
and open space. Where conditions warrant, such as in
floodplains, additional widths may be required.
(b) A minimum easement width of 25 feet shall be required for all
storm drainage systems and sanitary sewer systems which are
located outside of the public right-of-way and wherever storm
drainage is collected in swales and ditches. An additional five
feet of easement width shall be required for each additional
utility which is placed within the easement area.
(6) Easements required to be obtained by developers shall provide for
the maintenance, repair and replacement of the facilities, including
the right of passage for such work. The Township shall have the
right of review and correction of all easements obtained by
developers from other property owners which shall be turned over
to the Township. The developer shall convey, at no cost to the
Township, all requested easements.
(7) No right-of-way or easement for any purpose whatsoever shall be
recited or described in any deed unless the same has been shown
on the approved record plan. Any error found in a deed shall be
immediately corrected and recorded in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds for Montgomery County at the sole expense of the
subdivider or owner.
C. Public utilities. All water and gas mains and other underground
facilities shall be installed prior to street paving at locations approved
by the Township for the full width of the right-of-way.
D. Underground utilities. All gas and water mains shall be installed
underground. All electric, telephone and communication services, both
main and service lines, shall be provided by underground cables and
installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and practices of
the utility or other company providing such services, except where it is
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Township governing body that
underground installations herein required are not feasible because of
physical conditions of the land involved. All main underground cables
which are within the right-of-way of a street shall be located as
specified by the governing body.
(1) In order to promote and facilitate the undergrounding of utility
distribution lines, a letter of endorsement shall be required from
the suppliers of utility service (not limited to electrical, telephone
or cable television) wherein the utility acknowledges that
underground utilities are feasible and shall be installed as part of
the improvement plan. A statement relative to the intent of the
developer to provide underground utility service shall be placed on
the final plan requisite to final approval of such plan.
(2) The provisions in this chapter shall not be construed as to limit or
interfere with the construction, installation, operation and
maintenance of public utility structures or facilities which may
§ 154-28 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-28
151:365
§ 154-29. Sanitary sewers and on-site sewage disposal.
hereafter be located within public easements or rights-of-way
designated for such purposes.
(3) Light standards are to be placed as required by ordinance. The
power source for such standards shall be placed underground, as
required.
A. Sewers.
(1) Sanitary sewers shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the Upper Providence Township Municipal Authority's Design,
Construction Requirements and Detail Drawings for Wastewater
Facilities, as adopted by resolution and as may be amended from
time to time by resolution of the Upper Providence Township Board
of Supervisors. In areas not presently served by public sanitary
sewers, appropriate sewage disposal must be provided in
accordance with the regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP), and in addition, the installation
and capping of sanitary sewer mains and house connections may be
required if studies by the governing body indicate that the
extension of public sanitary sewer trunks or laterals to serve the
property subdivided appears probable or necessary to protect the
public health. [Amended 11-7-1977 by Ord. No. 196; 6-2-2008
by Ord. No. 490]
(2) Consistency with plan.
(a) When consistent with the Township sewage facilities plan,
sanitary sewers with connection to each building in a
subdivision or land development shall be installed at the
expense of the applicant or subdivider, and connected to the
Township sanitary sewer system.
(b) When not consistent with the Township sewage facilities plan,
the applicant must request a revision to the plan in accordance
with Act 537, the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.93
[Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
(3) If outfall sewers are not available in the vicinity but are considered
reasonably necessary in the near future by the Township for the
area in question, a system of sewers, together with all necessary
laterals extending from mains to the street right-of-way line, shall
be installed at the expense of the subdivider or applicant. The
sewer lines shall be suitably capped at the limits of the subdivision
or land development and the laterals shall be capped at the rightof-
way line. The sewer installation shall include the construction
93.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 154-28 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-29
151:366
within rights-of-way or easements to bring the sewer to the future
connection with the Township sanitary sewer system.
(4) If sanitary sewers are not to be installed at the time of subdivision
and development, subdividers shall grant, reserve and set aside
easements in streets and roads for the installation and
maintenance of sewer lines at such time that the subdivision or
land development shall be a part of the Township sanitary sewer
system.
(5) A sewer shall be considered to be planned for extension to a given
area any time after preliminary engineering and related studies
have been completed and the construction of facilities adequate to
serve the area containing the subdivision has been programmed for
completion within a reasonable time.
(6) When capped sewers are provided, on-site disposal facilities shall
also be provided.
(7) All sanitary sewer lines shall have a minimum inside diameter of
eight inches. The sizing of pipe for a subdivision shall include
adequate capacity for all future upstream development located
within the subdivision's drainage basin. When required by the
Township Engineer, the developer shall also upgrade any existing
portion of the sanitary sewer which the Engineer determines to be
inadequate as a result of the proposed development. [Amended
1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296; 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490 ]
(8) Laterals. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296; 6-2-2008 by
Ord. No. 490]
(a) Lateral connections to each lot shown on the final plan shall be
installed to the right-of-way line of the street prior to paving.
Each building shall have a separate connection to the Township
sanitary sewer system.
(9) Sewage pump stations. Public or private sewage pump stations
shall not be allowed unless authorized by the Township. Also, new
dwellings shall not be designed with the use of private on-lot
package ejector pumps unless approved by the Township Engineer.
[Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296; 6-2-2008 by Ord. No.
490]
(10) Construction details. The developer shall provide all construction
details required by the Township on the construction drawings.
[Added 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296; amended 6-2-2008 by
Ord. No. 490]
(11) Applicability. This section shall be applicable to all subdivisions and
land developments, whether utilizing public or private streets, and
to driveways serving as private streets, and in the case of a
subdivision or land development utilizing private streets, the
§ 154-29 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-29
151:367
subdivider or the applicant shall execute recordable covenant with
the Township and/or Township authority that, for the purposes
of sewer connections, assessments and rentals, the rights and
liabilities of himself and his grantees, heirs, successors and assigns
shall be the same as if his property abutted a public street. All
sanitary sewer construction shall be performed in strict accordance
with the specifications of the Upper Providence Township
Municipal Authority and the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. All construction will be
inspected by a duly authorized representative of the Township
and shall be tested and proven acceptably free of leakage, at
the expense of the applicant or subdivider. Whenever practical,
gravity sewers will be provided without pumping facilities. [Added
1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296; amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No.
490]
(12) The developer or property owner shall consider access of public
sewers to existing dwellings which border his development. This
shall consist of granting permanent sanitary sewer easements and/
or the installation of capped laterals or manholes extended to
streets, rights-of-way or development property lines. [Added
1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296; amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No.
49094]
B. On-lot disposal system. If public sewage is not available and the sewage
treatment is on a project or individual lot basis, such private facilities
must be installed by the subdivider, developer, or building in
accordance with the provisions of Act 537, the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act.95 [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
(1) The usable area for sewage disposal shall be shown on the
preliminary plan for each lot. The usable area shall be situated
beyond the radius of the water supply well and shall conform to all
rules and regulations or future amendments thereto of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, the
Township of Upper Providence, and the Montgomery County
Health Department.
C. The following note shall be placed on the record plan: "The developer or
property owner shall pay to the Township and to the authority which
treats the sewage the current fees for the treatment and collection of
sewage when such facilities are made available to the applicant's site."
[Added 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
94.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Subsection A(13),
Applicability, and (14), concerning access of public sewers to bordering existing dwellings,
added 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296, both of which immediately followed this subsection. See
now Subsection A(11) and (12), respectively.
95.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 154-29 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-30
151:368
§ 154-30. Special drainage problems, flood-prone areas and
watercourses. [Amended 6-26-1978 by Ord. No. 204; 1-15-1990 by
Ord. No. 296]
A. Those areas defined as floodplains by the Floodplain Conservation
District of Chapter 182, Zoning, shall be subject to the requirements
and restrictions contained in Chapter 182, Zoning, and the following
additional regulations which are intended to conform to the
requirements of Section 1910.3d of the National Flood Insurance
Program, P.L. 93-234. It is the purpose of these regulations to:
(1) Regulate the subdivision and development of flood-prone land
areas in order to promote the general health, welfare and safety of
the community.
(2) Require that each subdivision lot or development site in floodprone
areas be provided with a safe building site with adequate
access and that public facilities which serve such sites be designed
and installed to preclude flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
(3) Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for use
because of flood hazards by prohibiting the subdivision and
development of unprotected flood-prone areas.
(4) Maintain the certification of Upper Providence Township and the
eligibility of the property owners in Upper Providence Township for
the benefits of the National Flood Insurance Program, P.L. 93-234.
B. Preapplication procedures for subdivision and land development:
(1) Prospective developers shall consult the Montgomery County
Conservation District representative concerning erosion and
sediment control measures, the effect of geologic conditions on the
proposed subdivision and land development and the potential
impact of the proposed subdivision and land development on
geologic conditions.
(2) Prospective developers shall consult with the Zoning Officer and, if
necessary, the Township Planning Commission to make a
determination as to whether or not the proposed subdivision or
land development will be affected by an identified flood-prone area.
C. The following requirements shall apply for all subdivision and land
developments proposed in Upper Providence Township:
(1) Where the land is located partially or wholly within the floodplain,
the lowest floor elevation and the one-hundred-year-flood elevation
shall be indicated on all final subdivision and land development
plans. This information shall be maintained by the Township.
[Amended 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 356]
§ 154-30 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-30
151:369
(2) The Board of Supervisors may, when it is deemed necessary for the
health, comfort, safety or welfare of the present and future
population of the area and necessary to the conservation of water,
drainage and sanitary facilities, prohibit the subdivision of any
portion of the property which lies within the floodplain of any
stream or drainage course.
(3) In an FA subdistrict of the floodplain, no subdivision or land
development shall be approved if the proposed development or
improvements will, individually or collectively, increase the base
flood elevation more than one foot at any point. [Amended
12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 356]
(4) If the Board of Supervisors determines that only a portion of a
proposed plan can be safety developed, it shall limit development
to that part and shall require that development proceed consistent
with this determination.
(5) When a developer does not intend to develop the plan himself and
the Board of Supervisors determines that additional controls are
required to ensure safe development, it may require the developer
to impose appropriate deed restrictions on the land. Such deed
restrictions shall be inserted in every deed and noted on the record
plan.
D. Where any excavation or grading is proposed or where any existing
trees, shrubs or other vegetative cover will be removed, the developer
shall consult the Montgomery County Conservation District
representative concerning plans for erosion and sediment control and a
report on the soil characteristics of the site in order to determine the
type and magnitude of development the site may safely accommodate.
Before undertaking any excavation or grading, the developer shall
conform to all pertinent laws, regulations and ordinances of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and Upper Providence Township.
E. The finished elevation of proposed streets shall be no more than one
foot below the established flood level or regulatory flood elevation
(where available). Drainage openings shall be sufficient to discharge
flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights. Pervious rather
than impervious materials shall be utilized in the development of any
street, driveway or parking area within a floodplain. The development
of such facilities shall be done according to accepted engineering and
technological practices and in compliance with all applicable provisions
contained in § 154-18 of this chapter. Plans for the development of such
facilities shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for his approval
prior to commencing development. [Amended 12-2-1996 by Ord. No.
356]
F. All sanitary sewer systems located in flood-prone areas, whether public
or private, shall be floodproofed up to a point and 1 1/2 feet above the
established flood level or regulatory flood elevation (where available).
§ 154-30 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-30
151:370
(1) The Board of Supervisors may prohibit installation of sewage
disposal facilities requiring soil absorption systems where such
systems will not function due to high groundwater, flooding or
unsuitable soil characteristics. The Board of Supervisors may
require that the developer note on the plan and in any deed of
conveyance that on-site sewage disposal systems are prohibited in
designated flood-prone areas.
(2) The Board of Supervisors may prescribe adequate methods for
waste disposal. If a public sanitary sewer system is located within
or near the proposed subdivision or land development, the Board of
Supervisors shall require the developer to connect to this system,
where practical, and shall prescribe the procedures to be followed
by the developer in connecting to said system.
G. All water systems in flood-prone areas, whether public or private, shall
be floodproofed to a point 1 1/2 feet above the established flood level or
regulatory flood elevation (where available). If there is an existing
centralized water supply system within or near the subdivision or land
development, the Board of Supervisors shall require the developer to
connect to this system, where practical, and shall prescribe the
procedures to be followed by the developer in connecting to said
system.
H. All other public or private utilities and facilities shall be elevated or
floodproofed to a point 1 1/2 feet above the established flood level or
regulatory flood elevation (where available).
I. All continuously flowing natural watercourses shall be maintained in
their natural state, except that the removal of debris and the correction
of severe erosion shall be required.
J. Intermittent watercourses shall be maintained essentially at their
existing alignments and gradients, except that they may be improved by
minor regrading and shall either be planted in grass or provided with
erosion preventive improvements such as riprap. The paving of such
watercourses shall not be allowed, nor shall piping, except under roads,
driveways and walkways.
K. Intermittent watercourses often are significant elements at the
headwaters of larger streams and are usually small in size. Therefore,
developers should be encouraged to design and build around and with
respect for these drainageways, and the Board of Supervisors may
allow rerouting of these drainageways only when serious
considerations so warrant or when the site drainage will be improved
by such proposed alignment changes.
L. Where a subdivision or land development lies partially or completely in
a flood-prone area or where the subdivision or land development
borders on a flood-prone area, the plan shall include detailed
information identifying the following:
§ 154-30 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-30
151:371
§ 154-31. Public water facilities. [Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No.
212; 10-20-1980 by Ord. No. 220; 10-20-1980 by Ord. No. 221;
1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
(1) The location and elevation of existing and proposed streets, water
supplies and sanitary facilities, building sites, structures, soil types
and proposed floodproofing measures.
(2) Boundaries of the floodplain area and the base flood elevation as
defined in the Floodplain Conservation District of Chapter 182,
Zoning.
M. Waivers. Guidelines for relaxation from the requirements set forth in
this section are as follows:
(1) A waiver shall not be issued within any designated regulatory
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
(2) A waiver shall only be issued if there is:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(b) A determination that failure to relax the requirements would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(c) A determination that the relaxing of a requirement will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense or create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
(3) A waiver shall only be issued upon a determination that the waiver
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
(4) The Township shall:
(a) Maintain a record of all waivers, including justification for
their issuance.
(b) Report such decisions issued in its annual report submitted to
the Federal Insurance Administrator.
A. Whenever a centralized water supply system is provided for a
development, the subdivider shall supply a system capable of producing
adequate and sufficient water pressure to supply domestic water needs
and meet fire emergency demand to each lot in a subdivision,
multifamily complex or commercial or industrial development. The
minimum standard for meeting fire emergency demand shall be as set
forth and required and published by the Insurance Services Office of
Pennsylvania.
§ 154-30 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-31
151:372
B. Where no centralized water service is available and it would be an
undue hardship for the subdivider to install such a system, the
subdivider may, upon approval of the Board of Supervisors, be
permitted to construct a well on each lot for residential and commercial
development, but no closer than 2,000 feet between wells for industrial
development. (This standard may be waived if the Township Engineer
approves the well spacing plan of the applicant.) All nonsystem wells
shall be constructed according to present rules and regulations or any
future amendments thereto of the Department of Environmental
Protection and the Township, except that nonsystem wells located in
proximity to centralized water facilities shall be required to be
constructed to the specifications of the centralized water system in
order to facilitate future interconnection. [Amended 6-2-2008 by
Ord. No. 490]
C. A circular area with a radius conforming to the rules and regulations or
future amendments thereto of the Department of Environmental
Protection and the Township of Upper Providence shall be shown
around each well to denote clear space in which no on-site sewage
system is to be located. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
D. Where centralized water service is furnished, the circles are not
necessary, with the exceptions of those well(s) lying immediately
adjacent to the subdivision. However, the usable area is limited by a
clear zone surrounding the water service line to each house as required
by the Department of Environmental Protection and the Township of
Upper Providence. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
E. Fire hydrants and water mains. Fire hydrants supplied by an eight-inch
or larger main shall be provided in all new subdivisions when public
water is available and in all new townhouses, apartment and other
residential uses, educational institutions, commercial and industrial
developments and other areas, at the direction of the Fire Marshal who
shall consult with the entity supplying the water and an approved rating
bureau before directing such installations. When new streets are
accepted by the Township, all fire hydrants on such streets shall
become public, and thereafter rental charges for the same shall be
borne by the Township.
(1) Fire hydrant specifications shall be as follows:
(a) Five-inch hydrants with two-and-one-half-inch National
Standard male couplings with caps and chains, pitch diameter
2.9820 inches, major diameter 3.0686 inches, minor diameter
two and eight thousand nine hundred fifty-four tenthousandths
inches and 7 1/2 threads to the inch.
(b) One four-and-one-half-inch pumper nozzle with cap and chain,
pitch diameter 5.5985 inches, major diameter 5.7609 inches,
minor diameter 5.4361 inches and four threads to the inch.
(Mueller hydrant, Model No. 107 or equivalent.)
§ 154-31 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-31
151:373
(c) Valve opening sizes: five-inch for three-way hydrants and sixinch
for four-way hydrants. The bell connection to water mains
shall be not less than six inches. The net area of hydrant
barrels shall not be less than 120% of the valve opening. The
hydrant shall have a smooth discharge orifice with a coefficient
of 0.90. Friction loss will not exceed four pounds per square
inch for 1,000 gallons per minute flow. Drain valves shall be
made of noncorrosive material. Operating nut shall be a
uniform size, pentagonal shape measuring 1 1/2 inches from
point to flat. The operating nut on caps will be a uniform size,
pentagonal shape measuring 1 1/2 inches from point to flat.
The hydrant operating nut shall open in a counterclockwise
direction.
(d) All fire hydrants shall be painted according to the following
specifications: [Added 3-16-1998 by Ord. No. 370]
[1] Barrels: fire protection red.
[2] CAPS: gloss white.
[3] Bonnets shall be painted with a Light-reflective paint.
(2) Hydrant spacing and locations.
(a) Residential districts: one hydrant shall be located on each
street intersection with intermediate hydrants between
intersections so located that spacing does not exceed 600 feet,
measured along the roadway.
(b) Hydrants will be located adjacent to paved roadways suitable
for fire apparatus and, where possible, at least 50 feet from any
building. The hydrant shall be not more than 10 feet from the
curbline. Fire hydrants shall not be installed within a fifteenfoot
radius of any obstructions that may impair Fire
Department operations.
(c) The barrel of the fire hydrant shall be set perpendicular to the
ground with the lowest discharge outlet at 15 inches from the
finished grade. Large hydrant outlets should face the street or
road toward the pumper.
(3) Fire hydrants must be installed on a waterline of not less than eight
inches in size.
(4) Waterline sizes and layout. All waterlines shall be large enough to
provide at least 1,500 gallons per minute for fire protection. Also, a
loop system shall be used in all developments. Dead-end lines will
be accepted only upon approval of the Township. A six-inch line
may be installed in lieu of an eight-inch line in isolated cases, when
approved by the Township and water authority. All water main
pipes shall be ductile iron pipe, Class 52, with double thickness
§ 154-31 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-31
151:374
§ 154-32. Erosion and sediment control.
cement lining. Water valves shall be only those approved by the
American Water Works Association.
(5) Water mains, service connections and fire hydrants must be
installed and functioning before any use and occupancy permit is
issued.
A. General.
(1) For qualifying tracts, no changes shall be made in the contour of
the land; no grading, excavating, removal or destruction of the
topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of the land shall be
commenced until such time that a plan for minimizing erosion and
sedimentation has been processed with the Commission or there
has been a determination by the Commission that such plan is not
necessary.
(2) No subdivision or land development plan shall be approved unless:
(a) There has been a plan approved by the Board of Supervisors
that provides for minimizing erosion and sedimentation
consistent with this section and an improvement bond or other
acceptable security is deposited with the Township in the form
of an escrow guaranty which will insure the installation and
completion of the required improvements; or
(b) There has been a determination by the Board of Supervisors
that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation is not
necessary.
(3) The Board of Supervisors in its consideration of any preliminary
plan of subdivision and land development shall condition its
approval upon the execution of measures designed to prevent
accelerated soil erosion and resulting sedimentation, as required
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. All
applicable regulations and permit requirements of said
Department, as stipulated in its Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Manual, shall be followed by all parties engaged in
earthmoving activities. The manual is available at the office of the
Montgomery County Conservation District. [Amended 6-2-2008
by Ord. No. 490]
B. Performance principles. The following measures are effective in
minimizing erosion and sedimentation and shall be included, where
applicable, in the control plan:
(1) The stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall
be done in such a way that will minimize erosion.
§ 154-31 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-32
151:375
(2) Development plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep
cut-fill operations to a minimum and ensure conformity with the
topography so as to create the least erosion potential and
adequately handle the volume and velocity of surface water runoff.
(3) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected
and supplemented.
(4) The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
(5) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
(6) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
(7) The permanent (final) vegetation and structural erosion control and
drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practical in the
development.
(8) Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and
after development. Where necessary, the rate of surface water
runoff will be structurally retarded.
(9) Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed
area is stabilized by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt
traps or similar measures.
C. Grading for drainage. In order to provide more suitable sites for
building and other uses, improve surface drainage and control erosion,
the following requirements shall be met:
(1) All lots, tracts or parcels shall be graded to provide proper
drainage away from buildings and dispose of it without ponding,
and all land within a development shall be graded to drain and
dispose of surface water without ponding, except where approved
by the Board.
(2) All drainage provisions shall be of such design to adequately handle
the surface runoff and carry it to the nearest suitable outlet such as
a curbed street, storm drain, natural watercourse or properly
designed swale. Where drainage swales are used to divert surface
waters away from buildings, they shall be sodded or planted as
required and shall be of such slope, shape and size as to conform to
the requirements of the Township.
(3) Concentrations of surface water runoff shall only be permitted in
properly designed and maintained swales, watercourses or
detention basins.
(4) Excavation and fills.
§ 154-32 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-32
151:376
(a) Cut and fill slopes shall not be steeper than a 3:1 slope unless
compliance is made with § 154-26, Grading. [Amended
9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 232]
(b) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water
from damaging the cut face of excavations of the sloping
surfaces of fills.
(c) Cut and fills shall not endanger enjoining property.
(d) No increased surface runoff will be permitted to leave the
property being subdivided or developed by way of natural
watercourses or storm drainage pipes without first being
suitably retained in such a way as to maintain runoff volume
existing on the site previous to subdivision or development.
(e) Fill shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or
erosion of the soil.
(f) Fills shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed
channels.
(g) Fills placed adjacent to natural watercourses or constructed
channels shall have suitable protection against erosion during
periods of flooding.
(h) Grading will not be done in such a way so as to divert water
onto the property of another landowner without the expressed
consent of the Board.
(i) During grading operations, necessary measures for dust
control will be exercised.
(j) Grading equipment will not be allowed to cross live streams.
Provisions will be made for the installation of culverts or
bridges.
D. Responsibility.
(1) Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation,
regrading or other development, it shall be the responsibility of the
person, corporation or other entity causing such sedimentation to
remove it from all adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and
watercourses and to repair any damage at his expense as quickly as
possible.
(2) The maintenance of all drainage facilities and watercourses within
any subdivision or land development is the responsibility of the
developer until they are accepted by the Township or some other
official agency, after which they become the responsibility of the
accepting agency.
§ 154-32 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-32
151:377
(3) It is the responsibility of any person, corporation or other entity
doing any act on or across a communal stream, watercourse or
swale or upon the floodplain or right-of-way thereof to maintain, as
nearly as possible in its present state, the stream, watercourse,
swale, floodplain or right-of-way during the pendency of the activity
and to return it to its original or equal condition after such activity
is completed.
(4) The maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses originating
and completely on private property is the responsibility of the
owner to their point of open discharge at the property line or at a
communal watercourse within the property.
(5) No person, corporation or other entity shall block, impede the flow
of, alter, construct any structure on or deposit any material or thing
on or commit any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any
communal stream or watercourse without having obtained prior
approval from the Township or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, whichever is applicable. [Amended
6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
(6) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be
provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming
substantially with the line of such watercourse and of such width as
will be adequate to preserve natural drainage.
(7) Each person, corporation or other entity which makes any surface
changes shall be required to:
(a) Collect on-site surface runoff and dispose of it to the point of
discharge into the common natural watercourse of the
drainage area.
(b) Handle existing and potential off-site runoff through his
development by designing to adequately handle storm runoff
from a fully developed area upstream.
(c) Pay his proportionate share of the total cost of off-site
improvements to the common natural watercourse, based on a
fully developed drainage area.
(d) Provide and install at his expense, in accordance with
Township requirements, all drainage and erosion control
improvements, temporary and permanent, as required by the
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook.
E. Compliance with regulations and procedures. [Amended 1-15-1990
by Ord. No. 296]
(1) The Board of Supervisors in its consideration of all preliminary
plans of subdivision and land development shall condition its
§ 154-32 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-32
151:378
§ 154-33. Bridges and culverts.
§ 154-34. Survey markers. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
approval upon the execution of erosion and sediment control
measures as contained in Subsections B, C and D of this section.
(2) The installation and design of the required erosion and sediment
control measures shall be in accordance with the standards and
specifications on file with the Township Engineer.
(3) Final plans for minimizing erosion and sedimentation as approved
will be incorporated into the agreement and bond requirements as
required under Article V of this chapter.
(4) The approval of plans and specifications for the control of erosion
and sedimentation shall be concurrent with the approval of the
final plats of subdivision or land development and become a part
thereof.
(5) At the time that a building permit is applied for, a review shall be
conducted by the Township Engineer to ensure conformance with
the plan as approved. During the construction further consultative
technical assistance will be furnished, if necessary, by the Township
Engineer and the Montgomery County Soil and Water Conservation
District. During this development phase, the Township Engineer
shall inspect the development site and enforce compliance with the
approved plans.
(6) Permission for clearing and grading prior to recording of plats may
be obtained under temporary easements or other conditions
satisfactory to the Township.
(7) In the event that the developer proceeds to clear and grade prior to
recording plats, without satisfying conditions specified under
Subsection E(5), the Board may revoke the approval of the
preliminary plan.
A. Bridges and culverts shall be designed to meet current Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Standards to support expected loads and
to carry expected flows. They shall be constructed to the full width of
the right-of-way.
B. An approval or waiver of permit requirements shall be obtained from
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for all
bridges and culverts placed in existing or relocated streams, regardless
of the drainage area. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296;
6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
C. Where county-owned roads or bridges are involved, the County
Department of Roads and Bridges must review and approve all
proposals.
§ 154-32 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-34
151:379
§ 154-35. Natural or historic feature preservation.
A. Survey markers.
(1) Survey monuments shall be placed on the right-of-way lines at
corners, angle points, the beginning and ends of curves, at all
corners and changes in directions of the boundary of the tract
under development and at other points as required by the
Township. All monuments, existing and proposed, shall be shown
on the record plans. The monuments shall be placed after all
roadway improvements have been completed.
(2) One of the following types of permanent reference monuments
shall be installed by the developer or property owner at all
locations mentioned above:
(a) A concrete monument with minimum dimensions of 20 inches
by four inches square, with forty-five-degree beveled edges.
(b) Solid steel pins with minimum dimensions of 3/4 inch in
diameter and 24 inches in length.
B. Bench marks. The Township elevations are based on the Township
sanitary sewer system datum. The location and elevation is available to
all engineers and surveyors upon request to the Engineer's office. All
contours and elevations shown on plans must be based on this system.
C. Staking requirements. All lots shall be staked by the registered
engineer or surveyor for the subdivider when final grading has been
completed. This stakeout shall be visible and completed before an
owner or occupant moves into the property. All lot corner markers shall
be permanently located and shall be at least a three-fourths-inch metal
pin with a minimum length of 24 inches, located in the ground to
existing grade.
A. Limit of contract. Where the applicant is offering for dedication or is
required by ordinance to establish a reservation of open space or
preserve an area of scenic or historic importance, a limit of contract,
which will confine excavation, earthmoving procedures and other
changes to the landscape, may be required to ensure the preservation
and prevent destruction of the character of the area in open space.
B. Tree preservation. All trees six inches or more in caliper at breast
height should not be removed unless within the proposed right-of-way
line of a street or impracticable for development. The relocation of
noteworthy plant material should be encouraged where retention is
impracticable.
C. Topsoil preservation. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used
as spoil. Topsoil must be removed from the areas of construction and
stored separately. Upon completion of the construction, the topsoil
must be redistributed on the site uniformly. All areas of the site shall be
§ 154-34 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-35
151:380
§ 154-35.1. Preservation of, protection of and transplanting of
existing vegetation. [Added 9-21-1998 by Ord. No. 376]
stabilized by seeding or planting on slopes of less than 10% or more and
planted in ground cover on slopes of 20%, provided that riprap shall be
utilized for banks exceeding 25%.
D. Preserved landscaping. When there is a conscientious effort to preserve
the existing natural integrity and character of a site and where such
preservation includes areas of two woodland and trees comparable to
required planting improvements, i.e., landscaping and buffer screening,
the plan may be received in lieu of additional landscaping
requirements.
A. Preservation of existing vegetation. Each mature tree, tree mass or
woodland on the site shall be designated "TO REMAIN" or "TO BE
REMOVED" in accordance with the following criteria:
(1) All subdivisions and land developments shall be laid out in such a
manner as to minimize the removal of healthy trees and shrubs on
the site. Special consideration shall be given to specimen trees, as
well as those discussed in § 154-35B.
(2) It shall be incumbent on the applicant to prove that vegetation
removal is minimized. If challenged by the Township, the applicant
shall produce evidence, such as written documents or plans
certified by a registered landscape architect or other qualified
professional, showing that no alternative layouts are possible and
that no alternative clearing or grading plan would reduce the loss
of mature trees, tree masses and woodlands.
(3) A mature tree, tree mass or woodland shall be considered "TO
REMAIN" only if it meets all of the following criteria:
(a) The outermost branches of the tree(s) are at least five feet from
any proposed buildings, structures, paving, parking or utilities
(overhead or underground).
(b) The outermost branches of the tree(s) are at least five feet from
any proposed changes in grade or drainage, such as
excavations, mounding or impoundments.
(c) The tree(s) are clear of any proposed sight triangles and do
not, by their location or apparent health, pose any undue
threat to the health, safety and welfare of the community.
(4) Mature trees, tree masses or woodlands that do not fit the above
criteria shall be designated "TO BE REMOVED." These trees will be
removed in the field during the construction process.
B. Protection of existing vegetation. Existing vegetation designated "TO
REMAIN," in accordance with § 154-35.1A(2), as part of the of the
§ 154-35 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-35.1
151:381
§ 154-36. Planting. [Amended 9-21-1998 by Ord. No. 376]
landscaping of a subdivision or land development shall be identified
in the field prior to any clearing and shall be physically protected
throughout the construction process. A temporary physical barrier,
such as a snow fence, shall be erected a minimum of one foot outside
the dripline on all sides of individual trees, tree masses or woodlands
prior to major clearing or construction. The barrier shall be placed to
prevent disturbance to or compaction of soil inside the barrier and shall
remain until construction is complete. The barrier shall be shown on
the landscape plan.
C. Hydrology. Alteration of existing drainage patterns and water supply for
the protected vegetation shall be minimized.
D. Transplanting existing plant material. Specimen trees or individual
trees from woodlands or tree masses designated "TO BE REMOVED"
are encouraged to be transplanted from one area of the site to another.
Transplanted trees must conform to all applicable requirements of
§ 154-36 of this chapter.
A. Lot siting, planting and beautification for subdivisions and land
developments. In order to promote the highest environmental quality
possible, the success to which the applicant of a subdivision or land
development plan has preserved existing salient natural features and
land forms intrinsic to the site shall be assessed. Terms of approval of a
plat may be subject to the manner in which the layout or design or the
plan has preserved existing natural features.
B. Landscaping. For all apartment, commercial and industrial districts, the
developer should incorporate sufficient planting into his design so as to
gain approval of the Township Planning Commission. It should be of a
type recommended by the Planning Commission, including open
spaces, planting strips, screening, formal gardens, shade trees, natural
barriers or other types of acceptable growth. The following standards
shall apply to all landscaping, including landscaping in buffers, general
required landscaping or shade tree installations, as applicable:
(1) The location, dimensions and spacing of required plantings should
be adequate for their proper growth and maintenance, taking into
account the size of such plantings at maturity and their present and
future environmental requirements, such as wind, soil, moisture
and sunlight.
(2) Plantings should be selected and located where they will not
contribute to conditions hazardous to public safety. Such locations
include, but are not limited to, public street rights-of-way,
underground and aboveground utilities and sight triangle areas
required for unobstructed views at street intersections.
§ 154-35.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-36
151:382
(3) All evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five to six feet in height
at planting.
(4) All evergreen and deciduous shrubs shall be a minimum of two to
three feet spread and/or height at planting.
(5) All flowering ornamental trees shall be a minimum of six to eight
feet in height at planting.
(6) All deciduous shade trees shall have a minimum of 2 1/2 inch
caliper at planting.
(7) Provisions shall be made for a replacement guaranty of at least 18
months for all plant material. If material fails to survive during this
period, replacement shall be made at the beginning of the first
successive planting season. All replacements shall have a guaranty
equal to that stated above. A performance bond is required in
accordance with § 154-41, Required improvements.
C. Shade (street) trees.
(1) Shade trees shall be required:
(a) Along all existing streets when they abut or lie with the
proposed subdivision or land development.
(b) Along (both sides of) all proposed streets.
(c) Along access driveways that serve five or more residential
dwelling units.
(d) Along access driveways that serve two or more nonresidential
properties.
(e) Along major walkways through parking lots and between
nonresidential buildings, as recommended by the Planning
Commission.
(2) The shade tree requirement may be waived by the Board of
Supervisors where existing vegetation is considered sufficient to
maintain scenic views of open space, farmland, natural features or
other valued features.
(3) Shade trees shall be located between the ultimate right-of-way line
and the building setback line and shall meet the following
standards:
(a) Trees shall be planted a minimum distance of five feet and a
maximum distance of 15 feet outside the ultimate right-of-way
line. However, in certain cases, as follows, the Board of
Supervisors may permit trees to be planted within the ultimate
right-of-way:
§ 154-36 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-36
151:383
[1] In areas, such as existing villages, where front yards may
be located within the ultimate right-of-way.
[2] In cases where closely spaced rows of shade trees may be
desirable and future street widening is considered
unlikely.
(b) In nonresidential developments, trees shall be located within a
planting bed within the front yard setback, at least 10 feet in
width, planted in grass, shrubs or ground cover.
(c) Trees shall be planted so as not to interfere with the
installation and maintenance of sidewalks and utilities. Trees
shall be planted a minimum distance of five feet from curbs and
sidewalks, 15 feet from overhead utilities and 10 feet from
underground utilities.
(d) Trees shall be planted at a ratio of at least one tree per 50
linear feet of frontage or fraction thereof. Trees shall be
distributed along the entire frontage of the property, although
they need not be evenly spaced.
(e) Shade trees shall be comprised predominantly of species
native to the area.
(f) No more than 10 shade trees of the same species shall be
planted in a group unless a specialized design concept is
desired. Alternating species within a group shall be avoided.
(4) Recommended shade trees are contained in § 154-36.1 herein.
D. Buffer planting requirements. The land surrounding any permitted use
shall be landscaped, except for paved areas and necessary parking and
service areas, and each apartment house, group apartment
development or nonresidential use shall make such other suitable
screening provisions as are necessary to safeguard the character of an
adjacent area. A buffer area shall be lawns or trees, except for
necessary accessways. Such buffer shall include a suitable and
uninterrupted coniferous planting screen of sufficient height and
density to give maximum protection and immediate screening to the
abutting district. Such screening shall be permanently maintained and
replaced where necessary to present an attractive appearance. Buffer
planting requirements shall be applicable to parking lot facilities, along
the areas fronting major or secondary roads and along the areas
adjacent to other properties. The following requirements shall apply to
all buffers which are required to be installed pursuant to the
requirements of this article.
(1) All buffers are to be landscaped. Unless specifically noted herein,
landscape buffers may also consist of earthen berms, fences and
masonry walls. To prevent a linear wall appearance, no segment of
§ 154-36 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-36
151:384
a berm, fence or masonry wall shall exceed 50 feet without a break
or offset.
(2) Earthen berms shall vary in height, length and width, but shall not
exceed a 3:1 slope or a four-foot height. Berms shall be laid out in a
curvilinear manner whenever space allows.
(3) Every buffer shall include some plants from each of the following
categories: evergreen trees, deciduous trees, flowering ornamental
trees, deciduous and evergreen shrubs, and ground cover.
(4) All shade and ornamental trees installed in a buffer shall be planted
with an understory of shrubs.
(5) Buffering specifications. The following specifications shall be
considered minimum in all cases. Specifications are arranged by
buffer type. Specifications for a specific buffer type shall be utilized
for each situation in which that buffer type is required under the
provisions of this article. Existing vegetation should be integrated
into the design of buffers wherever feasible.
(a) Buffer Type 1: A buffer shall be provided equal to a width no
less than the setback width, at least half of which shall be
planted. The buffer may be located anywhere within the
setback area and may incorporate foundation plantings into a
cohesive landscape design. The buffer shall consist of a
minimum of 20% evergreen material and 80% deciduous
material. Required shade trees may be incorporated into this
area.
(b) Buffer Type 1A: In addition to Buffer Type 1 specifications,
where parked cars are oriented perpendicular to an internal
road, additional evergreen and deciduous shrubs and/or
earthen berms shall be provided to form a continuous screen of
no less than three feet in height.
(c) Buffer Type 2: A buffer width of no less than 25 feet shall be
planted. The buffer may be located anywhere within the
setback area and shall be exclusive of foundation plantings.
The buffer shall consist of a minimum of 40% evergreen
material and 60 percent deciduous material.
(d) Buffer Type 2A: In addition to Buffer Type 2 specifications,
earthen berms shall be integrated into the landscape.
(e) Buffer Type 3: A buffer width of no less than 25 feet shall be
planted. The buffer may be located anywhere within the
setback area and shall be exclusive of foundation plantings.
The buffer shall consist of a minimum of 70% evergreen
material and 30 percent deciduous material. Earthen berms
shall be incorporated into the buffer. This buffer shall be
visually opaque year-round.
§ 154-36 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-36
151:385
(f) Buffer Type 4: Sufficient landscape materials shall be provided
to visually separate the parking area from the building.
E. Parking lot landscaping requirements. The following landscaping
requirements shall apply to all parking lots of 10 or more stalls:
(1) On average, a planting island (minimum dimensions of nine by 18
feet) shall be provided for every 20 parking spaces. For double
parking bays, the spaces on each side shall be additive for purposes
of applying this standard. Parking islands (same minimum
dimensions) shall be applied at the ends of all parking bays. Each
nine-by-eighteen-foot planting island shall have at least one shade
tree and three shrubs.
(2) On average, every fourth, full bay of parking shall be separated
from the fifth bay by a ten-foot wide parking bay island running the
entire length of the parking bay, from one end island to the other.
Each ten-foot-wide parking island shall have a minimum of one
shade tree for every 40 feet, on center, six shrubs and one flowering
ornamental tree for every 40 linear feet.
F. Stormwater management facility landscaping. [Added 8-1-2011 by
Ord. No. 51796]
(1) Any landscaping shall be so designed in and adjacent to the
stormwater facility so that it shall not have a negative effect on the
hydrological function of the facility.
(2) When a stormwater management facility adjoins existing
woodlands, it is recommended that plantings be selected to blend
with the natural surroundings.
(3) Basin floors that are dry most of the year shall be landscaped in one
or a combination of the following:
(a) Seeded or sodded lawn.
(b) Seeded in low-maintenance wildflowers and meadow grasses.
(c) Wildflower sod.
(d) All-season ground cover.
(4) Basin floors that are dry most of the year shall be landscaped in one
or a combination of the following:
(a) Wet habitat grasses and ground covers.
(b) Seeded in wildflower mix for wet areas.
96.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection F as Subsection G.
§ 154-36 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-36
151:386
§ 154-36.1. Recommended planting lists. [Added 9-21-1998 by Ord.
No. 376; amended 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
Planting recommendations are included within the Upper Providence
Engineering and Construction Standards and Improvement Procedures, on
file in the Township offices. Applicants are encouraged to consult with
Upper Providence Township's landscape architectural consultant for any
species installations.
§ 154-36.2. Design standards for developments in the Interchange
Office, Retail, Service, and Recreation (IO-3) District. [Added
8-7-2006 by Ord. No. 462; amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 476]
The design of buildings and adjacent landscaping shall be governed by the
following criteria:
(5) Stormwater management facility slopes shall be seeded in
PennDOT Formula "L" modified seed mix or an appropriate
naturalized seed mix approved by the Township.
(6) There shall be a minimum of one shade tree and two shrubs for
each 50 linear feet of stormwater management facility perimeter.
Up to 50% of the shade trees may be substituted with two flowering
trees or two evergreen trees, at the discretion of the Township. No
tree planting shall be placed on the fill area of a berm.
G. Maintenance.
(1) Required plant material shall be maintained for the life of the
project to achieve the required visual effect to the buffer or screen.
It shall be the ultimate responsibility of successive property owners
to insure that the required plantings are properly maintained. Dead
or diseased plant material shall be removed or treated promptly by
the property owner and replaced at the next growing season.
(2) All sight triangles shall remain clear, and any plant material that
could endanger safety such as unstable limbs, shall be removed and
the plant material replaced if necessary. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to maintain all plantings and
architectural elements to ensure a safe environment.
(3) Maintenance guidelines for the plantings are encouraged to be
published by the planting plan designer, to be used by grounds
maintenance personnel to ensure that the design's buffering and
screening concepts are continued.
A. The project shall be planned and constructed as a unified development,
with compatible architectural design for all components, including any
structured parking. Buildings should be sited in a manner compatible
with adjacent buildings, landscaping and the streetscape.
Consideration should be given to size and height relationships with
adjacent buildings. All buildings within the development shall be
§ 154-36 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-36.2
151:387
similarly treated on all sides, with the exception of any side that is
hidden or otherwise not within view of customers.
B. Architectural style of the development shall be designed to avoid the
massive scale and uniform impersonal appearances of a "big box"
commercial center through facade ornamentation, building offsets,
window treatments, variation in rooflines, entry treatments and
upgraded building materials. The focus should be on varying the spaces
among groups of buildings to avoid creating a walled corridor of long
unbroken rows of buildings along a setback or a monotonous pattern of
buildings across a site. Facades should be divided into increments
through the use of architectural features such as bay windows, offsets,
recesses and other devices that break or minimize scale. Strong vertical
and horizontal reveals, offsets and three-dimensional details between
surface planes should be incorporated into building design to create
shadow lines and to further break up flat surfaces.
(1) In addition to facade ornamentation, proposed buildings along the
primary drive or main thoroughfare that function as street walls
shall include facades that appear to be two stories in height and
have architectural features that complement those of the ground
floor. Corner buildings help to anchor blocks and street
intersections and should be given more prominence. Sixty percent
of the street wall shall be two stories in height or appear to be two
stories in height, and all buildings proposed on corner locations
shall be or appear to be two stories. When a corner location does
not contain a building, a compatible architectural feature shall be
provided at the corner and be of a height similar to a two-story
facade.
C. Building facades greater than 100 feet in length, including separate
buildings that are attached, shall incorporate one or more architectural
features over at least 20% of the length of the facade. There shall be no
uninterrupted length of facade that exceeds 100 feet.
D. Smaller retail stores with individual entrances can help to break up a
long facade. Retail stores or restaurants of less than 25,000 square feet
shall have glass facades between the height of three and eight feet for
no less than 60% of the horizontal length of the building facade.
E. The ground floor of buildings should provide pedestrian interest and
activity. Each building facade, including separate buildings which are
attached, exceeding 100 feet in length shall have clearly defined, highly
visible customer entrances that include at least two of the following:
(1) Weather protection features and entrance details such as awnings,
canopies or porticos; overhangs; recesses/projections; arcades;
raised cornice parapets over the door; peaked roof forms; and/or
arches;
(2) Outdoor patios;
§ 154-36.2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-36.2
151:388
(3) Architectural details such as file work and moldings which are
integrated into the building structure and design;
(4) Integral planters or wing walls than incorporate landscaped areas
and/or places for sitting.
F. The use of arcades, colonnades or awnings to provide pedestrian
protection is encouraged. Weather protection features should extend
out from the building and provide cover within 30 feet of all customer
entrances and to extend at least three feet wider than the entrance.
G. Variations in rooflines shall be used to screen HVAC equipment, to
provide interest, and to reduce the scale of large buildings. Roofs
should provide a variety of vertical dimensions. Multiplaned and
intersecting rooflines are encouraged. Flat-roofed designs are
discouraged. However, if utilized, flat roofs shall include architecture
details such as cornices, decorative facings and arches to provide
interest to the roofline. Additionally, all roof types should have at least
one of the following features:
(1) Overhanging eaves of at least three feet;
(2) Sloping roofs with an average slope of between 3:1 and 1:1 that do
not exceed the average height of the supporting walls;
(3) Three or more roof slope planes.
H. All ground-mounted exposed HVAC units or other utility equipment
shall be screened from customer views. This shall be accomplished
through the use of masonry walls and landscaping; see § 154-36.2Q(6)
in this chapter for masonry wall requirements.
I. Exterior building materials and colors contribute significantly to the
visual impact of a building. The exterior building skin shall be
composed of one dominant facing material and not more than two
additional materials. The dominant material shall comprise sixty
percent (60%) or greater of each building elevation, with the exception
of any side that is hidden or otherwise not within view of customers.
(1) Dominant exterior materials may include:
(a) Wood.
(b) Brick.
(c) Stone, or stone veneer (cultured stone or equivalent).
(d) Concrete masonry unit (CMU). CMU allowed only as split-face
block or block molded with a textured surface.
(e) Glass, warm and cool tones.
(f) Stucco and synthetic stucco.
§ 154-36.2 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-36.2
151:389
(2) Dominant exterior building materials may not include:
(a) Aluminum siding.
(b) Vinyl siding.
(c) Smooth-faced CMU.
(d) Tilt-up concrete panels.
(e) Glass, highly reflective/mirrored.
J. Dominant facade colors shall be complementary to the architectural
style of the building. Detailed elevations with facade treatment
examples, complete with color choices, shall be submitted to the
Township for approval. High-intensity colors, metallic colors and black
are prohibited.
K. Trim and accent colors should be complementary to the facade
treatment and are subject to approval by the Township. Colors, utilized
specifically in the branding or identity of an establishment, such as
logos or emblems, will be given special consideration by the Township.
L. Pedestrian use of the development shall by encouraged by:
(1) Reducing walkway distances and providing short cuts.
(2) Providing protection from wind and rain especially at main building
entrances and over public walkways.
(3) Increasing the character and visual diversity of walkways by
varying the paving material. However, the type and change in
materials should be an obvious designed feature and complement
the architecture immediately adjacent to the walkway. Acceptable
sidewalk treatments can be any of the following:
(a) Concrete, with smooth trowel edging and broom finish;
(b) Stamped concrete;
(c) Unit/brick pavers;
(d) Bluestone, flagstone, cobblestone;
(e) Asphalt, only for fitness trails or trails located in open space.
(4) Providing pedestrian amenities such as benches, planters, plazas,
drinking fountains and water features.
(5) Providing sufficient walkway widths to allow for easy flow of
pedestrian traffic; minimum widths subject to ADA compliance.
(6) Providing adequate, pedestrian-scaled lighting. Pedestrian-scaled
lighting shall be less than 15 feet in height, and be consistent with
the overall concept for the proposed development.
§ 154-36.2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-36.2
151:390
(7) Providing convenient and direct pedestrian access from public
walkways to primary building entrances.
(8) Improving the safety and appearance of walkways when crossing
parking and driveway areas by varying the paving material, texture
and color of walkways. Designated crosswalks are required.
M. Loading facilities shall be provided through screened delivery
courtyards, via underground service corridors, or in a similar fashion
which is not visually or functionally obtrusive to patrons using the
parking areas. Waste receptacles shall be located in areas convenient
for on-site use and accessible for collections. Loading areas, trash
dumpsters, and HVAC units or other utility equipment shall be screened
from views by the use of masonry walls; see § 154-36.2Q(6) in this
chapter.
N. All lighting shall be consistent with the overall design concept for the
development and chosen from a selection of fixtures approved by the
Board of Supervisors. Sufficient lighting shall be provided for the
convenience and safety of the patrons of the development. All lighting
shall comply with the standards of § 154-140 of this chapter.
O. A gateway feature is required to define the main entry point(s) of a
development. Materials used in the construction of the gateway feature
shall be of a type that is consistent with the overall appearance of the
development. Landscaping shall be designed in conjunction with the
gateway feature, but in no case shall the landscaping or the gateway
feature impact on required sight distances. It is the intent of the
gateway feature to create a unique identity or branding for the
development at the points of highest traffic and visibility. All gateway
features shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors. Examples of
gateway features include, but are not limited to:
(1) Monument signs.
(2) Wing walls.
(3) Sculpture.
(4) Fountains.
(5) Landmark buildings.
(6) Other structures that help to anchor street corner conditions.
P. Buffering, screening and landscaping, including tree protection and
installation, shall be as required by § 182-120.17C of the Zoning
Ordinance and §§ 154-35.1 and 154-36 of this chapter. The landscape
plan shall be based on a well-defined concept consistent with the
architectural character and overall site design and shall be harmonious
with and enhance the visual appearance and natural amenities of the
area in which the project is located.
§ 154-36.2 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-36.2
151:391
Q. Other landscaping and pedestrian-oriented amenities shall be utilized
throughout the proposed development, including but not limited to the
following:
(1) Bike racks, as approved by the Township, shall be located
throughout the development.
(2) Benches and trash receptacles, in a style consistent with the
development, shall be utilized throughout the site, with special
attention given to pedestrian nodes and gathering areas.
(3) Planters and other vessels for containerized landscaping are
encouraged, especially at building entrances. All planters shall be
safely and securely anchored.
(4) Trees located in plazas, sidewalk areas, courtyards or other highly
traveled areas shall include tree grates and guards and shall be
subject to Township approval.
(5) Portable structures, such as market carts, ticket booths or tents,
shall be placed and maintained when approved by the Township. All
portable structures shall be anchored in a safe and secure manor.
No vending machines shall be permitted, unless said vending
machines are located within a building or other approved
enclosure.
(6) Masonry walls shall be utilized to enclose trash dumpsters and
loading areas and shall be of a material and color compatible with
the nearest building; they can also be used in lieu of berms to
screen other views. Walls that help define pedestrian spaces are
encouraged. Walls shall not obstruct or otherwise interfere with
sight distances at intersections. Wall material shall be consistent
with the concept of the proposed development. This section does
not include retaining walls.
R. Signs shall be in accordance with Article XIX, § 182-146.2, of the
Zoning Ordinance. All signs shall be consistent with the overall design
concept for the development and be appropriate to the type of activity
to which they pertain. Design elements such as the size, shape,
materials, lighting, color, lettering style and the number and
arrangement of signs should present a unified appearance. The color of
individual store signage should coordinate with any awnings that are
provided. The monument signs required by § 182-146.2I(1) shall be
masonry.
S. Outdoor storage. The use of outdoor areas for any type of storage is
prohibited. The use of semitrailers, metal storage or shipping
containers or temporary storage buildings for temporary storage or
during a loading or unloading procedure is permitted only in designated
loading areas.
§ 154-36.2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-36.3
151:392
§ 154-36.3. Design guidelines for select commercial developments.
[Added 12-3-2007 by Ord. No. 480; amended 9-16-2013 by Ord. No.
529]
Any building or group of buildings proposed for the NC Neighborhood-
Convenience Commercial District or the Village Commercial and Office
District should, through its architectural design, reflect the existing
residential character of the area. In addition, the following design
guidelines are required:
A. Building facades.
(1) Building facades greater than 50 feet in length, including separate
buildings that are attached, shall incorporate one or more
architectural features over at least 20% of the length of the facade.
There shall be no uninterrupted length of facade that exceeds 50
feet. Architectural features include but may not be limited to the
following:
(a) Change of setback of building facade: minimum change shall
be two feet.
(b) Dormers.
(c) Bay windows or similar features.
(d) Change in building material.
(e) Change in roof style and/or height.
(2) No building facade shall be longer than 125 feet when that building
facade is within 300 feet of and less than or equal to 35° of being
parallel to any roadway.
B. Variations in rooflines shall be used to screen HVAC equipment, to
provide interest, and to reduce the scale of large buildings. Roofs
should provide a variety of vertical dimensions. Multiplaned and
intersecting rooflines are encouraged. Flat-roofed designs are generally
discouraged and specifically prohibited on any building constructed
within 50 feet of a residential zone. If utilized, flat roofs shall include
architecture/details such as cornices, decorative facings and arches to
provide interest to the roofline. Additionally, all roof types should have
at least one of the following features:
(1) Overhanging eaves of at least three feet;
(2) Sloping roofs with an average slope of between 3:1 and 1:1 that do
not exceed the average height of the supporting walls;
(3) Three or more roof slope planes.
C. All ground-mounted exposed HVAC units or other utility equipment
shall be screened from customer views. This shall be accomplished
§ 154-36.3 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-36.3
151:393
§ 154-36.4. Design Guidelines for developments in TDR Transfer of
Development Rights District. [Added 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 495]
Any residential dwelling unit or group of dwelling units proposed for the
TDR District should, through their architectural design, reflect the existing
residential character of the area. In addition, the following design
guidelines are required:
through the use of masonry walls and landscaping; see this chapter for
masonry wall requirements.97
D. The exterior building skin shall be composed of one dominant facing
material and not more than two additional materials. The dominant
material shall comprise 60% or greater of each building elevation, with
the exception of any side that is hidden or otherwise not within view of
customers.
(1) Dominant exterior materials may include wood, brick, stone or
stone veneer (cultured stone or equivalent), glass (warm and cool
tones), stucco and synthetic stucco, or concrete masonry unit
(CMU). CMU is allowed only as split-face block or block molded
with a textured surface.
(2) Dominant exterior building materials may not include aluminum
siding, vinyl siding, smooth-faced CMU, tilt-up concrete panels or
highly reflective/mirrored glass.
E. Dominant facade colors shall be complementary to the architectural
style of the building. Detailed elevations with facade treatment
examples, complete with color choices, shall be submitted to the
Township for approval. High-intensity colors, metallic colors and black
are prohibited. Trim and accent colors should be complementary to the
facade treatment and are subject to approval by the Township. Colors,
utilized specifically in the branding or identity of an establishment, such
as logos or emblems, will be given special consideration by the
Township.
F. Knee wall and fence design standards.
(1) All knee wall and fences shall be constructed of materials similar or
complementary to the building materials as herein described in
Subsection D of this section. All knee walls shall be opaque for a
minimum height of 2 1/2 feet above grade.
(2) All knee walls as provided for in the NC District shall not be lower
than 30 inches or taller than 42 inches and shall be designed and/or
placed in such a way that they will not obstruct any required sight
lines for required driveways.
97.Editor's Note: See 154-36.2Q(6).
§ 154-36.3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-36.4
151:394
A. Facade treatment (i.e., architectural details) and overall color palate
must be varied throughout a TDR subdivision. In no instance shall more
than one out of five contiguous dwelling units have the same facade
treatment, roof color, and color palate. Dwelling units directly across
from each other on opposite sides of any street may not have identical
facade treatments and overall color palates. In addition, dwelling units
within 100 feet of each other on opposite sides of the street, as
measured between the closest sides of the dwellings as shown in the
sketch below, shall not have identical facade treatments, roof colors,
and color palates. Roof color and/or material shall be varied with the
same frequency as facade treatments and color palates.
B. Attached garages shall be varied in their location. Where adequate lot
width is available, side entry garages shall be provided. For side entry
garages, no more than six in a row shall be on the same side of the
dwelling. It is strongly encouraged that when it is feasible, garages
should face each other on adjacent lots.
C. On a minimum of 75% of the homes in a subdivision with transferable
development rights or of a separate phase of such subdivision, the
exterior building skin shall be composed of one dominant facing
material and not more than two additional materials. The dominant
material shall comprise 60% or greater of each building elevation, with
§ 154-36.4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-36.4
151:395
§ 154-37. Recreational areas and community assets.
Wherever practicable, provision shall be made for suitable open space for
parks, playgrounds and recreational areas. In commercial areas, provision
shall be made for suitable open space for walkways (connecting parking
facilities with commercial structures), malls, sitting areas, etc. Due
consideration shall be given to the preservation of natural features,
including large trees, groves, waterways, scenic points, historical spots and
other community assets.
§ 154-38. Use of standards; recommendations of Planning
Commission.
the exception of any side that is hidden or otherwise not within view
from a street. Dominant exterior materials shall include: wood, brick,
stone, or stone veneer (cultured stone or equivalent), or stucco and
synthetic stucco.
D. Except for accent purposes on no greater than 10% of any elevation,
aluminum siding, vinyl siding or fiber-cement siding shall not be
utilized.
E. Dominant facade colors shall be complementary to the architectural
style of the building. Detailed elevations with facade treatment
examples, complete with color choices, shall be submitted to the
Township for approval. Trim and accent colors should be
complementary to the facade treatment and are subject to approval by
the Township.
F. All residence doors (including garage doors) facing a street shall be
wood, wood-stained, faux wood finish or other finishes as approved by
the Township.
G. A reverse-frontage buffer in accordance with § 154-24.1 of this chapter
shall be required for any number of reverse-frontage lots in a
subdivision with transferable development rights; provided, however,
the minimum width of the setback required by § 154-24.1B(1) may be
reduced to 15 feet.
A. The standards of design of this article should be used to judge the
adequacy of subdivision proposals. Where, in the opinion of the
Township Planning Commission, the literal application of these
standards in certain cases would work undue hardship or be plainly
unreasonable, the Township Planning Commission may recommend to
the Board of Supervisors such reasonable exceptions as will not be
contrary to the public interest. The Board of Supervisors may modify or
adjust the standards to permit reasonable utilization of property while
securing substantial conformance with the objectives of the
regulations.
§ 154-36.4 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-38
151:396
§ 154-39. Signs. [Added 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296; amended
10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 317]
The developer or property owner shall provide and install all required street
signs, speed limit signs and all other regulatory signs. A street sign for a
new street shall be installed within 10 calendar days from completion of
the installation of the base course for that street. All signs shall meet the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
§ 154-40. Lighting. [Added 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296; amended
6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 416]
Lighting shall be provided within parking facilities and recreational
facilities when required by the township. The developer or property owner
shall provide a lighting plan in accordance with the requirements of
§ 154-12H. herein which shall be approved by the Township Board of
Supervisors upon recommendation of the Township Lighting Consultant and
Township Engineer, before final plan approval. Lighting shall be designed
and installed in accordance with the following requirements; provided,
however, that lighting shall also be provided along public streets, when
required, in accordance with the applicable requirements herein:
B. The standards included in these regulations are minimum design
requirements. The Board of Supervisors reserves the right in any case
to request that development features exceed these standards if
conditions so warrant.
C. In reviewing subdivision or land development plans, the governing body
shall refer such plans to the Township Planning Commission for
recommendations concerning the adequacy of existing and proposed
community facilities to serve the additional dwellings proposed by the
subdivision or land development.
D. Subdividers are requested to give careful consideration to the
desirability of providing adequate rights-of-way and paving on existing
streets and reserving areas and easements for facilities normally
required in residential sections, including churches, libraries, schools
and other public buildings, parks, playgrounds and playfields, shopping
and local business centers and rights-of-way and easements for
stormwater, water and sanitary sewer facilities in those areas that
cannot be immediately joined to the existing stormwater, water and
sanitary sewer systems of the Township.
E. Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities should be
adequate to provide for building sites, landscaping and off-street
parking as appropriate to the use proposed. The Board of Supervisors
reserves the right to accept or refuse offers of dedication for public
uses.
A. All parking areas, walkways, and passageways serving commercial and
residential land developments shall be illuminated to the satisfaction of
§ 154-38 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-40
151:397
Upper Providence Township Board of Supervisors and Township
Lighting Consultant.
B. Where required by Supervisors, streetlights and all accessory
equipment shall be provided at the expense of the developer at all
intersections, end of culs-de-sac, and between all intersections at
spacing approved by the Township Lighting Consultant. As a minimum,
all residential developments (or other, as required by Supervisors) shall
be constructed with a minimal number of connections (to the power
source), underground streetlight wiring system (wire protected by
conduit), including all accessory equipment required for future
installation of streetlights (and foundations) by others. Plan for
residential lighting and underground wiring system (energizing plan)
shall be prepared by the Township Lighting Consultant and presented
to the developer upon receipt of development's underground wiring
layout when supplied by the energy supplier. Supply of this
underground wiring plan to Township Lighting Consultant is the
responsibility of the developer.
C. All streetlights, where required by Supervisors, shall have a highpressure
sodium vapor lighting source (pole-mounted) which supplies a
minimum maintained average footcandle (fc) level of 0.30 fc. All
lighting and accessory equipment shall be standard equipment as
approved by the Township Lighting Consultant or variations as
approved by the Township Board of Supervisors.
D. Streetlights shall be energized at time of issuance of the first use and
occupancy permit of the development, or where a development is
phased, at the time of the issuance of the first use and occupancy
permit for each individual phase. All fees for connection and operation
of such lights shall be the responsibility of the developer until Upper
Providence Township formally accepts dedication of public
improvements. Upper Providence Township shall coordinate energizing
of lights, in accordance with the approved energizing plan. Request for
electrical connection shall only be made by Upper Providence
Township. Upper Providence Township shall pay all associated
connection and operation feed (to the energy supplier) for which the
developer shall reimburse the Township for connection fees and
operation fees under rate SLS, on a monthly basis, including
appropriate administration fees. This payment arrangement shall
continue until formal acceptance of dedication of public improvements,
at which time, Upper Providence Township shall assume these
responsibilities. The developer shall warranty all parts and associated
labor for the streetlighting system for the period of time from date of
installation until 18 months from the date of formal acceptance of
public improvements by the Township. In developments in which
improvements are not to be dedicated, the start of the eighteen-month
period shall be the later of either the date on which the Township deems
the installation to be complete based upon the approved final plan and
in proper operating order, or the date on which the use and occupancy
§ 154-40 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-40
151:398
permit for the final building in the development or applicable phase is
granted.
E. Upon completion of streetlight installation, the developer or his
designated representative shall notify the Township Lighting
Consultant and Township Engineer, in writing, of completion of lighting
facilities. Copy of the Electrical Underwriter's certificate shall also be
included with this notification.
F. All other proposed lighting such as building lights, general parking
areas, sidewalk/walkway/pathway illumination, driveway illumination,
signs or other ornamental lighting shall be shown in sufficient detail on
the lighting plan to allow determination of the effects on adjacent
properties, traffic safety, and overhead sky glow.
G. Unless stated herein or otherwise required by Supervisors, all lighting
systems shall utilize high-intensity discharge sources. No floodlights
permitted without written waiver from Township. Average minimum
maintained footcandle levels shall be no less than 1.00 fc and no more
than 3.00 fc. The incident light spill-off at the development boundaries
shall not exceed 0.10 fc at any point along off-street areas and 0.30 fc
along public roadways.
H. For freestanding lighting, all fixtures shall utilize appropriate sharp
cutoff luminaires. Shielding shall be provided to screen light sources at
angles above 72° to 90° from the vertical. All lenses must be flat with no
dropped dish variety permitted. Maximum height of freestanding
fixtures shall not exceed 25 feet. Fixture heights shall be measured
from the bottom of the fixture to ground level.
I. For building-mounted lighting, shielding shall be provided so as to
screen the light source and directed reflectors at angles above 72° to
90° from the vertical. In all cases, lighting will not be permitted along
the outline of a building(s) or along rooflines.
J. For canopy lighting, all fixtures shall be recessed in the canopy with no
lens lower than the canopy surface. Recessed fixtures shall be shielded
so that the light source is screened at angles above 90° from the
vertical. Maximum footcandle level permitted under canopy not to
exceed 50 footcandles at any point.
K. Outdoor sales areas shall not be permitted to exceed 50 footcandles at
any specific point on the front line display areas. General parking and
storage areas shall not exceed 20 footcandles at any specific point. In
no case shall floodlights be utilized to illuminate front sales line or
general area.
L. Athletic fields shall: [Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 535]
(1) Athletic fields shall be provided with glare guards unless granted
specific waiver by the Township.
§ 154-40 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-40
151:399
(2) All recreation activities shall not exceed the following:
Activity Maximum Footcandles
Baseball 30/50
Football 30
Soccer 30
Tennis 30
Basketball 25
All other activities not
specifically named
30
(3) The Board of Supervisors has discretion, by resolution, to limit the
hours that the lights on an athletic field may be used.
M. For developments that include traffic signalization, said signalization is
encouraged wherever possible to include streetlighting as overbuilds
on signal standards.
N. All traffic signals shall include emergency service pre-emption
provision compatible with existing system.
O. All traffic signals shall include LED-type lights or equal as approved by
the Township Lighting Consultant.
P. For all of the foregoing standards, whether subjective or objective, the
Township Lighting Consultant shall be the sole arbiter for section
interpretation.
§ 154-40 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-40
151:400
ARTICLE IVA
Open Space and Recreational Facilities
[Added 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 341; amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
561]
§ 154-40.1. General purpose and intent.
The provisions of this article are intended to provide regulations for the
use and development of land which is required to be set aside in new
subdivisions or land developments pursuant to the requirements of the
various districts contained in Chapter 182, Zoning, of the Code of the
Township of Upper Providence. It is also the purpose of this article to
provide regulations for the payment of a fee in lieu of the provision of land
and facilities in appropriate situations. Further, it is the specific intent of
this article to:
§ 154-40.2. Open space requirements.
A. Implement the findings and recommendations of any park master plans
or other guiding documents used as reference by the Upper Providence
Township Recreation Department.
B. Implement the findings and recommendations of the most recently
adopted Open Plan for Upper Providence Township, Montgomery
County, PA (Draft).
C. Implement the findings and recommendations of the Comprehensive
Plan Update for the Township, as amended, and pursuant to the
authorization by Section 302 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
D. Preserve open space to protect the environmental, scenic, historical
and cultural features of the Township.
E. Preserve adequate usable open space which will allow areas for active
recreation for Township residents.
F. Provide a variety and balance of facilities which can meet the various
recreational needs of the residents, businesses and industry.
G. Develop a system of facilities which can deliver recreation services
effectively and efficiently.
H. Provide equitable and convenient accessibility to recreation facilities.
I. Support community development and stability by providing recreation
sites and open space.
A. For residential districts, these regulations shall apply to any and all
open space and/or recreation areas which are set aside through the
subdivision and land development processes pursuant to the
requirements of the various residential districts of Chapter 182,
§ 154-40.1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-40.2
151:401
§ 154-40.3. Physical criteria for open space lands.
The following criteria shall be used in determining if proposed open space
or recreation spaces incorporated in a land development proposal are
acceptable as lands to be set aside.
Zoning, subsequent to the enactment of this article. These regulations
shall apply to any land so provided, including any that may exceed the
minimum requirements of said districts.
B. For nonresidential zoning districts, including Chapter 182, Zoning,
Article XI, in Institutional District, these regulations shall apply to any
and all open space and/or recreation areas set aside through the land
development process. All land developments shall be required to set
aside 1,300 square feet of open space or recreation facilities for each
2,000 square feet of new or additional gross floor area of construction.
C. For any open space requirements contained within this section that may
conflict with requirements with other Township regulations and
requirements, the largest open space area or recreation requirement
required to be provided shall apply.
A. An open space area(s) shall be developed to complement and enhance
the man-made environment. In the selection of the location of such
areas, consideration shall be given to the preservation of natural and
man-made features which will enhance the attractiveness and value of
the remainder of the property to be subdivided or developed. Such
features are floodplains, including streams and ponds; wetlands; slopes
equal to or greater than 15%; mature, permanent vegetation; an
exceptional view; cultural and historical amenities; and other
community assets as determined by the Board of Supervisors.
B. Said area(s) shall be at a location conveniently accessible to the
residents or employees to be served.
C. Said area(s) shall be located and designed so that it does not become a
barrier to the handicapped, aged or people with baby strollers.
D. Said area(s) specifically designated for open space shall be fully usable
and suitable for that purpose and shall have all improvements required
by this chapter.
E. The size and shape of said areas shall be such as to be usable for
passive and/or active recreation.
F. Said area(s) shall comprise a single parcel of land, except where the
Board of Supervisors concurs that the creation of two or more parcels
would be in the public interest and determines that, where feasible, a
connecting path or strip of land is in the public interest.
G. Safe and easy access to said open space area(s) shall be provided either
by adjoining public road frontage, public easements or paths and/or
§ 154-40.2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-40.3
151:402
sidewalks. At the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, an open space
area(s) may be permitted to cross a public road if specific
circumstances related to the location of natural features, site layout
and/or intended use of the open space so dictate. The Parks and
Recreation Committee and Planning Commission shall make specific
recommendations to the Board concerning any proposed road crossing
in their review pursuant to § 154-40.4D herein.
H. Said area(s) shall be easily accessible to essential utilities such as
water, sewage and electric power, to the greatest extent practical.
I. Said area(s) shall be free of fuel, electric power and other transmission
lines, whether underground or overhead, except where these may
provide opportunities for trails and/or connections to other open space
lands.
J. Said area(s) shall be free of all structures, except those related to
outdoor recreational use. Should any existing structure(s) be located in
an area(s) proposed for open space, the applicant shall demonstrate
how said structure(s) will be used in connection with their plans for
recreational activities for the site, as required in § 154-40.4D herein.
K. Steep slopes, streams, lakes, watercourses, ponds, wetlands and
floodplains may comprise no more than 40% of the open space land
requirement. In all instances, a minimum of 60% of the open space land
requirement shall be suitable for dry ground recreational use. Fifty
percent of the dry ground recreational use area shall not exceed 2%
finished grade; the Board of Supervisors may agree to waive this
requirement in cases of exceptional topography, watercourses and tree
coverage.
L. The location, form, overall design and use of the required open space
area(s) shall be as approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(1) At the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, a portion(s) of the
open space may be permitted on abutting land which has a
different zoning classification than the development which it
serves, if it forms an integral part of the open space for the
development or for the Township's overall open space network.
M. Areas defined as open space or recreation sites shall not include areas
less than 45 feet in width or land area within 10 feet of any building,
community facility, or other accessory use.
N. Areas defined as open space or recreation sites shall have a minimum of
25 feet of street frontage.
O. Areas defined as open space or recreation sites shall not contain
stormwater management facilities, unless those facilities are directly
related to a recreation use.
§ 154-40.3 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-40.3
151:403
§ 154-40.4. Improvement requirements for open space lands.
P. The areas set aside for open space or recreation shall be reasonably
accessible to the residents or employees, as applicable.
A. When the Board of Supervisors approves open space area(s) bisected
by a public road pursuant to the provisions of § 154-40.3G herein,
grade-separated pedestrian walkways (bridges or tunnels) shall be
required whenever the roadway being crossed is of greater than feeder
classification.
B. At least one accessway shall be provided to each open space area which
shall be sufficiently wide so that maintenance equipment shall have
reasonably convenient access to said area. In all instances, said open
space area(s) shall be maintained in a careful and prudent manner.
C. When an open space area is intended to serve residents of a large
number of dwelling units or lots, more than one pedestrian access to
said area shall be provided. The exact number and locations of said
accesses shall be based upon the design of the development and the
location of any recreational facilities proposed within the open space
area. The Board of Supervisors shall require additional pedestrian
accesses or the relocation of an accessway(s) when it believes that
adequate access is not being provided for the majority of the
development's residents. Pedestrian access may share any accessway
provided for maintenance vehicles pursuant to Subsection B of this
section.
D. Recreational facilities shall be provided in the open space area(s) to
service the needs of the residents of the development for which the
area(s) is being set aside. Facilities to be provided may include, but not
be limited to, the following: tot lots; playgrounds; tennis courts;
basketball courts; and multipurpose fields. The precise number and
extent of facilities proposed shall be based upon information supplied
by the developer, including projected number, age breakdown, income
and other applicable characteristics of the development's residents;
and the number and types of recreational facilities nearby and available
to the proposed development. Based upon said analysis, the applicant
shall propose a plan for the facilities proposed to be reviewed by the
Parks and Recreation Committee and Planning Commission. These
bodies shall then make a recommendation to the Board of Supervisors,
who shall make the final determination as to the facilities to be
installed.
E. Sufficient parking shall be provided for the recreational facilities to be
installed.
(1) The exact number of spaces shall be approved by the Board of
Supervisors upon recommendation of the Planning Commission
and coordination with the Parks and Recreation Department. The
adequacy of pedestrian access to serve the recreational facilities
§ 154-40.3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-40.4
151:404
§ 154-40.5. Ownership and maintenance provisions for open space
lands.
shall be evaluated in the determination of the number of necessary
parking spaces.
(2) For parking areas of more than 20 cars, a minimum of 10% of the
parking lot shall be devoted to interior parking lot landscaping,
exclusive of any other landscaping or buffering which may be
required by the zoning district in which the development is located.
The minimum dimension of a planting island shall be nine feet by
18 feet.
F. If lighting is proposed for nighttime use of recreational facilities, it shall
be so arranged as to not produce glare on neighboring or nearby
dwellings. Parking lots shall also be lit if facilities they serve are to be
used after dark.
G. The joint use of stormwater management facilities and recreational
facilities may be permitted if the presence of the stormwater
management facilities directly relates to the proper function and
drainage of the recreation facility.
H. Recreational facilities shall be interconnected with recreational
facilities on abutting parcels or with existing parkland, wherever
possible, by the provision of pedestrian trails.
I. Recreational facilities shall be coordinated with applicable open space
and recreation plans or any federal, state, county, regional, adjacent
municipal or private organization to complement various programs
increasing the utility of the open space and recreation network.
J. All areas devoted to open space and/or recreational facilities shall be
suitably landscaped either by retaining existing vegetation and wooded
areas and/or by a landscaping plan for enhancing the areas through
plantings which are consistent with the purposes of this section and
which minimize maintenance costs.
A. All land set aside for open space and recreational purposes shall first be
offered for dedication to the Township for public use.
(1) Size, shape, access, topography and other physical characteristics
of the open space area(s) and recreation facilities shall be
considered in the determination of the acceptance of facilities and
land offered for dedication.
(2) When the Board of Supervisors deems it to be in the public interest
to accept dedicated land, such acceptance shall be by means of a
signed resolution to which a property description, recorded deed
and plan of the dedicated open space/recreational area(s) shall be
attached.
§ 154-40.4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-40.5
151:405
§ 154-40.6. Fee in lieu of open space land dedication, residential
zoning districts.
§ 154-40.7. Fee in lieu of open space land dedication,
nonresidential zoning districts.
B. In which any or all land is not to be dedicated, there shall be adequate
provisions to assure the retention and future maintenance of said
area(s) and any recreational facilities located within them. At the option
of the Township, lands designated for dedication, but not accepted,
shall be retained in private ownership by an association of landowners
or homeowners, by a land conservation organization, or by a state or
county government. Lands not dedicated to the Township shall be made
subject to such agreement with the Township and such deed
restrictions duly recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds as may
be required by the Board of Supervisors for the purpose of preserving
and maintaining the land for recreation or open space use.
A. Where the Board of Supervisors agrees with the developer that,
because of the size, shape, location, access, topography or other
physical features of the land, it is impractical to dedicate land to the
Township or set aside an open space area(s) or recreation facility(ies),
the Board shall require a payment of a fee in lieu of dedication of such
land and recreational facilities. Said fee shall be payable to the
Township prior to approval of the final plan of the subdivision and/or
land development by the Board of Supervisors or at such other time as
determined by the Board.
(1) When a subdivision or residential development is phased, the
Board may permit the fee to be paid in amounts proportionate to
the number of lots or dwelling units in each phase.
B. The amount of any fee for residential development shall be equal to the
value of the land and recreational facilities that would normally be
preserved and developed for open space and recreation use. Said fee
shall be paid on a per-dwelling-unit or per-lot basis. The amount of said
fee, for residential uses, shall be established by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors.
C. All funds collected in lieu of land dedication shall be deposited in an
interest-bearing account, known as the "open space capital reserve
fund." All interest earned on this account shall become funds of the
account. Upon request of any party who paid a fee, the Township shall
refund such fee, plus any interest accumulated thereon from the date of
payment, if the Township has not used the funds to meet the purposes
set forth in this article within three years from the date such fee was
paid.
A. Where the Board of Supervisors agrees with the developer that,
because of the size, shape, location, access, topography or other
physical features of the land, it is impractical to dedicate land to the
§ 154-40.5 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-40.7
151:406
Township or set aside an open space area(s) or recreation facility(ies),
the Board shall require a payment of a fee in lieu of dedication of
such land and recreational facilities. Said fee shall be payable to the
Township prior to approval of the final plan of land development by the
Board of Supervisors or at such other time as determined by the Board.
B. Determination of fees.
(1) The amount of any fee shall be equal to the value of the land and
recreational facilities that would normally be preserved and
developed for open space and recreation use. Said fee shall be paid
on a per-employee basis as follows:
Use Fee
Office $700 per employee (for the first
100 employees)
$140 per employee (for each
employee over 100)
Commercial $420 per employee (for the first
100 employees)
$140 per employee (for each
employee over 100)
Industrial $140 per employee (all
employees)
Institutional $140 per employee (for each
employee)
If the institutional use includes
residential care of any sort, the
following also apply:
$210 per unit (for the first 100
units);
$140 per unit (for each bed over
100 units)
(2) If a proposed development cannot provide the number of new
employees that a given development will employ, the Township will
determine the probable number of employees based on a ratio as
follows:
Use Number of Employees
Office 6.5 employees per 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area
Retail/Commercial 1.25 employees per 1,000
square feet of gross floor area
Industrial/Manufacturing 1 employee per 2,000 square
feet of gross floor area
Institutional 1 employee per 2,000 square
feet of gross floor area
§ 154-40.7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-40.7
151:407
(3) In the event the Township and the developer agree that the formula
does not yield a payment in lieu of set-aside that reasonably
approximates the value of the land set aside, the Township and
developer can enter negotiations to determine the exact fee in lieu
when open space or recreation or recreation facilities are not
dedicated to the Township.
C. All funds collected in lieu of land dedication shall be deposited in an
interest-bearing account, known as the "open space capital reserve
fund." All interest earned on this account shall become funds of the
account. Upon request of any party who paid a fee, the Township shall
refund such fee, plus any interest accumulated thereon from the date of
payment, if the Township has not used the funds to meet the purposes
set forth in this article within three years from the date such fee was
paid.
§ 154-40.7 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-40.7
151:408
ARTICLE V
Improvements
§ 154-41. Required improvements. [Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord. No.
232]
A. The applicant shall agree, in writing, to construct streets and other
improvements required by this chapter from the lot or lots to be sold or
built upon to an existing improved street, subject to the provisions of
§ 154-5 herein. The work shall be performed in strict accordance with
approved plans and the Township standards and specifications or the
applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Department of Highways
Specifications 408, latest edition, or any subsequent number or section
thereof. No plan shall be finally approved until the developer has
completed all of the necessary and appropriate improvements as
required as a condition for final approval of a plan or until such time as
the applicant has provided a proper guaranty in the form of
performance bond or bonds with surety satisfaction to the Township or
by the deposit of funds or securities in escrow or by the presentation of
an irrevocable letter of credit from a federal- or commonwealthchartered
lending institution. Such financial security shall be posted
with a bonding company or federal- or commonwealth-chartered
lending institution chosen by the developer, builder or subdivider
posting the financial security, provided that said bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct business within the
commonwealth. When requested by the applicant, to facilitate
financing, the Township shall furnish him with a signed copy of a
resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent upon the
applicant obtaining satisfactory financial security. The final plat or
record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the financial security
agreement is executed. The resolution of contingent approval shall
expire and be deemed to be revoked if the financial security agreement
is not executed within 90 days unless written extension is granted by
the Board of Supervisors. Such extension shall be placed in writing. The
amount of financial security shall be equal to 110% of the cost of the
required improvements for which the financial security is to be posted,
estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by
the applicant. The cost of the improvements shall be based upon an
estimate prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Said estimate shall be certified by said
engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The
Township, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer, may refuse
to accept said estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant and
Township are unable to agree upon an estimate, the estimate shall be
recalculated and recertified by another licensed professional engineer,
who shall mutually be chosen by the applicant and the Township. The
estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and
reasonable and shall be the final estimate. Fees for the services of said
third engineer shall be paid equally by the Township and applicant. The
applicant shall also guarantee that no lot will be sold or building
§ 154-41 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-41
151:409
§ 154-42. Release from liability. [Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord. No.
232]
constructed in any flood-prone area prior to completion of all
floodproofing measures planned for such lot and necessary access
facilities. [Amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
B. Such financial security shall provide for and secure to the public the
completion of all subdivision improvements for which such security is
being posted by the date fixed in the subdivision plan or subdivision
agreement for completion of such improvements. Annually, the
Township may adjust the amount of financial security by comparing the
actual cost of the improvements which have been completed and the
estimated cost for completion of the remaining improvements as of the
expiration of the 90th day after either the original date scheduled for
completion or a rescheduled date of completion to complete the
required improvements. The Township may require the applicant to
post additional financial security to assure that it equals the required
110% of the cost of completing the required improvements as
reestablished by using the above procedure. [Amended 12-16-1991
by Ord. No. 307]
C. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
Board of Supervisors may authorize the submission of final plans by
sections or stages of development, subject to such requirements or
guaranties as to improvements in future sections or stages of
development as it finds essential for the protection of any finally
approved section of the development.
A. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Board of
Supervisors to release or authorize the release from time to time of
such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the
contractor(s) performing the work. Any such request shall be in writing,
addressed to the Board of Supervisors and subject to the provisions for
release as established in Section 509 of Act 247, the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.98
B. If a partial release is not authorized as stated in Subsection A, the
financial security shall be released only upon the complete installation
of the required improvements in accordance with the approved
improvement construction plan. Strict compliance with the procedures
established by Section 510 of Act 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,99 shall be followed with respect to the release of the
performance bond or other security. If the Board fails to comply with
the time limitations of said Section 510, all improvements will be
deemed to have been approved and the developer shall be released
from all liability pursuant to the performance bond. If the required
98.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
99.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510.
§ 154-41 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-42
151:410
§ 154-43. Public utilities and laterals.
All sewers (capped and operative), water, gas, electric, telephone and other
pipes and conduits and all service connections or laterals shall be laid to
the full width of the ultimate right-of-way, where the need therefor can be
reasonably anticipated, before streets are paved. The arrangements for said
service connections or laterals shall be the responsibility of the subdivider,
developer or builder.
§ 154-44. Inspection of work and materials.
§ 154-45. Off-site improvements.
Certain improvements beyond the geographical boundaries of a site to
be subdivided and/or developed, including but not limited to road
improvements, may be required to be constructed where it can clearly be
demonstrated that such improvements have been made necessary solely
through the additional burden imposed by the subdivision and/or
development of the site. The Solicitor shall render final judgment in any
instances where a dispute arises as to the direct causal relationship for
the improvement(s). The subdivider or developer may be required to cover
costs which must be incurred by the Township or other governmental
jurisdiction in order to make these improvements feasible (for example,
but not limited to, right-of-way acquisitions). The legal and financial
arrangements to cover costs of the off-site improvements shall be the same
as those herein prescribed for § 154-41, Required improvements.
improvements are not completely installed within the required time
period, the Board shall declare the performance bond in default and
authorize the Township Manager to collect the amount payable
thereunder. Upon receipt of such amount, the Township shall install
such improvements as were covered by the bond and are
commensurate with the extent of the building development which has
taken place in the subdivision or land development, not exceeding in
cost, however, the amount collected upon the bond.
A. Notice.
(1) The Township Engineer shall be notified 48 hours in advance of the
commencement of any construction or installation operation, in
order that provision may be made for inspection by the Township.
(2) Construction and installation operations shall also be subject to
inspection by Township officials during the progress of the work,
and the subdivider, developer or builder shall pay for all
inspections.
B. Samples of materials. Samples of materials shall be furnished to the
Township in the same manner as is required of contractors under the
highway and sanitary drainage specifications.
§ 154-42 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-46
151:411
§ 154-46. Construction sequence. [Added 1-15-1990 by Ord. No.
296]
A. Existing roads. The implementation and scheduling of the
improvements required by the Township in relation to existing roads
shall be addressed by the Township as part of the final plan approval.
B. Proposed roads. All improvements within the roadway right-of-way
shall be completed along all lots or units before any use and occupancy
permit shall be issued for the lot or unit which abuts the roadway
improvements. The only exception to this requirement shall be the
placement of the pavement wearing course which shall be placed upon
completion of the project. This required work shall also include those
improvements which are required on the lot or unit for which the use
and occupancy permit is required.100
100. Editor's Note: Original Art. VI, Condominiums and Condominium Conversions, which
followed this section, was deleted 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 301. For current provisions, see
the Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 154-46 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-46
151:412
ARTICLE VI
Mobile Home Developments
[Added 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 210]
§ 154-47. Applicability.
§ 154-48. Use regulations.
The uses allowed within a mobile home development shall be as specified in
§ 182-73 of Chapter 182, Zoning.
§ 154-49. Applications for development.
All applications for mobile home developments shall follow the procedures
established in § 182-74 of Chapter 182, Zoning. No application for
subdivision or land development approval for the construction of a mobile
home development will be accepted until the governing body has given
conditional use approval pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 182,
Zoning.
§ 154-50. Site design.
All regulations of §§ 182-75 through 182-78 of Chapter 182, Zoning, shall be
adhered to in mobile home developments. In addition thereto, the following
regulations shall apply:
A. Individual mobile homes. Individual mobile homes may be erected on
any lot where the use is permitted, provided that compliance is made
with zoning requirements, §§ 154-50A and B, 154-52A(3), B(3) and C
and 154-54 of this article and all other applicable regulations. Tracts of
land may be developed and improved for the purpose of erecting two or
more mobile homes, provided that zoning requirements, all
requirements of this chapter including those sections referenced above,
and other applicable regulations are met. The following regulations of
this article apply to mobile home developments, as defined in this
chapter.
B. Mobile home developments. The provisions of this article shall be
followed in the construction or alteration of all mobile home
developments, as defined in this chapter, planned for tracts of land 15
acres or greater in size in accordance with Article X, Mobile Home
Development District, of Chapter 182, Zoning. These regulations are in
addition to those set forth in Article X of Chapter 182, Zoning, and other
applicable regulations of this chapter, and compliance with all
regulations of both chapters is required.
A. Arrangement of structures and facilities. The tract, including mobile
home stands, patios, other dwellings and structures and all tract
improvements, shall be organized in relation to topography, the shape
of the plot and the shape, size and position of structures and common
§ 154-47 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-50
151:413
facilities. Special attention shall be given to new mobile home designs
and to common appurtenances that are available.
B. Adaption to tract assets. Each mobile home unit or other dwelling or
structure shall be fitted to the terrain with a minimum disturbance of
the land and a minimum elevation difference between the floor level of
the unit and the ground elevation under it. Existing trees and shrubs,
rock formations, streams, floodplains, steep slopes and other natural
features of the tract shall be preserved to the maximum extent
practical. Favorable views shall be emphasized by the plan.
C. Courts and spaces. Groups or clusters of units, so placed as to create
interior spaces and courtyards, shall be incorporated whenever
feasible.
D. Orientation. Mobile homes are encouraged to be arranged in a variety
of orientations and are strongly encouraged to have many units with
their long sides facing the street rather than their ends, in order to
provide variety and interest. Site layout shall be designed to ensure that
mobile home units are offset to block long uninterrupted vistas between
the units.
E. Street layout. Gridiron layouts and street patterns unrelated to the
topography of the site are to be avoided.
F. Roadways.
(1) Standards. All applicable standards for streets and roads contained
in this chapter, and as subsequently amended, shall be adhered to
for all public roads in and abutting mobile home developments. In
those developments wherein the roads are to be maintained as
private internal roadways owned and maintained by the mobile
home park operator or owned and maintained in common by the
residents/owners of the individual lots, the standards shall be as
follows:
(a) Right-of-way. There shall be an equivalent right-of-way, as
defined herein, reserved along those streets which are
designed to function as feeder or collector roads and which
connect major exterior roadways, form major loops, traverse
the development or provide major or important access to
adjacent parcels. No equivalent right-of-way is required on
other roads. On those roads where an equivalent right-of-way
is required, parallel parking may be permitted, but
perpendicular or angle parking is discouraged.
(b) Pavement. Pavement width of all residential streets serving as
accesses to mobile home lots shall not be less than 26 feet,
except that this may be reduced to less than 20 feet on a street
serving as an access to no more than 20 mobile home lots
where parking is prohibited along the road and off-street
§ 154-50 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-50
151:414
visitor parking is provided in common areas within 300 feet of
all dwelling units at a rate of 0.3 space per mobile home.
(c) Grades. Gradients on all residential streets shall not exceed
10%.
(d) Culs-de-sac. A paved turnaround area with a minimum radius
of 60 feet shall be provided at the closed end of any cul-de-sac
road serving as the sole access to four or more mobile home
lots. No permanently closed cul-de-sac street shall exceed 500
feet in length or serve as the sole access to more than 20
mobile home lots.
(e) Other requirements. All other applicable requirements of this
chapter relating to grades, vertical curves, horizontal curves,
tangents between curves, sight distance, construction
specifications, intersection alignment, intersection radius,
interconnection of adjacent parcels and similar regulations
shall be adhered to in all mobile home park developments.
(2) Access limitations. Mobile home lots may have direct access only
onto minor internal streets. Direct access from a mobile home lot
shall not be permitted onto the street(s) from which the mobile
home development gains primary access.
(3) Conversions. Any road built as a private road and later proposed for
conversion to a public road shall be brought up to the applicable
standards for public roads prior to being ordained as a public way,
unless this requirement is waived by the governing body
subsequent to determining that compliance with the requirement
would have a negative effect on the mobile home development.
G. Pedestrian circulation.
(1) General requirements. All mobile home developments shall provide
safe, convenient, all-season pedestrian walkways of adequate width
for the intended use, durable and convenient to maintain, between
individual mobile homes, mobile home development streets, all
community facilities provided for the residents and off-site
pedestrian traffic generators, such as schools, bus stops,
commercial centers, etc. These pedestrian walkways may parallel
vehicular roadways, where they shall only be required on one side,
or they may form a separate but coordinated system away from
streets. Walkways must be provided wherever pedestrian traffic is
concentrated and where school children congregate, but may be
waived elsewhere if the applicant successfully demonstrates a lack
of need.
(2) Common walk system. Where a common walk system is provided
and maintained between locations, such common walks shall have
a minimum width of four feet. Where these walks parallel
§ 154-50 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-50
151:415
roadways, they shall be separated from the road pavement by a
distance of at least four feet.
(3) Individual walks. All dwellings shall be connected to common walks
or to streets or to driveways or parking spaces connecting to a
paved street. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of
two feet.
H. Parking.
(1) Spaces required. Two paved off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for each dwelling either on the same lot therewith or in
common parking facilities, provided that parking areas contained
therein are within 150 feet of the mobile home lots for which they
are intended. Parking for any commercial or other nonresidential
use shall follow the requirements otherwise applicable for such
uses.
(2) Common parking areas.
(a) Aisle width. Where common parking facilities are to be used,
the standards contained in Article IV, § 154-20I, for aisle width
shall be utilized.
(b) Required green areas. Ten percent of all common parking
areas on each tract shall be devoted to green areas consisting
mostly of natural vegetation which must be interspersed within
the paved parking areas to channel traffic or divide parking
areas. The green areas required by this section shall not
constitute a portion of any green area or common open space
otherwise required by this chapter or any other ordinance or
regulation of the Township. The exact design and location of
the green areas required by this section shall be indicated on a
development or subdivision or other similar plan and be
permanently maintained as such.
I. Common open space.
(1) The requirements of §§ 182-78 and 182-185A of Chapter 182, shall
apply.
(2) Recreation. Recreation areas and facilities shall be provided to
meet the anticipated needs of the residents of the development and
as specified in Article XXIII § 182-185B of Chapter 182, Zoning,
with reference to single-family detached units. Not less than 25% of
the required open space area, exclusive of lands within the
required buffers, shall be devoted to recreation. Recreation areas
should be of a size, shape and relief that is conducive to active and
passive recreation.
J. Buffers.
§ 154-50 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-50
151:416
(1) General requirements. Along all exterior property boundary lines
except those which abut another mobile home development, there
shall be a permanent buffer at least 15 feet in depth, unless this is
waived pursuant to Subsection J(4) or (5) below. A screen buffer, as
defined herein, shall be provided wherever the mobile home
development abuts existing residential uses, with the exception of
mid-rise or high-rise structures, and where abutting other types of
uses when deemed necessary by the Township governing body to
provide sufficient buffering and transition. A softening buffer, as
defined herein, shall be provided wherever the mobile home
development abuts existing mid-rise or high-rise residential uses;
existing commercial, office, industrial and institutional uses; any
existing street [as modified by Subsection J(3) below], drive or
parking area; or open, not wooded, undeveloped land. An open
buffer shall be provided wherever the mobile home development
abuts wooded undeveloped land or where more extensive buffers
are deemed unnecessary by the governing body.
(2) Components. The minimum component of each type of buffer shall
be as follows:
(a) Screen buffer. The primary component of a screen buffer shall
be a row of evergreen trees at a height of not less than six feet
when planted, spaced not more than 10 feet apart on center,
and these trees shall be of such species to attain a height at
maturity of not less than 20 feet. Also required as a secondary
component of the buffer is one of the following: mounding (the
use of which is encouraged), provided that the slopes shall be a
maximum of three to one; visually opaque fencing not greater
than six feet in height; or coniferous shrubbery. Any
combination of evergreen trees, coniferous shrubs, mounding,
fencing or other natural vegetation or man-made materials is
allowable, provided that an effective visual screen at least 15
feet in height above the adjacent ground elevation in the
mobile home development is achieved within a reasonable
time. But whenever only vegetation is used, there shall be at
least a double row of evergreen trees, with the trees in one row
offset five feet from the trees in the other row and the rows at
least five feet apart.
(b) Softening buffer. The primary component of a softening buffer
shall be a row of trees spaced not more than 25 feet apart oncenter,
at least 25% of which shall be evergreens. The
evergreen trees shall be at least six feet in height when planted
and shall attain at least 20 feet in height at maturity. Any
deciduous trees shall be at least 1 1/2 inches in caliper and
eight feet in height when planted and shall attain a height of
not less than 20 feet at maturity. These trees shall be
interspersed with other allowable components, including any
other type of trees, shrubs, mounding, fencing and/or similar
§ 154-50 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-50
151:417
natural or man-made elements having a visible vertical
dimension, or any combination thereof.
(c) Open buffers. The open buffer shall as a minimum consist of
grass, ground cover and/or similar vegetative material and
may include trees, shrubs or other natural or man-made
landscaping materials, but it shall be mostly vegetative with
minimal paved areas, if any.
(3) Street boundaries. Rather than the extensive buffers described in
Subsection J(2) above, the use of a single row of deciduous trees at
least eight feet in height when planted and at least 20 feet in height
at maturity, with a spacing of not more than 40 feet on center, may
be provided along all property boundaries which abut a street,
wherever necessary for adequate sight distance or where the
governing body determines this to be a sufficient buffer to protect
the welfare and safety of the community.
(4) Existing buffers. In cases where an edge(s) of a mobile home
development occurs along natural features which function as
buffers, including but not limited to mature vegetation, significant
grade changes or stream valleys, which are likely to be
permanently preserved, buffering may be waived along that
edge(s) upon approval of the governing body.
(5) Buffer alternative. Buffers may also be waived by the governing
body where the mobile home development abuts a single-family
residential use, if only detached modular homes or conventionally
built single-family detached dwellings, but not mobile homes, are
constructed within 200 feet of that property boundary.
(6) Maintenance. All vegetation shall be maintained permanently and
in the event of death or other destruction shall be replaced within
one year by the persons responsible for maintenance when the
death or destruction occurred.
(7) Buffer landscape plan. A landscaping plan shall be submitted with
the final plans, showing all pertinent information, including the
location, size and species of all individual trees and shrubs to be
preserved or planted or, alternately, the general characteristics of
existing vegetation masses which are to be preserved.
K. Drainage considerations. The following site drainage requirements
shall apply to all mobile home developments:
(1) Surface water. The ground surface in all parts of the development
shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe,
efficient manner. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
(2) Ponds and retention structures. Surface water collectors and other
bodies of standing water capable of breeding mosquitoes and other
insects shall be eliminated or controlled in a manner approved by
§ 154-50 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-50
151:418
§ 154-51. Common elements.
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
[Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
(3) Wastewater. Wastewater from any plumbing fixture or sanitary
sewer line shall not be deposited upon the ground surface in any
part of a mobile home development or the surrounding properties.
(4) Erosion and sediment control. All applicable regulations and permit
requirements to prevent accelerated soil erosion and resulting
sedimentation as stipulated by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection shall be followed by all parties engaged
in the establishment of a mobile home development. [Amended
6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
L. Ground cover requirement. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of
every mobile home development shall be paved or covered with stone
screenings or other solid material or protected with a vegetative
growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and the emanation of
dust during dry weather. Impervious pavement shall be kept to a
minimum. All ground surfaces shall be appropriately maintained.
M. Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as needed and
arranged in a manner which will protect the mobile home development
residents, neighboring properties and adjacent highways from direct
glare or hazardous interference of any kind. Lighting facilities shall be
required where deemed necessary by the governing body for the safety
and convenience of the mobile home development residents and shall
be installed by the developer.
A. Ownership. Common open space and roadways shall be offered for
dedication to the Township or their public use assured through
easements or other appropriate means in any mobile home
development where all lots will be sold or where the Township
governing body determines those facilities to be key elements in the
open space and/or circulation systems of the Township, in accordance
with Township comprehensive planning policies and applicable
standards of Article XXIII, § 182-185C, of Chapter 182, Zoning. In all
other cases, these and other common elements may be retained in
private ownership, or may be owned jointly by the residents of the
development in conformance with Article XXIII, § 182-185D, of Chapter
182, Zoning.
B. Maintenance. Prior to development plan approval, provision acceptable
to the Township governing body and Solicitor for the maintenance of all
common elements which will not be owned and maintained by a
governmental agency shall be established in conformance with Article
XXIII, § 182-185D, of Chapter 182, Zoning.
§ 154-50 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-51
151:419
§ 154-52. Utilities.
C. Service building. The structure or structures containing the
management office and other common facilities shall be conveniently
located for the use intended. Consolidation of laundry, recreation,
management and other common facilities in a single building and
location is encouraged if the single location will adequately serve all
mobile home lots.
A. Water supply.
(1) General requirements. An adequate supply for domestic, auxiliary
and fire-fighting uses shall be provided for all uses included in the
mobile home development, including service buildings and
accessory facilities, in accordance with § 182-70 of Chapter 182,
Zoning.
(2) Water distribution system. All water piping, fixtures and other
equipment shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with
state and local regulations as well as those of the servicing utility.
(3) Individual water-riser pipes and connections: mobile homes.
(a) Individual water-riser pipes shall be located within the
confined area of the mobile home stand at a point where the
water connection will approximate a vertical position, thereby
ensuring the shortest water connection possible and
decreasing susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
(b) The water-riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter
consistent with the standards of the servicing public utility or,
in lack thereof, of the Township Engineer and terminate at
least four inches above the ground surface. The water outlet
shall be provided with a cap when a mobile home does not
occupy the lot.
(c) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent the freezing of
service lines, valves and riser pipes and to protect risers from
the heaving and thawing actions of the ground during freezing
weather. Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location
of the riser pipe.
(4) Fire protection. All mobile home developments shall be provided
with fire hydrants to meet the specifications of the Middlestates
Department Association of Fire Underwriters. In addition, those
hydrants shall be in sufficient numbers to be within 600 feet of all
existing and proposed mobile homes and other dwellings and
structures, measured by way of accessible streets or common
areas.
B. Sewage disposal.
§ 154-51 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-52
151:420
§ 154-53. Permits, licenses, fees and inspections.
(1) General requirements. An adequate and safe sewage system shall
be provided in all mobile home developments for the conveying and
disposing of sewage from dwellings, service buildings and
accessory facilities in accordance with § 182-70 of Chapter 182,
Zoning.
(2) Sewer system. All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of
sufficient depth to be free of breakage from traffic or other
movements and shall be separated from the water supply system.
The system shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with
all state and Township regulations, as well as those of the servicing
utility.
(3) Individual sewer connections: mobile homes.
(a) Each mobile home stand shall be provided with a sewer-riser
pipe consistent with the standards of the servicing utility or, in
lack thereof, of the Township Engineer. The sewer-riser pipe
shall be so located on each stand that the sewer connection to
the mobile home drain outlet will approximate a vertical
position.
(b) The sewer connection shall have an inside diameter and slope
as required by the servicing utility or, in lack thereof, by the
Township Engineer. All joints shall be watertight.
(c) All materials used for sewer connections shall be semirigid,
corrosive-resistant, nonabsorbent and durable. The inner
surface shall be smooth.
(d) Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer-riser pipe when
a mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall
be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall
extend at least 1/2 inch above ground elevation.
C. Underground utilities. All electric, natural gas, telephone and any other
utility lines shall be placed underground in all mobile home
developments, and each shall have the necessary shutoff valves and
other safety requirements normally associated with safe operation; all
utility connections shall be appropriately capped for safety purposes
whenever a mobile home stand is not occupied.
A. Permits required.
(1) Lots for sale. In those mobile home developments wherein some or
all of the mobile home lots will be sold individually, whether totally
fee simple, fee simple with a homeowners' association, a
condominium or cooperative, no lot to be conveyed shall be
developed or a mobile home or other structure placed or
constructed thereon until the subdivision and/or land development
§ 154-52 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-53
151:421
plan has been properly approved and the proper building and
construction permits have been issued for that lot in accordance
with standard procedures for any building activity in Upper
Providence Township. No mobile home or other structure shall be
occupied until a valid occupancy permit has been issued by the
Township.
(2) Lots for lease. In those mobile home developments wherein some
or all of the mobile home lots will be leased, the following
regulations shall apply to the entire development, exclusive of the
lots being sold individually:
(a) Initial permits. It shall be unlawful for any person or group to
construct, alter, extend or operate a mobile home development
unless and until that person or group obtains:
[1] A valid permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources, in the name of the operator, for
a specified construction, alteration or extension proposed;
and
[2] A valid permit(s) authorizing construction and initial
occupancy, issued by the Upper Providence Township
Zoning Officer in the name of the operator, which shall not
be issued until a copy of the Department of Environmental
Resources permit has been furnished, all permits for water
supply and sewage systems shall have been obtained and
all other requirements contained herein have been
complied with and final approval of the application has
been granted by the Board of Supervisors.
(b) Annual licenses. In addition to the initial permits, the operator
of a mobile home development with lots for lease shall apply to
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources and
to the Upper Providence Township Zoning Officer on or before
the first day of each year for an annual license to continue
operation of the mobile home park. The Zoning Officer shall
issue the annual license upon satisfactory proof that the park
continues to meet the standards prescribed by state agencies
having jurisdiction and the standards of this article and other
applicable Township ordinances. The license so issued shall be
valid for one year from the date of issuance.
B. Fees.
(1) Fees for the initial application and preliminary and final approvals
of any mobile home development shall be prescribed by regulations
of the Board of Supervisors of Upper Providence Township.101
101. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 154-53 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-53
151:422
§ 154-54. Additional requirements.
(2) The fee for the annual license required for mobile home
developments having lots for lease shall be prescribed by
regulations of the governing body and shall be submitted to the
Zoning Officer with the application for the annual license.
C. Inspection.
(1) Upon notification to the licensee, manager or person in charge of a
mobile home development with lots for lease, the Zoning Officer of
Upper Providence Township may inspect a mobile home
development after due notice to determine compliance with this
article.
(2) Upon receipt of the application for annual license and before
issuing such annual license, the Zoning Officer or other designated
representative of Upper Providence Township shall make an
inspection of the mobile home development to determine
compliance with this article and other applicable Township
ordinances. The Zoning Officer or other representative shall
thereafter notify the licensee of any instance of noncompliance and
shall not issue the annual license until the licensee has corrected
all such violations.
A. Mobile home stand. A concrete pad properly graded, placed and
compacted so as to be durable and adequate for the support of the
maximum anticipated loads during all seasons shall be used for all
mobile homes.
B. Footings and anchoring. Each mobile home shall be installed and
anchored according to the applicable standards of Standard for the
Installation of Mobile Homes (American National Standards Institute/
National Fire Protection Association No. 501A, 1977) and as may be
subsequently amended, prior to the unit being occupied or used in any
other way.
C. Stability. All mobile homes placed within a mobile home development
shall, prior to occupancy or other use, be affixed to their mobile home
stands in such a way so as to prevent tilting of the unit. No mobile home
shall permanently rest on the wheels used to transport the unit.
D. Skirts. All mobile homes placed within a mobile home development
shall, prior to occupancy or other use, have skirts installed which are
designed to complement the appearance of the mobile home and are
coordinated throughout the park.
E. Hitch. The hitch or tow bar attached to a mobile home for transport
purposes shall be removed and remain removed from the mobile home
when it is placed on its mobile home stand.
§ 154-53 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-54
151:423

ARTICLE VII
Fees; Conditions of Acceptance
§ 154-55. Fees and costs.
The subdivider shall be required to pay the following fees and costs:
§ 154-56. Conditions of acceptance.
A. Preliminary plan. Fees are established by resolution by the Board of
Supervisors.102 In addition to fees established by resolution, all charges
in Subsection B(1) through B(4) also apply.
B. Final plan. No fee will be charged for filing a construction improvement
plan or a record plan unless no preliminary plan has been filed, in which
case the fees established for preliminary plans will be charged. In
addition, all fees listed in Subsection B(1) through B(4) apply:
(1) Engineering services. The services of the Township Engineer, as
provided in these rules and regulations. In addition, all costs for
other engineering and professional certification as deemed
necessary.
(2) Material and facilities tests. The actual cost of all drainage, water
and/or material tests.
(3) Inspection. Ten dollars per hour for each hour or portion thereof
the Township officer is engaged on the work. [Amended
9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 301]
(4) Dedication. Legal fees, advertising and other costs involved in the
dedication of streets and public improvements to the Township.
C. Review fees. In addition to any other fees or costs payable as set forth
above, the subdivider shall pay for all other review fees including
reasonable and necessary charges by the Township's professional
consultants, Solicitor or Engineer for review and report thereon to the
Township. Such review fees shall be based upon a schedule established
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors from time to time.103 [Added
1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 296]
A. Conditions. The Township shall have no obligation to take over and
make public any street or other improvements unless:
(1) The requirement improvements, utility mains and laterals and
monuments shown on an approved plan or plans have been
constructed to all requirements.
102. Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
103. Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 154-55 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-56
151:425
(2) It is established to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that
there is a need for the improvements to be taken over and made
public.
B. Acceptance. The Township shall have no responsibility with respect to
any street or other improvement, notwithstanding the use of the same
by the public, unless the street or other improvement is accepted by an
ordinance or resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
C. Guaranty. The applicant shall guarantee for a period of 18 months from
the date of the ordinance accepting dedication to maintain the stability
of all materials and work and to promptly make good and replace all
poor or inferior materials or workmanship and all shrinkage, settlement
or other faults of any kind whatsoever arising therefrom, at his own
expense and to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer, when notified
in writing to do so by the Township Engineer, and, in order to secure the
guaranty as herein required, the Township shall be assured by means of
a proper guaranty in the form of a bond or surety satisfactory to the
Township or the deposit of funds or securities in escrow in an amount
equal to 15% of the completion guaranty posted by the owner with the
Township. [Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 232]
§ 154-56 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-56
151:426
ARTICLE VIII
Amendments
§ 154-57. Amendment procedure.
The Board of Supervisors of Upper Providence Township may from time
to time amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal this chapter by
proceeding in the following manner. The Board of Supervisors, by resolution
adopted at a regular or special meeting, shall fix the time and place of a
public hearing of the proposed amendment and cause public notice thereof
to be given as follows:
§ 154-58. Referral to Planning Commission.
All proposed amendments, before adoption, shall be referred to the
Township Planning Commission and the Montgomery County Planning
Commission at least 30 days prior to the public hearing for recommendation
and report, which shall not be binding.
A. By publishing a notice thereof once each week for two successive weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The first notice
shall not be more than 30 days nor less than 14 days from the date of
the hearing.
B. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing, the general
nature of the proposed amendment and that full opportunity to be
heard will be given to any citizen and all parties in interest attending
such hearing.
C. Whenever a proposed amendment affects a particular property, then
there shall be posted upon said property or premises, at such place or
places as the Board of Supervisors may direct, notice of said proposed
amendment.
§ 154-57 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-58
151:427

ARTICLE IX
Act 209 Traffic Impact Fees
[Added 6-17-2019 by Ord. No. 578]
§ 154-59. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Upper Providence Township
Transportation Impact Fee Ordinance."
§ 154-60. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a transportation impact fee to
ensure that the cost of needed capital improvements be applied to new
developments in a manner that will allocate equitably the cost of those
improvements among property owners such that the transportation system
of the Township is available and adequate to support new growth and
development. To advance this objective, there is hereby created a
transportation impact fee payable to the Township at the time of issuance of
the building permit(s).
§ 154-61. Findings and conclusions.
The Board, pursuant to Act 209, hereby finds and declares:
A. The conditions and standards for determination and imposition of a
transportation impact fee set forth herein are those set forth in Act 209
and consist of:
(1) The recitals set forth above;
(2) The analysis, advice and recommendations of the Committee;
(3) The Land Use Assumptions Report as prepared by the Committee
and approved by the Board on the above date;
(4) The Roadway Sufficiency Analysis as prepared by the Committee
and approved by the Board on the above date;
(5) The Transportation Capital Improvement Plan as prepared by the
Committee and approved by the Board on the above date; and
(6) Such other conditions and standards as the Board may by
resolution from time to time identify as being relevant, material
and necessary to the imposition of a Transportation Impact Fee and
consistent with the provisions of Act 209 and any amendments
thereto.
B. The amount of the per-peak-hour-trip transportation impact fees shall
be set forth in Section 59-13, "Calculation of Per-Peak-Hour-Trip Fee for
the Transportation Service Area" of this article.
§ 154-59 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-61
151:429
§ 154-62. Definitions.
The terms and definitions as set forth in 53 P.S. § 10502-A, Definitions, of
Act 209 are hereby adopted, referenced and incorporated as if more fully
set forth herein.
§ 154-63. Enactment and imposition of transportation impact fees.
There is hereby enacted a transportation impact fee to be imposed upon
new subdivision and new development, as defined in the Act, for the
purpose of funding off-site public transportation improvements as
authorized by Act 209 and as described in the Roadway Sufficiency Analysis
approved by the Board and the Capital Improvements plan approved by
the Board. The transportation impact fees shall apply to all subdivisions
or new developments (as such term is defined under 53 P.S. § 10502-A)
within the transportation service area as hereinafter defined and identified
(the "transportation service area") and shall be due and payable to the
Township at the time of issuance of a building permit(s), such payment
being a condition precedent to the issuance and validity of such building
permit(s).
§ 154-64. Uses.
Transportation impact fees collected pursuant to this article may be
expended for those costs incurred for improvements identified in the
analysis and plan which are attributable to subdivision or new development,
including the acquisition of land and rights-of-way, engineering, legal and
planning costs and all other costs which are directly related to road
improvements within the transportation service area, including debt
service, and further including such proportionate amount of the preparation
of the Roadway Sufficiency Analysis as is permitted pursuant to Act 209.
§ 154-65. Incorporation and adoption of supporting documentation.
The following documents, approved by the Board, are hereby incorporated
by reference in full in this article, as if attached hereto:
C. The time, method and procedure for payment of Transportation Impact
Fees shall be as set forth in Section 59-15, "Administration of
Transportation Impact Fees" of this article.
D. The procedure for credits against Transportation Impact Fees shall be
as set forth in Section 59-17, "Credit" of this article.
E. The procedure for refunds of transportation impact fees shall be set
forth in Section 59-18, "Refunds" of this article.
A. The Land Use Assumptions Report as approved by Resolution No.
2018-67;
B. The Roadway Sufficiency Analysis as approved by Resolution No.
2019-22;
§ 154-61 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-65
151:430
§ 154-66. Special transportation studies.
§ 154-67. Uniform applicability of transportation impact fees.
This article shall be uniformly applicable to all subdivision and new
developments that occur within the transportation service area.
§ 154-68. Imposition and payment of transportation impact fee as
condition to issuance of building permit.
No building permit shall be issued for a subdivision or new development
within the transportation service area until such time as the applicant
thereof has paid to the Township the transportation impact fee imposed by
and calculated pursuant to this article.
C. The Transportation Capital Improvements Plan as approved by
Resolution No. 2019-22; and
D. The Transportation Service Areas Map as prepared by McMahon
Associates, Inc., attached as Exhibit "A" to the Transportation Capital
Improvements Plan, and incorporated by reference in full herein, as if
attached hereto.
A. Where intended to assist in the determination of the appropriate
amount of the transportation impact fee, the Township may require an
applicant to prepare a special transportation study (the "special
transportation studies") to determine the traffic generation and
circulation patterns in new nonresidential developments or
subdivisions; provided, however, that no studies may be required when
the proposed development will not require a deviation from the land use
assumptions resulting in increased density, intensity or trip generation.
The special transportation study shall be prepared by a qualified traffic
or transportation engineer in accord with generally accepted
transportation planning and engineering standards and shall be
submitted prior to the imposition of a transportation impact fee and
shall be considered in determination of same. The applicant shall be
responsible for all costs associated with the special transportation
studies.
B. Where a new nonresidential development is proposed which deviates
from the land use assumptions resulting in increased density, intensity
or trip generation, the developer shall be required to prepare a special
transportation study in order to assist the Township in determining
traffic generation or circulation and to serve as the basis for the
determination of the amount of the transportation impact fee for such
development or subdivision. Such transportation studies shall conform
with the requirements of the Township's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. Any such studies shall be submitted prior to
the imposition of the impact fee and shall be considered in the
determination of the fee.
§ 154-65 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-69
151:431
§ 154-69. Method of calculation.
§ 154-70. Establishment of transportation service areas.
A. The transportation impact fee shall be based upon the total costs of
road improvements or portions thereof included in the analysis and
plan within a given transportation service area that are attributable to
and necessitated by subdivision and/or new development within the
transportation service area, as calculated in accordance with the Act
and herewith, divided by the number of anticipated peak-hour trips
generated by all subdivision and/or new development consistent with a)
the land use assumptions, as approved, and b) calculated in accordance
with the Trip Generation Manual published by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers, 10th or subsequent editions, as amended,
which is hereby approved by the Township, to equal the per-trip cost for
transportation improvements within the transportation service area.
B. The transportation impact fee for a specific subdivision or new
development within the transportation service area for road
improvements shall be determined as of the date of preliminary
subdivision or new development approval by multiplying the per-trip
cost established for the transportation service area by the estimated
number of peak-hour trips to be generated by the subdivision or new
development using the 10th edition or later of the Trip Generation
Manual published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
C. If the subdivision or new development contains a mix of uses, the
applicant must separately calculate the transportation impact fee due
for each type of use.
D. The Board may authorize or require the preparation of a special
transportation study in order to determine the traffic generation or
circulation for a new nonresidential development to assist in the
determination of the amount of the transportation fee for such
subdivision or new development.
A. Transportation service areas are established as shown on the map,
entitled "Transportation Service Areas," as included in the analysis and
plan and as further attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and incorporated
fully herein by reference.104 As shown therein, this article recognizes a
Service Area One and Service Area Two.
B. Additional transportation service areas may be designated by the Board
from time to time consistent with the procedures set forth herein and in
Act 209 and when designated in consideration of the following
additional factors:
(1) The Township Comprehensive Plan;
104. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 154-69 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-70
151:432
§ 154-71. Calculation of per-peak-hour-trip fee for transportation
service area.
The amount of the per-peak-hour-trip fee for the transportation service area
shall be $1,955.88 for Service Area One and $2,766.02 for Service Area
Two, unless revised or amended in accordance with the provisions hereof
and the Act, calculated in accordance with the Act as follows:
§ 154-72. Nonbinding transportation impact fee estimates.
Prior to making an application for a building permit, an applicant may
request a nonbinding impact fee estimate from the Township. Unless the
applicant specifies a lesser use or development, any such estimate shall
be based upon the maximum development potential of the site pursuant to
existing zoning regulations.
§ 154-73. Administration of transportation impact fees.
(2) Any standards for adequate public facilities incorporated the
Capital Improvements Program;
(3) The projected build-out and timing of development areas; and
(4) Such other factors as the Board deems relevant.
C. Transportation impact fees collected from development and subdivision
in the transportation service area shall be used exclusively to fund
transportation improvements projects scheduled for that transportation
service area.
A. Total costs of road improvements in each transportation service area
included in the approved analysis and plan attributable to and
necessitated by new development and subdivision within the
transportation service area, including 50% of the estimated costs of
improvement to highways, roads and streets qualifying as a state
highway or portion of the rural highway system as provided under the
State Highway Law.105
B. Total costs attributable to each service area.
A. Collection. Transportation impact fees due pursuant to this article shall
be collected by the Township in the manner or manners prescribed
herein prior to the issuance of a building permit.
B. Establishment of fund. Upon the receipt of any transportation impact
fees, the Township shall be responsible for the separate and proper
accounting of such fees. All such fees shall be deposited into interestbearing
accounts in a bank authorized to receive deposits of the
Township's funds. Interest earned by each account shall be credited to
105. Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-101 et seq.
§ 154-70 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-73
151:433
§ 154-74. Time, method and procedure for payment.
The transportation impact fee for a specific subdivision or new development
shall be paid prior to the issuance of the building permit for the
development. The transportation impact fee shall be paid to the Township
in cash, bank cashier's check, certified check or electronic fund transfer
that account and shall be used solely for the purposes specified for
funds of such account.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, and in
compliance with Act 209, the Township may expend transportation
impact fees paid by an applicant for projects not contained in the
analysis and plan, or may provide credit against transportation
impact fees for the value of any construction not contained in the
analysis and plan, which are performed at the applicant's expense
if all of the following criteria are met:
(a) The applicant has not provided written consent to use its
corrected transportation impact fees or the provision of such
credit against its transportation impact fees for specific,
alternative transportation projects which are not included the
analysis and plan.
(b) The alternative transportation projects, whether highway or
multimodal, have as their purpose the reduction of traffic
congestion or the removal of vehicle trips from the roadway
network; and
(c) The Township amends its analysis and plan to provide
replacement of the collected transportation impact fees
transferred to alternative transportation projects from sources
other than impact fees or developer contributions within three
years of completion of the alternative projects to which the
transferred transportation impact fees were applied or for
which credit was provided.
C. Establishment and maintenance of accounts. The Township shall
establish appropriate trust fund accounts and shall maintain records
whereby transportation impact fees collected can be segregated for
each transportation service area.
D. Maintenance of records. The Township shall be responsible for the
separate and proper accounting of any transportation impact fees
received pursuant to this article. The Township shall maintain and keep
adequate financial records for each account, which shall show the
source and disbursement of all revenues, which shall account for all
monies received, and which shall ensure the disbursement of funds
from each account shall be used solely and exclusively for the provision
of projects specified in the analysis and plan for the transportation
service area.
§ 154-73 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-74
151:434
approved by the Township and shall be administered by the Township in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 154-75. Credit.
Any applicant who shall perform off-site improvements, at its own expense
and with the consent and agreement of the Board, shall be eligible for a
credit from a transportation impact fee otherwise due in the amount for
the actual cost of such off-site improvements as approved by the Township
Engineer. Such credit shall not exceed the amount of the transportation
impact fee that would have been charged if a credit was not due. The Board,
at its sole discretion, may direct the Township to provide the applicant:
A. A credit against the transportation impact fee otherwise due in the
amount of the fair market value of any land dedicated by the applicant
to the Township for future right-of-way, realignment or widening of any
existing roadways. The fair market value of the land dedicated by the
applicant shall be determined as of the date of the submission of the
subdivision or new development application to the Township.
B. A credit against the transportation impact fee otherwise due for the
value of construction of road improvements contained in the analysis
and plan which are performed at the applicant's expense. The amount
of such credit for any transportation capital improvements constructed
shall be the amount allocated in the analysis and plan, including
contingency factors, for such work.
C. Any applicant who shall perform, at his own expense, and with the
consent and agreement of the Board, off-site improvements, as herein
defined, shall be eligible for a credit from the transportation impact fee
otherwise due in the amount of the actual cost of such off-site
improvements as approved by the Township Engineer, only if all of the
following criteria are met:
(1) The applicant shall enter into an agreement (the "improvement
agreement") with the Township prior to the issuance of a building
permit. The improvement agreement shall establish the estimated
cost of the off-site improvements, the schedule for initiation and
completion of the off-site improvements, a requirement that the offsite
improvements be completed to Township and Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standards and design criteria and
other such terms and conditions as deemed necessary by the
Board;
(2) The Township shall review the improvement agreement, verify
costs and time schedules, determine if the improvement is
contained in the analysis and plan, and determine the amount of
the applicable credit for such improvement to be applied against
the otherwise due transportation impact fee; and
§ 154-74 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-75
151:435
§ 154-76. Refunds.
Transportation impact fees collected pursuant to this article shall be
refunded, together with earned accrued interest thereon from the date
of payment, to the payer of the impact fees under any of the following
circumstances:
(3) The applicant shall be required to supply financial security
sufficient, in the judgment of the Township, to cover the cost of any
such improvement installed by the applicant for which the credit is
sought.
D. In no instance shall any credit authorized by the Board pursuant to this
article exceed the amount of the transportation impact fee actually due.
A. In the event the Township terminates or completes the analysis and
plan for a transportation service area and there remains at the time of
termination or completion undisbursed funds in the account(s)
established for that purpose, the respective payors shall be entitled to a
share of the fund balance in the same portion as the payor's
transportation impact fee payment plus interest earned bears to the
total transportation impact fees collected plus interest. Any allocations
of a refund shall be determined by generally accepted accounting
practices. The Township shall provide written notice by certified mail to
those persons who previously paid the transportation impact fees which
remain undispersed. Such notice shall advise of that person's
proportionate share of the fund balance that is available for refund to
such person. Such notice shall be provided to the last known address
provided by the payor of the transportation impact fee to the Township.
In the event any of the funds remain unclaimed following one year after
notice, the Township shall be authorized to transfer any funds
remaining to any other fund in the Township without further obligation
to refund such funds. It shall be the responsibility of the payor to
provide the Township at all times with a current address for such
notice.
B. In the event the Township fails to commence construction of any
transportation service area road improvements (the "transportation
capital improvement") within three years of the scheduled construction
date set forth in the analysis and plan, any person who paid any
transportation impact fees pursuant to that analysis and plan shall,
upon written request to the Township, receive a refund of that portion
of the transportation impact fee attributable to the contribution for the
uncommenced transportation capital improvement, plus interest
accumulated thereon from the date of payment. However, no refund
shall be payable or paid with respect to any project actually commenced
prior to the receipt of such refund request, and the failure of a payor to
make such written request prior to the commencement of such project
shall be deemed a waiver of any right to such refund.
§ 154-75 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-76
151:436
§ 154-77. Additional and supplemental requirement.
The transportation impact fee is additional and supplemental to, and not in
substitution of, any other requirements by the Township on the subdivision
or development of land or the issuance of building permits. Nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to alter or affect the Township's existing
ordinances and regulations regarding on-site improvements. In no event
shall a property owner be obligated to pay for transportation capital
improvements in an amount in excess of the amount calculated pursuant
to this article; provided, however, that a property owner may be required
to pay, pursuant to Township ordinances, regulations or policies, for other
public facilities as an addition to the transportation impact fee as provided
herein.
§ 154-78. Retroactive application.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, transportation
impact fees may be imposed on those projects involving subdivisions, new
developments or planned residential developments for which an application
has been filed on or after the first publication of notice of the Township's
intent to adopt this article; provided, however, that such retroactivity does
not exceed 18 months after the adoption of the resolution that created the
committee in connection herewith.
§ 154-79. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith or in conflict
with any of the specific terms enacted hereby, to the extent of said
inconsistencies or conflicts, are hereby specifically repealed.
C. In the event that, upon completion of any road improvements project,
the actual expenditure for the project is less than 95% of the costs
budgeted for such project, the Township shall refund the pro rata
difference between the budgeted costs and the actual expenditures,
including interest accumulated thereon from the date of payment, to
the person(s) who paid the transportation impact fees for such
improvements.
D. If the new subdivision or new development for which the transportation
impact fees were paid is not commenced prior to the expiration of the
building permits issued for the project within the time limits
established by the applicable building codes within the Township, the
transportation impact fees paid with accumulated interest shall be
refunded to the payor. Further, if the building permit as issued for the
project is altered and the alteration results in a decrease in the amount
of the transportation impact fee due in accordance with the calculations
set forth under § 154-69, Method of calculation, the difference between
such amount and the amount actually paid shall be refunded. The payor,
at its option, may roll over the transportation impact fees attributable to
an expired building permit to cover fees incurred by a new permit.
§ 154-76 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-80
151:437
§ 154-80. Revisions.
The Upper Providence Township Board of Supervisors does hereby reserve
the right, from time to time, to adopt amendments to this article.
§ 154-81. Severability.
In the event that any section, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this
article shall be declared illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not prevent, preclude or
otherwise foreclose enforcement of any of the remaining portions of this
article.
§ 154-82. When effective.
This article shall become effective five days after the date of adoption.
§ 154-83. Failure to enforce not a waiver.
The failure of Upper Providence Township to enforce any provision of this
article shall not constitute a waiver by the Township of its rights of future
enforcement hereunder.
§ 154-80 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 154-83
151:438
Chapter 160
TAXATION
§ 154-83 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 154-83
151:439

ARTICLE I
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 478106]
§ 160-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Upper Providence
Township Local Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 160-2. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
or language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The Tax Collector of Upper Providence Township, or
any other person designated by Upper Providence Township to collect
and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation, as this term is defined in Section
13 (relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act,
the Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 6913,107 as amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited-liability
corporation, limited-liability partnership, corporation, governmental
body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, including a selfemployed
person.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of Upper Providence
Township.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on
or performed within the corporate limits of Upper Providence Township
for which compensation is charged or received, whether by means of
salary, wages, commission or fees for services rendered.
106. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Occupational Privilege Tax
adopted 2-1-1971 by Ord. No. 133, as amended.
107. This section of the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6913, was repealed by 2008, July 2,
P.L. 197, No. 32, effective 6-30-2012.
§ 160-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-2
151:441
§ 160-3. Levy of tax.
§ 160-4. Exemption and refunds.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 160-3 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year;
a calendar year.
B. The words "he," "his" or "him" shall mean and indicate the singular and
plural numbers, as well as male, female and neuter genders.
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging
in an occupation with a primary place of employment within Upper
Providence Township during the tax year. Each natural person who
exercises such privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall
pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata
basis, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. This tax may be used solely for the following purposes as the same may
be allocated by Upper Providence Township from time to time:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes; or
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85,
Subchapter F108 (relating to homestead property exclusion).
C. Upper Providence Township shall use no less than 25% of the funds
derived from the tax for emergency services.
D. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore
levied by Upper Providence Township.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within Upper Providence Township is less than $12,000 for
any calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment
of the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
108. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8581 et seq.
§ 160-2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 160-4
151:442
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as
a result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a
double or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total, one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the Upper
Providence Township Tax Collector and with the person's employer
affirming that the person reasonably expects to receive earned
income and net profits from all sources within Upper Providence
Township of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for which the
exemption certificate is filed. The exemption certificate shall have
attached to it a copy of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2
forms from employment within Upper Providence Township for the
year prior to the fiscal year for which the employee is requesting to
be exempted from the tax. Upon receipt of the exemption
certificate and until otherwise instructed by Upper Providence
Township or except as required by § 160-4B(2), the employer shall
not withhold the tax from the person during the calendar year or
the remainder of the calendar year for which the exemption
certificate applies. Employers shall ensure that the exemption
certificate forms are readily available to employees at all times and
shall furnish each new employee with a form at the time of hiring.
The exemption certificate form shall be the uniform form provided
by Upper Providence Township.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption from the tax for
a given calendar year, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by Upper Providence Township that the person has
received earned income and net profits from all sources within
Upper Providence Township equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax
exemption for that calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to
the person of earned income within the municipality in an amount
equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer
shall withhold the local services tax from the person under
§ 160-4B(3).
§ 160-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-4
151:443
§ 160-5. Duty of employers to collect.
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption from the tax for a given
calendar year becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year
under § 160-4B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under § 160-4B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount of
tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and Upper Providence Township
may pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in § 160-4B(2), it is the intent of this subsection
that employers shall not be responsible for investigating exemption
certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or exempting any
employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. Upper Providence Township, in consultation with the
Collector and DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of
refund claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for
exemption, which procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the
general municipal law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest
on overpayments. Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or
75 days after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax for
the last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be
subject to interest. No refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a
calendar year that do not exceed $1: Upper Providence Township or the
Collector shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide refunds
to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within Upper Providence Township, as well as those
employers situated outside Upper Providence Township but who
engage in business within Upper Providence Township, is hereby
charged with the duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees
engaged by him or performing for him within Upper Providence
Township and making a return and payment thereof to the Collector.
Further, each employer is hereby authorized to deduct this tax for each
employee in his employ, whether said employee is paid by salary, wage
or commission and whether or not all such services are performed
within Upper Providence Township.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro-rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro-rata share of the tax assessed on the person
§ 160-4 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 160-5
151:444
§ 160-6. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him to an
employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer shall be
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the
tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro-rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of
a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll-period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer, and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. Upper Providence Township shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to Upper Providence Township if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of Subsection B
of § 160-4 of this article and this section and remits the amount so
withheld in accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 160-5 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-6
151:445
responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had been
originally levied against the employer.
§ 160-7. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 160-8. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within Upper Providence Township shall be required to comply
with this article and pay the pro-rata portion of the tax due to the Collector
on or before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 160-9. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 160-10. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of Upper Providence Township but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within Upper
Providence Township do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and
subject themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated
under this article with the same force and effect as though they were
residents of Upper Providence Township. Further, any individual engaged
in an occupation within Upper Providence Township and an employee of a
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires that the
person work in more than one political subdivision during a payroll
period, the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in
the following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his
principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
§ 160-6 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 160-10
151:446
nonresidential employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a
self-employed person, and in the event his tax is not paid, Upper Providence
Township shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or
employee for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 160-11. Duty of Collector; administration and enforcement of tax.
§ 160-12. Recovery of unpaid tax; interest; penalty for nonpayment.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of Upper Providence
Township. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer or self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights109 under Act 50 of
1998.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
109. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 160-10 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-13
151:447
§ 160-13. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject
to this tax who are in his employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file
any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to enforce the penalty
herein prescribed may be instituted against any person in charge of the
business of any employer who shall have failed or who refuses to file a
return required by this article.
§ 160-14. Interpretation; validity.
§ 160-15. (Reserved)
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower Upper
Providence Township to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of Upper Providence Township
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 160-13 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 160-15
151:448
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)110
§ 160-16. through § 160-20. (Reserved)
110. Editor’s Note: Former Art. II, Per Capita Tax, adopted 2-1-1971 by Ord. No. 134, as
amended, was repealed 2-6-2017 by Ord. No. 557.
§ 160-16 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-16
151:449

ARTICLE III
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 1-7-1974 by Ord. No. 154; amended in its entirety
8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 516]
§ 160-21. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act shall have the meanings set
forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of Upper Providence
Township.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth in
53 P.S. § 6901 et. seq., while such numbering and provisions remain in effect
under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et. seq., when
such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32 of 2008, and
as amended in the future.
TAX — The tax imposed by this ordinance.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the collector for reporting the amount
of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted or
reported under this ordinance or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TCC — The Tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the Township or any part of the
Township is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
THIS ORDINANCE — This article.
TOWNSHIP — Upper Providence Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 160-22. Imposition of tax; rate.
A. General purpose resident tax. The Township hereby imposes a tax for
general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income and net
profits of individual residents of the Township.
B. General purpose nonresident tax. The Township hereby imposes a tax
for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income and
net profits derived by an individual who is not a resident of the
Township from any work, business, profession or activity of any kind
engaged in within the boundaries of the Township.
§ 160-21 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-22
151:451
§ 160-23. Exemptions.
Although credits and deductions against the tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations, no individuals
are exempt from the tax based on age, income or other factors.
§ 160-23.1. Tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay the tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 160-23.2. Employer withholding, remittance and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold and remit the tax, and file tax
returns in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 160-23.3. Collection of tax.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the collector.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this ordinance is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Combined tax rate applicable to residents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to residents of the Township, including the tax imposed by
the school district and municipality in which the individual resides, is
1%.
E. Municipal tax rate applicable to nonresidents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to nonresidents working within the Township based on the
municipal nonresident tax rate is 1%.
F. Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this
ordinance. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that
are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will
automatically become part of this ordinance upon the effective date of
such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this
ordinance, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
G. Applicable laws, regulations, policies and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations; and policies and procedures adopted by the TCC or by the
collector. This includes any regulations, policies and procedures
adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa. C.S.A.
§ 1937.
§ 160-22 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 160-23.4
151:452
§ 160-23.4. Interest, penalties, costs and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 160-23.5. Purpose; effect on prior revisions.
The primary purpose of this ordinance is to conform the earned income
and net profits tax currently imposed by the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time frame
required by Act 32. Any prior enactment imposing a tax on earned income
or net profits of individuals is amended and restated in its entirety to read
as stated in this ordinance. Any other prior enactment or part of any prior
enactment conflicting with the provisions of this ordinance is rescinded
insofar as the conflict exists. To the extent the same as any enactment in
force immediately prior to adoption of this ordinance, the provisions of this
ordinance are intended as a continuation of such prior enactment and not as
a new enactment. If this ordinance is declared invalid, any prior enactment
levying a similar tax shall remain in full force and effect and shall not
be affected by adoption of this ordinance. If any part of this ordinance is
declared invalid, the similar part of any prior enactment levying a similar
tax shall remain in effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this
ordinance. The provisions of this ordinance shall not affect any act done or
liability incurred, nor shall such provisions affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty or to punish an
offense under the authority of any enactment in force prior to adoption
of this ordinance. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, this
ordinance shall amend and restate on the effective date any enactment
levying a tax on earned income or net profits in force immediately prior to
the effective date.111
111. Editor's Note: For effective date, see § 160-21, Definitions.
§ 160-23.4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-23.5
151:453

ARTICLE IV
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 268]
§ 160-24. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of Upper
Providence Township."
§ 160-25. Tax levied.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or an interest in real estate situated within
Upper Providence Township, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements on
such transfer took place, as authorized by Article XI-D, Real Estate Transfer
Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 160-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate; but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid, or any cancellation thereof, unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 160-25 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
§ 160-24 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-26
151:455
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person" as applied to associations shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within Upper Providence
Township, including, without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures,
mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or
lower boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or
interests, excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in
an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holding, exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
A.
§ 160-26 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 160-26
151:456
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
§ 160-27. Imposition of tax; interest.
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold; or
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof, where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents, also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that, where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations.
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest.
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons, existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
§ 160-26 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-27
151:457
§ 160-28. Exemptions.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 160-29. Excluded transactions.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the recorder whereon the date
of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer, then the tax levied by Upper Providence Township under the
authority of that Act shall during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and
such one-half rate shall become effective without any action on the part
of Upper Providence Township; provided, however, that Upper
Providence Township and any other political subdivision which imposes
such tax on the same person or transfer may agree that, instead of
limiting their respective rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they
will impose respectively different rates, the total of which shall not
exceed the maximum rate permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. Any tax imposed under this Article IV that is not paid by the date the tax
is due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent
municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153)(53
P.S. § 7101 et seq.), as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and
Tax Liens Act." The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate
imposed upon delinquent commonwealth taxes as provided in Section
806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176)(72 P.S. § 806), as
amended, known as the "Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate
permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
[Amended 6-18-2007 by Ord. No. 472]
§ 160-27 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 160-29
151:458
A. The tax imposed by § 160-27 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which Upper Providence Township is prohibited from
taxing under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax-delinquent property at a Sheriff's sale or
Tax Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer or division in kind for no nominal actual consideration of
property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
the spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse
of a brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or
the spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by
the grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedents devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
§ 160-29 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-29
151:459
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between the
principal and agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw
party where if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax
would be imposed under this article. Where the document by which
title is acquired by a grantee or the statement of value fails to set
forth that the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the
benefit of his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if.
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
§ 160-29 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 160-29
151:460
§ 160-30. Documents relating to associations or corporations.
Except as otherwise provided in § 160-29, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 160-31. Acquired company.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for the religious organization, if such real
estate is not being or has not been used by such transferor for
commercial purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c) (3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954 [68A, Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c) (3)] and which has as its
primary purpose the preservation of land for historic, recreational,
scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason that such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company, and, of itself or together
with prior changes, has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
§ 160-29 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-31
151:461
§ 160-32. Credits against tax.
§ 160-33. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount or tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
§ 160-31 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 160-34
151:462
§ 160-34. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority, out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, except the state realty transfer tax, and the Sheriff or
other officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 160-35. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 160-36. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by the Act of July 7, 1983
(P.L. 40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for
the local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to Upper
Providence Township based on a redetermination of the amount of tax
due by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax, without compensation from Upper Providence Township.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to
Upper Providence Township all local realty transfer taxes collected, less
2% for use of the county, together with a report containing the
information as is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in
reporting collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The twopercent
commission shall be paid by the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee have been
tendered.
§ 160-34 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-36
151:463
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 160-37. Civil penalties.
§ 160-38. Unpaid tax a lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments or any interest therein lying or being situated,
wholly or in part, within the boundaries of Upper Providence Township,
which lands, tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described
in or conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the
tax imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the
time when the tax under this article is due and payable and continue until
discharge by payment or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas
of Montgomery County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
§ 160-39. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with the interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 160-40. Regulations.
The Board of Supervisors of Upper Providence Township is charged with
the enforcement and collection of the tax and is empowered to promulgate
and enforce reasonable regulations for the enforcement and collection of
the tax. The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into
and made a part of this article.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 160-36 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 160-40
151:464
ARTICLE V
Tax Collector Fees
[Adopted 12-18-1995 by Ord. No. 348; amended in its entirety
2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 537]
§ 160-41. Fee established.
A. The Board of Supervisors hereby establishes the following Tax Collector
fees:
(1) A service fee of $15 for the preparation of a certification of taxes
paid on real estate involved in a sale. The fee shall be paid directly
to the elected Tax Collector at the time of request for such
certification.
(2) A returned check fee of $25.
(3) A duplicate bill fee of $5.
B. Fees shall be revised, as necessary, by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 160-41 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-41
151:465

ARTICLE VI
Collection of Delinquent Real Estate Taxes
[Adopted 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 567]
§ 160-42. Statutory authority; alternative collector.
In addition to the authorization for the collection of taxes and institution of
tax sales authorized by the Real Estate Tax Sales Law ("RETSL"), 72 P.S.
§ 5860.201 et seq., the Montgomery County Tax Claim Bureau is appointed
as alternative collector and is authorized and directed to file liens for
existing delinquent real estate taxes with the Prothonotary of Montgomery
County in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 160-43. Interest charged.
In accordance with the MCTLA and RETSL, interest shall be charged on
taxes so returned from and after but not before the first day of the month
following the return. Interest shall be charged at the rate of 9% per annum.
§ 160-44. Charges, expenses and fees.
Pursuant to Section 7106 of the MCTLA, it is hereby established that
the reasonable charges, expenses and fees incurred in the collection of
any delinquent account under the MCTLA are hereby fixed at 5% of the
total amount of the delinquent taxes (including interest and penalties), and
that additional reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in the collection of any
delinquent taxes shall be fixed at 1% of the total amount of the delinquent
taxes (including interest and penalties), and that said charges for attorneys'
fees and for all charges, expenses and fees set forth herein, shall be paid
to the County of Montgomery through the Montgomery County Tax Claim
Bureau in lieu of payment of commission pursuant to Section 207 of RETSL.
§ 160-45. Additional actions authorized.
The proper officials of Upper Providence Township are hereby authorized
and empowered to take such additional action as they may deem necessary
or appropriate to implement this article.
§ 160-46. Severability.
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this article shall be held invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect any other section, clause, provision or portion of this article
so long as it remains legally enforceable minus the invalid portion. Upper
Providence Township reserves the right to amend this article or any portion
thereof from time to time as it shall deem advisable in the best interest of
the promotion of the purposes and intent of this article, and the effective
administration thereof.
§ 160-42 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-46
151:467
Chapter 165
(RESERVED)
Chapter 169
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 160-46 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 160-46
165:468
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 169-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 169-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Township of Upper Providence.
§ 169-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 169-4. Experimental regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
Articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq. (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except
that in this chapter the word "street" may be used interchangeably with
the word "highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word
"highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Township Manager shall have the following powers to regulate
traffic and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Township Manager and the police in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who drives or parks a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature.
A. The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, designate places upon
and along the streets in the Township where, for a period of not more
§ 169-1 (RESERVED) § 169-4
165:469
§ 169-5. Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events.
§ 169-6. Authority of police officers.
The police shall have authority to direct traffic on the streets in the
Township, at intersections in public and in other places where the Vehicle
Code or this chapter applies.
than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate those
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in
this chapter. No person shall drive or park a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made
by authority of this section. Any person who violates any provision of
this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty set out in the
law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station police officers at each end of the closed portion, while
construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is
being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
under way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
§ 169-4 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-6
165:470
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 169-7. Speed limits.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I (§ 169-40), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated in said
schedule. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that street or part of a street.
§ 169-8. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated (or are ratified if
previously installed) at the intersection of those streets described in
Schedule II (§ 169-41), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 169-9. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
into another one-way street) when facing a steady red signal at any of the
locations described in Schedule III (§ 169-42), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 169-10. Prohibited turns at intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a turn of the kind
designated (left, right, all) at any of the intersections described in Schedule
IV (§ 169-43), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 169-11. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn on any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V (§ 169-44), attached
to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 169-12. One-way streets.
The streets or partsVillagespfmt -p2 -t=5 of streets described in Schedule
VI (§ 169-45), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby
designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other than
in the direction established for traffic on that street.
§ 169-13. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established along those streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VII (§ 169-46), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake
or pass another vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any nopassing
zone described in said schedule.
§ 169-7 (RESERVED) § 169-14
165:471
§ 169-14. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VIII (§ 169-47), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby established as stop intersections,
and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected)
in such a position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching
the second-named street in the direction or directions indicated in said
schedule. Every driver of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon
the first-named street, in the direction or directions indicated in each case,
shall come to a full stop before entering any such intersection.
§ 169-15. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 169-48), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby established as yield intersections, and
official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected) in
such a position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street in the direction or directions indicated. Every driver of
a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street, in
the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop
the vehicle and then yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection
or approaching on the second-named street so closely as to constitute a
hazard during the time that the driver is moving across or within such
intersection.
§ 169-16. Closing of certain streets to trucks. [Amended 1-7-2008
by Ord. No. 481]
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any truck, or any truck of a
specified length, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule X (§ 169-49), attached to and made a part of this chapter, except
for retail sales or services to residences directly abutting said streets. No
truck traffic shall use said streets as through ways to reach other property
having access to an unrestricted road.
§ 169-17. Vehicle weight limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any commercial vehicle or
other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination, having a gross weight in
excess of that respectively prescribed, upon any of the streets or bridges, or
portions thereof, described in Schedule XI (§ 169-50), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, except for the purpose of making local deliveries on
said streets.
§ 169-17.1. Prohibition of brake retarders. [Added 12-20-2010 by
Ord. No. 512]
It shall be unlawful for any person to use brake retarders while operating
a truck upon any of the streets, or portions thereof, described in Schedule
XVIII (§ 169-57), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 169-14 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-17.1
165:472
ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 169-18. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 169-19. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XII (§ 169-51), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, except at the angle designated and only within the painted stall
lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is now or shall
hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked with
the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 169-20. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XIII (§ 169-52), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 169-21. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIV (§ 169-53), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, during the hours specified in said schedule, on any day except
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
§ 169-22. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XV (§ 169-54),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, between the hours specified,
for longer than the time indicated in said schedule.
§ 169-23. Special purpose parking zones. [Amended 7-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 363]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to allow the
same to remain parked in any special purpose parking zone established
in Schedule XVI (§ 169-55), attached to and made a part of this chapter,
except as specifically provided for such zone.
B. No person, corporation or entity shall park a vehicle upon any street or
parts of streets in any residential district, as defined in the Zoning
Ordinances of Upper Providence Township, any commercial vehicle
having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds
§ 169-18 (RESERVED) § 169-23
165:473
§ 169-23.1. Handicapped persons and severely disabled veterans
parking. [Added 1-7-2008 by Ord. No. 482]
or more. This prohibition shall not apply to the parking of commercial
vehicles for the purpose of delivery or pickup of goods or delivery of
services to any building or lot in that district. For purposes of this
section, each day a vehicle is parked in violation of this section shall be
a separate offense.
C. To promote the public health, safety and welfare by preventing
unnecessary noise and air pollution, it is hereby declared that no
person, corporation or entity shall leave any internal combustion
engine-powered vehicle idling in any residential district as defined by
the Zoning Ordinances of Upper Providence Township for more than a
total of 60 minutes per day between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. prevailing local time or for more than a total of 10 minutes
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. For the purpose of this
section, "idling" shall be defined as any running of an internal
combustion powered vehicle while the vehicle is stationary, regardless
of the revolutions per minute of the internal combustion engine at
issue. Any person, corporation or entity violating this section shall be
fined not less than $75 and not more than $600.
A. In all such spaces on public and private property which have been
reserved for a handicapped person or severely disabled veteran and
have been properly marked, it shall be unlawful for any person, except
for persons parking vehicles lawfully bearing a handicapped or severely
disabled veteran registration plate or displaying a duly issued
handicapped or severely disabled veteran parking placard when such
vehicles are being operated by or for the transportation of a
handicapped person or a severely disabled veteran, to park in such
spaces or zones.
B. At the request of any handicapped person or severely disabled veteran,
the Township shall erect on the highway as close as possible to the
residence of the handicapped person or severely disabled veteran a
sign or signs indicating that the parking space is reserved for the
handicapped person or severely disabled veteran, that no parking is
allowed there by others and that any unauthorized person parking
there shall be subject to a fine.
C. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
HANDICAPPED OR SEVERELY DISABLED VETERAN PARKING
PLACARD — A parking placard issued by the Department of
Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other state
or commonwealth which designates the user as having the right to
use the vehicle for the purpose of assisting the handicapped person or
severely disabled veteran.
§ 169-23 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-23.1
165:474
§ 169-24. Penalties for parking violations. [Amended 3-5-2012 by
Ord. No. 523]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $75 and costs; provided,
however, that it shall be the duty of the police officers and of parking
enforcement personnel of the Township to report to the Chief of Police
all violations of any provision of this article, indicating, in each case, the
section violated, the license number of the vehicle involved in the violation,
the location where the violation took place and any other facts that might
be necessary in order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances
attending the violation. The police officer or other person making the report
shall also attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that
the vehicle was parked in violation of this article. The notice shall contain
instructions to the owner or driver of the vehicle that if he will report to
the office of the Chief of Police and pay the sum of $25 or, in the event
of a violation of § 169-23.1, Handicapped persons and severely disabled
veterans parking, the sum of $50, within 48 hours after the time of the
notice, that act will save the violator from prosecution and from payment of
the fine and costs prescribed in the first sentence of this section.
HANDICAPPED OR SEVERELY DISABLED VETERAN REGISTRATION
PLATE — Any special registration license plate issued by the
Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or any other state or commonwealth which designates the vehicle so
licensed as owned and/or operated by a handicapped person or severely
disabled veteran.
§ 169-23.1 (RESERVED) § 169-24
165:475

ARTICLE IV
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 169-25. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle Code
and gives authority to the township to remove and impound vehicles that
are parked overtime on any street in the township in violation of any
provision of Article I or Article III of this chapter.
§ 169-26. Authority to remove and impound.
The township shall have authority to remove and impound, or to order
the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 168-25 of this article and provided that no such
vechile shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the
provisions of this article.
§ 169-27. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time
by the Board of Supervisors. Every such garage shall submit evidence
to the Board of Supervisors that it is bonded or has acquired liability
insurance in an amount satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors as sufficient
to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to
those vehicles while in the custody of the garagekeeper for the purpose of
towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to the Board
of Supervisors its schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles
under this article, and when the schedule is approved by the Board of
Supervisors, those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage
garage. No different schedule of charges shall be adopted without approval
of the Board of Supervisors, and no different charges shall be demanded of
or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or impounded under
this article by any approved storage garage. The Board of Supervisors shall
delete from its list of approved storage garages any garage that makes any
unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle removed or impounded
under this article.
§ 169-28. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that the vehicle was removed shall
be sent by the Township to the owner of record of the vehicle. The notice
shall designate the place from which the vehicle was removed, the reason
for its removal and impounding and the garage in which it was impounded.
§ 169-25 (RESERVED) § 169-29
165:477
§ 169-29. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this article
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive and
shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If
payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a District Justice. Payment
of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any
vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision
of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 169-30. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Township shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded
under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the
owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to
the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 169-31. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in
charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 169-29 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-31
165:478
ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 169-32. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of
snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named pursuant to § 169-34
of this article, the Township Manager, in his discretion, may declare a snow
and ice emergency (designated in this article as a "snow emergency").
Information on the existence of a snow emergency may be given by the
Township through radio, newspaper or other available media, and
information on the termination of the emergency may be given by use of the
same media.
§ 169-33. Parking and driving restrictions.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 169-34. Snow emergency routes.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XVII (§ 169-56),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as snow
emergency routes.
§ 169-35. Penalty for violation.
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated pursuant to
§ 169-34; or
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
A. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 169-32 of this article, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a
motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency
route, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon
conviction, shall be punishable as provided in § 169-24 of this chapter.
B. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 169-32 of this article, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and,
upon conviction, shall be punishable as provided in § 169-36 of this
chapter.
§ 169-32 (RESERVED) § 169-35
165:479

ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 169-36. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or except as herein specified, every person
convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, or any supplement
thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of $25 and costs of prosecution.
§ 169-37. Repeal of previous ordinances; effect.
§ 169-38. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of
this chapter. It is hereby declared as a legislative intent that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise
invalid provision not been included herein.
§ 169-39. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect March 2, 1992.
A. All previous ordinances of the Township of Upper Providence pertaining
to the regulation of traffic and parking are hereby repealed.
B. The repeal of ordinances provided for in Subsection A above shall not
affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any
act done or liability incurred in violation of any ordinance or regulation
in force immediately prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
C. The provisions of this chapter, insofar as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments.
§ 169-36 (RESERVED) § 169-39
165:481

ARTICLE VII
Schedules
§ 169-40. Schedule I: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 169-7, the speed limit for both
directions of traffic along the streets or parts thereof described below is
hereby established at the rate of speed indicated:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Amanda lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Amelia Street [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Anderson Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Anthony Wayne Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Apple Street [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Arcola Road [Added
1-18-1994 by Ord. No. 323;
amended 5-19-2003 by
Ord. No. 427; 7-21-2008 by
Ord. No. 4914-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 501]
35 Entire length
Argyle Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Ashbridge Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Ashenfelter Road 30 Entire length
Bechtel Road [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
25 Entire length
Belmont Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Berkshire Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Birchleaf Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Black Rock Park, all internal
roads [Added 6-7-1999 by
Ord. No. 385]
15 From intersection with Black
Rock Road into Black Rock
Park
§ 169-40 (RESERVED) § 169-40
165:483
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Bonny Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Borough Line Road [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
25 Entire length
Brandon Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Brower Avenue [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Buchthorn Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Buckwalter Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Butternut Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Cambridge Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Cardinal Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Caroline Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Carriage Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Center Avenue [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
25 Entire length
Cheyenne Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Chinaberry Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Cider Mill Road [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366;
amended 5-19-2003 by
Ord. No. 427]
35 Entire length
Cochise Lane [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
25 Entire length
College Avenue [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 From Greenwood Avenue to
the municipal boundary
Corkwood Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
§ 169-40 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-40
165:484
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Cottonwood Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
County Rodge Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Crosshill Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Dale Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Dana Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
David Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Donna Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Dorothy Circle [Added
1-17-2012 by Ord. No. 522]
25 Entire length
Dreibebis Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Dwight Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Egypt Road [Added
10-2-2017 by Ord. No. 565]
35 From Collegeville Road to
270 feet east of Willow Drive
Elisabeth Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Elmar Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Fegley Avenue [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Fieldcrest Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Firethorn Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Fourth Avenue (Mont Clare)
[Added 5-19-2003 by Ord.
No. 427]
25 Entire length
Fox Run Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Fruit Farm Road 35 From Lewis Road to
Mennonite Road
§ 169-40 (RESERVED) § 169-40
165:485
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Gateshead Way [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Gay Street 25 From Second Avenue to Sixth
Avenue
Grasshopper Lane [Added
1-17-2012 by Ord. No. 522]
25 Entire length
Greenbriar Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Green Street (Oaks) [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Green Tree Road [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
25 Entire length
Green Valley Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Gumbes Road [Added
12-5-1994 by Ord. No. 332]
25 From Black Rock Road to
Egypt Road
Hafner Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
35 Entire length
Harvest Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Hawthorne Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Hess Road [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
25 Entire length
Hidden Valley Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Highland Avenue [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
25 Entire length
Hillside Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Hollow Road 30 From Black Rock Road to
Egypt Road
Hollow Road [Added
6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 320]
35 From Egypt Road,
approximately 2,607 feet in a
southwesterly direction to a
sharp bend
§ 169-40 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-40
165:486
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Hollow Road [Added
6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 320]
25 From a sharp bend located
approximately 2,607 feet
southwest of Egypt Road to
Port Providence Road
Honeysuckle Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Hopwood Road 35 From Route 113 to Route 29
Ironwood Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Iroquois Drive [Added
7-15-1996 by Ord. No. 352]
25 Entire length
Jacob Street (Mont Clare) 25 Entire length
Jasper Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Keokuk Road [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
25 Entire length
Kline Road [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
25 Entire length
Knoll Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Larkspur Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Laurel Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Leatherwood Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Linfield-Trappe Road [Added
4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 571]
40 Township Line Road to Main
Street both directions (SR
4017 from SR 4014 to SR
4031)
Longacre Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Longford Road [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
35 Entire length
Lovers Lane [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
25 Entire length
Lower Indianhead Road 30 From Egypt Road to Upper
Indianhead Road
§ 169-40 (RESERVED) § 169-40
165:487
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
MacDade Road [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
25 Entire length
Madison Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Maple Avenue [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Vaughn Road to Crosshill
Road
Maple Avenue [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Vaughn Road to New Street
Marshwood Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Meadowgreen Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Meadowland Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Mennonite Road 35 From Route 113 to Lewis
Road
Mennonite Road 35 From Route 113 to Route 29
Mill Road [Added 5-19-2003
by Ord. No. 427]
35 Entire length
Mingo Road [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
35 From Yeager Road to
Springertown Road
Minuteman Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Missimer Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Montgomery Avenue [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
25 Entire length
Morgan Lane [Added
10-2-2000 by Ord. No. 395]
25 Entire length
New Street [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
North Borough Line Road
[Added 7-21-1997 by Ord.
No. 366]
25 Entire length
Norwood Avenue [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Oakland Avenue [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
25 Entire length
§ 169-40 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-40
165:488
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Oaks School Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Old Mill Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
35 Township Line Road to
Missimer Drive
Old State Road [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
35 Entire length
Olympic Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Paddington Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Paperbirch Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 From Tawnyberry Lane to
Chinaberry Lane
Pennapacker Road [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
35 Entire length
Perkiomen Avenue [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
25 Entire length
Persimmon Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Pichelman Road [Added
1-17-2012 by Ord. No. 522]
25 Entire length
Pin Oaks Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Port Providence Road [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
25 Entire length
Ramsgate Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Ridgeview Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Rittenhouse Road [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
35 Entire length
Rosemont Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Saddleview Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Sagebrush Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Scarlet Oak Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
§ 169-40 (RESERVED) § 169-40
165:489
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
School Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Second Avenue (Mont Clare)
[Added 7-15-1996 by Ord.
No. 352]
25 From Sowers Avenue to
Fegley Street
Second Avenue (State Route
4015) [Added 7-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 547]
25 From Vaughn Road to the
municipal boundary
Shetland Way [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Sierra Crest Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Sourwood Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
South Fifth Avenue [Added
9-16-1994 by Ord. No. 326]
25 From Green Street to Vaughn
Road
South Fourth Avenue [Added
9-16-1994 by Ord. No. 326]
25 From Gay Street to Vaughn
Road
South Sixth Avenue [Added
9-16-1994 by Ord. No. 326]
25 From Green Street to South
Fifth Avenue
South Third Avenue [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Vaughn Road to the municipal
boundary
Sowers Avenue [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Sparkleberry Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Splitleaf Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Springertown Road [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
25 Entire length
Springmill Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Springwood Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Sugarberry Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Sugarpine Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
§ 169-40 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-40
165:490
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Summit Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Sunset Avenue [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Tara Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Tawnyberry Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Timber Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Trotter Way [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Troutman Road 35 Entire length
Troutman Road [Added
1-18-1994 by Ord. No. 323;
amended 5-19-2003 by
Ord. No. 427]
30 Entire length
Union Street [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Upland Way [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Upper Indianhead Road
[Added 7-21-1997 by Ord.
No. 366]
35 Entire length
Vaughn Road [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 366]
35 Entire length
Vista Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Walnut Street [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 From Route 29 to Port
Providence Road
Whitaker Avenue [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Whitford Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Willowbrooke Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Willowwood Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
§ 169-40 (RESERVED) § 169-40
165:491
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Winding Ridge Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Winterberry Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Woodlyn Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
Yeager Road [Added
7-6-1992 by Ord. No. 314]
45 From Mingo Road to Lewis
Road
Yeager Road [Added
7-6-1992 by Ord. No. 314]
35 From Route 113 to Mingo
Road
Yocum Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
25 Entire length
§ 169-41. Schedule II: Traffic Control Signals. [Amended 1-3-1995
by Ord. No. 333]
In accordance with the provisions of § 169-8, traffic control signals shall
be installed and operated (or are ratified if previously installed) at the
intersections described below:
Intersection
Arcola Road and Market Street (Providence Town Center) [Added
4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 539]
Arcola Road and PA Route 29
Bechtel Road and Hopwood Road and PA Route 113 [Added 2-3-2003 by
Ord. No. 422]
Black Rock Road and Greentree Road [Added 2-3-2003 by Ord. No.
422]
Black Rock Road and PA Route 29
Black Rock Road and Yeager Road and PA Route 113 [Added 2-3-2003
by Ord. No. 422]
Doe Run Boulevard and PA Route 29
Egypt Road and Black Rock Road and US Route 422 on/off ramps
(eastbound)
Egypt Road and Brower Avenue
Egypt Road and Cider Mill Road and New Mill Road [Added 2-3-2003 by
Ord. No. 422]
Egypt Road and Cresson Boulevard [Added 5-19-2003 by Ord. No.
427]
§ 169-40 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-41
165:492
Intersection
Egypt Road and Greentree Road Fire Company warning signal [Added
2-3-2003 by Ord. No. 422]
Egypt Road and Hollow Road [Added 2-3-2003 by Ord. No. 422]
Egypt Road and Mill Road [Added 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
Egypt Road and PA Route 29 (flashing)
Egypt Road and Station Avenue and Gumbes Road [Added 2-3-2003 by
Ord. No. 422]
Egypt Road and US Route 422 on/off ramps (westbound)
Jacob Street and PA Route 29
PA Route 29 and Town Center Drive (Providence Town Center) [Added
4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 539]
Perkiomen Boulevard and PA Route 29 [Added 5-19-2003 by Ord. No.
427]
Township Line Road and Ridge Pike
US Route 422 on/off ramps A and B (eastbound) and PA Route 29 [Added
2-3-2003 by Ord. No. 422]
US Route 422 on/off ramps (westbound) and PA Route 29
Wyeth entrance road and PA Route 29 [Added 2-3-2003 by Ord. No.
422]
§ 169-42. Schedule III: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 169-9, no person shall make a right
turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another one-way street) when
facing a steady red signal at any of the locations described below:
Name of Street
Direction
of
Travel
Prohibited Right
Turn on Red
Signal Onto Hours
Cider Mill Road
[Added 5-19-2003
by Ord. No. 427]
East Egypt Road
Egypt Road [Added
8-10-2010 by Ord.
No. 510]
East Eastbound Route
422 on-ramp
6:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., Monday
through Friday
§ 169-43. Schedule IV: Prohibited Turns at Intersections. [Amended
1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 333]
In accordance with the provisions of § 169-10, no driver of any vehicle shall
make a turn of the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
§ 169-41 (RESERVED) § 169-43
165:493
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
Driveway, 106 Black
Rock Road
(currently Uno's)
[Added 8-19-2019
by Ord. No. 580]
West Left 7:00
a.m. to
9:00
a.m.,
Monday
through
Friday;
11:00
a.m. to
1:00
p.m.
Saturday
Black Rock Road
Driveway, Oaks
Shopping Center
(Opposite 106 Black
Rock Road)
East Left 7:00
a.m. to
9:00
a.m.,
Monday
through
Friday;
11:00
a.m. to
1:00
p.m.
Saturday
Black Rock Road
Mennonite Road
[Repealed
1-7-2008 by Ord.
No. 481]
Old Mill Road
[Added 8-10-2010
by Ord. No. 510]
North Left All Township Line
Road
PA Route 29 [Added
1-7-2008 by Ord.
No. 481]
South Left All Produce Junction
driveway
[entrance]
Produce Junction
driveway [exit]
[Added 1-7-2008
by Ord. No. 481]
North Left All PA Route 29
Township Line Road
[Added 8-10-2010
by Ord. No. 510]
South Left All Old Mill Road
§ 169-43 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-44
165:494
§ 169-44. Schedule V: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 169-11, no driver of any vehicle shall
make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 169-45. Schedule VI: One-way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 169-12, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Amelia Street [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No.
427]
East Between Port Providence
Road and Canal Street
Store Street [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No.
427]
South Between Port Providence
Road and Canal Street
§ 169-46. Schedule VII: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 169-13, no-passing zones are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 169-47. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 169-14, the following described
intersections are hereby established as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be erected thereon as indicated in § 169-14.
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Acoma Lane (TR 511) -- --
Amanda Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West PA Route 29
Amanda Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Scarlet Oak Drive
Amelia Street (TR 417) East Bridge Street (SR 29)
Amelia Street (TR 417) West Landes Street
§ 169-44 (RESERVED) § 169-47
165:495
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Anderson Farm Park [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Hopwood Road
Anderson Road (TR 492) North Egypt Road
Andrew Way [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Yeager Road
Anthony Wayne Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Minuteman Drive
Apple Street (TR 454)
[Amended 5-19-2003 by
Ord. No. 427]
North Fourth Avenue
Arcola Road (TR 402) [Added 9-5-1995 by Ord. No. 346; repealed
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
Arcola Road (TR 402) West Cider Mill Road
Argyle Lane (2) [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Gumbes Road (2)
Ashbridge Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Spring Mill Lane
Ashenfelter Road (TR 401) North Troutman Road
Ashenfelter Road South Black Rock Road
Basswood Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Persimmon Drive
Bechtel Road (TR 325) East South Trappe Road (SR
113)
Bechtel Road (TR 325) West Lewis Road
Bechtel Road (TR 325) West Old State Road
Beech Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Tawneyberry Lane
Belmont Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Meadowland Drive
Belmont Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Greenwood Avenue
Berkshire Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Township Line Road
Birchleaf Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Persimmon Drive
Birchleaf Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Persimmon Drive
Black Rock Park [Added
6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 385]
-- All intersections
designated by signs
§ 169-47 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-47
165:496
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Black Rock Road (SR 4003) [Repealed 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
Bonnie Lane [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Mennonite Road
Boro Line Road (TR 427) Both West Fifth Avenue
Boro Line Road (TR 427) Both West Seventh Avenue
Boro Line Road (TR 427) East South Trappe Road (SR
113)
Brentfort Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Spring Mill Lane
Bridge Street (SR 29) -- --
Bridle Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Morgan Lane
Brower Avenue [Added
3-16-1998 by Ord. No. 371;
amended 5-19-2003 by Ord.
No. 427]
Both Montgomery Avenue
Brower Road (MC) (TR 439) West Collegeville Road (SR 29)
Buckthorn Lane [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Dana Drive
Buckthorn Lane West Longford Road
Buckwalter Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
Both Buckwalter Road
Buckwalter Road West Old Mill Road
Butternut Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Winterberry Lane
Butternut Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Persimmon Drive
Cambridge Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Berkshire Lane
Cambridge Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Township Line Road
Campus Drive (2) [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Arcola Road (2)
Canal Street (TR 404) East Port Providence Road
Canal Street (TR 404) West Port Providence Road
Canci Court West North Lewis Road
Cardinal Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Black Rock Road
Carmen Circle West Caroline Drive
§ 169-47 (RESERVED) § 169-47
165:497
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Caroline Drive (TR 512) North Black Rock Road
Carriage Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Mennonite Road
Carriage Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Saddleview Drive
Cathlyn Lane -- --
Center Avenue (TR 457) Both Highland Avenue
Center Avenue (TR 457) East Brower Avenue
Central Avenue -- --
Char Mar Lane [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Sixth Avenue
Cherry Lane (TR 461) Both Hawthorne Lane
Cherry Lane (TR 461) North Honeysuckle Lane
Cherry Lane (TR 461) South Laurel Lane
Chestnut Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Fieldcrest Drive
Cheyenne Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Donna Drive
Cheyenne Road (TR 508)
[Amended 5-19-2003 by
Ord. No. 427]
West Lewis Road
Chinaberry Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Hopwood Road
Chinaberry Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Paperbirch Drive
Cider Mill Road (TR 514)
[Amended 11-18-1996 by
Ord. No. 354]
Both Upper Indian Head Road
Cochise Lane (TR 472) North Shawnee Lane
Cochise Lane (TR 472) South Keokuk Road
Cochise Lane (TR 472) South Mennonite Road
College Avenue (TR 328) West Church Road (Greenwood
Avenue)
Collegeville Road (SR 29) -- --
Corkwood Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East PA Route 113
Corkwood Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Cottonwood Drive
§ 169-47 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-47
165:498
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Cottonwood Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Boro Line Road
Cottonwood Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Sugarberry Lane
Country Ridge Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East/west Meadowgreen Drive
Country Ridge Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North/south Meadowgreen Drive
Country Ridge Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Hafner Road
Cree Square (TR 476) South Keokuk Road
Crescent Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Meadowgreen Drive
Cresson Boulevard [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Mill Road
Crestwood Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Willowwood Drive
Cricket Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Meadowgreen Drive
Dale Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Lewis Road
Dana Drive West Longford Road
David Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Donna Drive
David Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Dwight Drive
Derby Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Fox Run Drive
Donna Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Lewis Road
Donny Brook Way [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Hopwood Road
Dorset Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Gateshead Way
Dreibelbis Road (TR 425) North South Trappe Road (SR
113)
Dwight Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Dale Drive
Dwight Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Donna Drive
§ 169-47 (RESERVED) § 169-47
165:499
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Egypt Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West PA Route 29
Eighth Street [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Morgan Lane
Elisabeth Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Black Rock Road
Elmar Circle (2) [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Crosshill Road (2)
Faraway Farm Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Longacre Drive
Fegley Street (TR 303) Both Second Avenue
Fegley Street (TR 303) East Bridge Street (SR 29)
Fern Avenue (TR 458) Both Hawthorne Lane
Fern Avenue (TR 458) North Honeysuckle Lane
Fern Avenue (TR 458) South Laurel Lane
Fieldcrest Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Madison Circle
Fieldcrest Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Ridge Pike
Fifth Avenue (TR 452) Both Sixth Avenue
Fifth Avenue [Amended 5-19
2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Vaughn Road
Firethorn Drive East Leatherwood Drive
Firethorn Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Leatherwood Drive
Fourth Avenue (Rofo) (TR 455) Both Gay Street
Fourth Avenue (MC) (TR 406) South Sowers Avenue
Fourth Avenue [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Vaughn Road
Fox Run Drive (2) [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Old State Road (2)
Fruit Farm Road (TR 428) North Lewis Road
Fruit Farm Road (TR 428) South Mennonite Road
Gateshead Way [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Black Rock Road
Gateshead Way [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Ramsgate Drive
§ 169-47 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-47
165:500
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Gateshead Way [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Ramsgate Drive
Gateshead Way [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Ramsgate Drive
Gay Street (TR 451) Both Fifth Avenue
Gay Street (TR 451) North Sixth Avenue
Gay Street (TR 451) South Second Avenue
Georgetown Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Mingo Road
Grace Street (TR 301) West Bridge Street (SR 29)
Greenbriar Drive (2) [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Pin Oaks Drive (2)
Green Street (Oaks) (TR 443) East Longford Road
Green Street (Rofo) -- --
Green Tree Road (TR 409) Both Egypt Road
Green Tree Road (TR 409) North Black Rock Road
Green Valley Drive [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Hopwood Road
Green Valley Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Mennonite Road
Greenwood Avenue (SR 4011) North Wartman Road
Greenwood Avenue (SR 4011) South Ridge Pike
Groff Circle (2) [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Arcola Road (2)
Gumbes Road (TR 394) North Black Rock Road
Gumbes Road (TR 394) South Egypt Road
Hafner Road [Amended
5-19-2003 Ord. No. 427]
East Old State Road
Hafner Road [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No.427]
West Second Avenue
Hampshire Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Ramsgate Drive
Harvest Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Longacre Drive
Harvest Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Hopwood Road
Hasson Road [Added
11-4-2013 by Ord. No. 533]
East Wilson Road and Valley
View Road
§ 169-47 (RESERVED) § 169-47
165:501
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Hasson Road (TR 437) West Collegeville Road (SR 29)
Hawthorne Lane (TR 459) Both Fern Lane
Hawthorne Lane (TR 459) East Gumbes Road
Hawthorne Lane (TR 459) West Cherry Lane
Helen Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Buckwalter Road
Henry Drive West Old Mill Road
Hess Road (TR 429) South Rittenhouse Road
Hickory Place [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Chinaberry Lane
Hidden Valley Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Mennonite Road
Highland Avenue (TR 303)
[Added 12-5-2011 by Ord.
No. 519]
Both Perkiomen Avenue (TR
456)
Highland Avenue (TR 303) North Egypt Road
High Street (TR 500) East Mill Road
Hillside Road [Added
8-5-1996 by Ord. No. 353]
East Springer Town Road
Hillside Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Crosshill Road
Hollow Road (TR 403) Both Egypt Road
Hollow Road (TR 403) North Black Rock Road
Hollow Road (TR 403) South Port Road
Honeysuckle Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
Both Fern Lane
Honeysuckle Lane (TR 460) East Gumbes Road
Honeysuckle Lane (TR 460) [Repealed 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
Hopwood Road (TR 327) East Collegeville Road
Hopwood Road (TR 327) West South Trappe Road
Hunt Club Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Cider Mill Road
Hunt Club Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Minuteman Drive
Ironwood Drive (2) [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Green Tree Road (2)
Iroquois Drive (TR 474) East Fruit Farm Road
Iroquois Drive (TR 474) West Keokuk Road
§ 169-47 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-47
165:502
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Jacobs Street (TR 398) East Bridge Street (SR 29)
Jasper Lane (2) [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Hollow Road (2)
Jessie Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Green Valley Drive
Jordan Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Green Valley Drive
Katie Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Yeager Road
Keokuk Road [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Lewis Road
Keokuk Road [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Cochise Lane
Kline Road (TR 431) North Ridge Pike
Kline Road (TR 431) South Linfield Road
Knoll Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Greenwood Avenue
Knoll Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Township Line Road
Landes Street (TR 406) North Sowers Avenue
Landes Street (TR 406) South Jacobs Street
Larkspur Lane (2) [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Gumbes Road (2)
Laurel Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Cherry Lane
Laurel Lane (TR 442) East Fern Lane
Laurel Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Gumbes Lane
Laurel Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Willow Drive
Laurel Lane (TR 442) West Cherry Lane
Laurel Lane (TR 442) West Fern Lane
Leatherwood Drive North Black Rock Road
Leatherwood Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Green Tree Road
Lenape Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Cochise Lane
Lewis Road [Added
12-4-2017 by Ord. No. 568]
North Boro Line Road
§ 169-47 (RESERVED) § 169-47
165:503
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Lewis Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Fruit Farm Road
Lewis Road (SR 4013) South Bechtel Road
Lewis Road (SR 4013) South Vaughn Road
Linden Way [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Springfield Drive
Linden Way [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Fieldcrest Drive
Linfield Trappe Road (SR
4017)
East Ridge Pike (Main Street)
Linfield Trappe Road (SR
4017)
West Township Line Road
Lisa Marie Lane North Buckthorn Lane
Lisa Marie Lane [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Longford Road
Little Knoll Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Upper Indian Head Road
Little Turtle Circle (TR 475) North Iroquois Drive
Longacre Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Hopwood Road
Longacre Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Longacre Drive
Longford Road (TR 399) Both Egypt Road
Longford Road (TR 399) North Black Rock Road
Longleaf Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Sugarberry Lane
Lovers Lane (TR 416) East Collegeville Road
Lower Indian Head Road (TR 397) [Repealed 5-19-2003 by Ord. No.
427]
Lowes Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Mill Road
MacDade Road (TR 419) East Egypt Road
MacDade Road (TR 419) West Collegeville Road
Madison Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Fieldcrest Drive
Main Street (SR 4031) -- --
Maple Street [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Vaughn Road
§ 169-47 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-47
165:504
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Maple Street [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Crosshill Road
Maple Street [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West New Street
Maple Street [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Vaughn Road
Marshwood Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Marshwood Drive
Marshwood Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Old State Road
Meadowgreen Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Old State Road
Meadowgreen Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Yeager Road
Meadowland Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Greenwood Avenue
Meadowview Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Egypt Road
Mennonite Road (TR 323) Both Old State Road
Mennonite Road (TR 323) Both South Trappe Road (SR
113)
Mennonite Road (TR 323) East Collegeville Road (SR 29)
Mennonite Road [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Mingo Road
Mill Road (TR 369) [Repealed 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
Mingo Road (TR 433) Both Yeager Road
Minuteman Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Anthony Wayne Circle
Minuteman Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Cider Mill Road
Missimer Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Buckwalter Road
Missimer Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Old Mill Road
Montgomery Avenue [Added
3-16-1998 by Ord. No. 371;
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
Both Brower Avenue
Montgomery Avenue (TR 445) Both Highland Avenue
Montgomery Avenue (TR 445) East Brower Avenue
§ 169-47 (RESERVED) § 169-47
165:505
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Montgomery Avenue [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Brower Avenue
Morgan Lane (2) [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Hopwood Road (2)
Needle Street (TR 412) -- --
New Mill Road (County Road) [Repealed 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
New Street [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Fourth Avenue
New Street [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Second Avenue
Norwood Avenue (TR 309) Both Whitaker Avenue
Norwood Avenue (TR 309) West Bridge Street (SR 29)
Norwood Avenue [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Second Avenue (Mont
Clare)
Nutmeg Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Crosshill Road
Oakland Avenue (TR 463) East Brower Avenue
Oakland Avenue [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Egypt Road
Oaks Elementary School
[Added 5-19-2003 by Ord.
No. 427]
East Oaks School Drive
Oaks School Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Green Tree Road
Olde Springhouse Village
[Added 8-5-1996 by Ord.
No. 353]
West Springer Town Road
Old Mill Road East Lewis Road
Old Mill Road (TR 435) North Township Line Road
Old Route 29 Both Collegeville Road (SR 29)
Olympic Road (TR 413) South Black Rock Road
Orchard Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Lewis Road
Orchard Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Vaughn Road
Paddington Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Marshwood Drive
Paddington Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Fox Run Drive
§ 169-47 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-47
165:506
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Paperbirch Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Chinaberry Lane
Paperbirch Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East PA Route 113
Paperbirch Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West PA Route 113
Paperbirch Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Tawneyberry Lane
Pennapacker Road (TR 434) North Main Street
Pennapacker Road (TR 434) South Linfield Trappe Road
Pennsylvania Avenue (TR 490) Both Perkiomen Avenue
Pennsylvania Avenue (TR 490) North Oakland Avenue
Pennsylvania Avenue (TR 490) South Montgomery Avenue
Perkiomen Avenue (TR 456) Both Highland Avenue
Perkiomen Avenue [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Brower Avenue
Persimmon Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Tawneyberry Lane
Persimmon Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Mennonite Road
Pin Oaks Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Green Tree Road
Pin Oaks Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Egypt Road
Pleasant Lane East Old State Road
Port Providence Road (TR
407)
West Canal Street
Providence Forge [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Vaughn Road
Ramsgate Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Gateshead Way
Ramsgate Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West PA Route 113
Reber Road (North) (TR 495) East Lower Indian Head Road
Reber Road (South) (TR 496) East Lower Indian Head Road
Red Cloud Circle [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Iroquois Drive
Redwood Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Sourwood Drive
§ 169-47 (RESERVED) § 169-47
165:507
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Redwood Drive -- --
Richard Way [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Morgan Lane
Ridgeview Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Mennonite Road
Ridgeview Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Mennonite Road
Rittenhouse Road (TR 326) East Lewis Road
Rittenhouse Road (TR 326) West Township Line Road
River Road -- --
Roboda Boulevard [Added
8-5-1996 by Ord. No. 353]
West Springer Town Road
Rosemont Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Old State Road
Roundwood Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Sugarberry Lane
Saddleview Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Old State Road
Sagebrush Lane (2) [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Sparkleberry Lane (2)
Saratoga Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Meadowland Drive
Satinleaf Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Tawneyberry Lane
Scarlet Oak Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North MacDade Road
Scarlet Oak Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Amanda Lane
Schell Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Hollow Road
School Lane East Vaughn Road
School Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Schoolside Court
Second Avenue (Mont Clare)
[Added 5-19-2003 by Ord.
No. 427]
Both Fegley Street
Second Avenue (MC) (TR 504) South Sowers Avenue
Second Avenue (Rofo) (SR
4015)
South South Trappe Road (SR
113)
§ 169-47 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-47
165:508
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Shawnee Lane (TR 477) South Cochise Lane
Shawnee Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Iroquois Lane
Shetland Way [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Morgan Lane
Shetland Way [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Trotter Lane
Sierra Crest Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Mennonite Road
Sierra Crest Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Ridgeview Drive
Sowers Avenue (TR 300)
[Added 9-5-2006 by Ord.
No. 464]
West Landis Street (TR 406)
Sourwood Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Persimmon Drive
Sourwood Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Sparkleberry Lane
South Mennonite Road
[Added 7-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 491]
South Arcola Road
South Sixth Avenue South South Fifth Avenue
South Sixth Avenue
[Amended 5-19-2003 by
Ord. No. 427]
West Gay Street
South Trappe Road (old)(SR
113)(2) [Added 5-19-2003 by
Ord. No. 427]
East PA Route 113 (2)
Sowers Avenue (TR 300) East Bridge Street (SR 29)
Sowers Avenue (TR 300)
(except right turn) [Added
12-5-2005 by Ord. No. 456]
North Amelia Street (TR
417)/Lovers Lane (TR 416)
Spares Lane (TR 503) East Bridge Street (SR 29)
Sparkleberry Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Persimmon Drive
Sparkleberry Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Mennonite Road
Spitleaf Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Winterberry Lane
§ 169-47 (RESERVED) § 169-47
165:509
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Spitleaf Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Persimmon Drive
Springertown Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Mingo Road
Springertown Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Second Avenue
Springertown Road [Added
8-5-1996 by Ord. No. 353;
amended 5-19-2003 by Ord.
No. 427]
West Vaughn Road
Springfield Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Fieldcrest Drive
Spring-Ford School (350 Lewis
Road) [Added 5-19-2003 by
Ord. No. 427]
South Lewis Road
Spring-Ford School (400 Lewis
Road) [Added 5-19-2003 by
Ord. No. 427]
North Lewis Road
Spring-Ford School (833 Lewis
Road) [Added 5-19-2003 by
Ord. No. 427]
East Lewis Road
Springhouse Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Arcola Road
Spring Mill Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Bechtel Road
Springwood Lane (2) [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Cottonwood Drive (2)
Sprouse Circle North Linfield Trappe Road
Stable Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Longacre Drive
Steeplechase Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Meadowgreen Drive
Store Street (TR 411) South Canal Street
Sugarberry Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Cottonwood Drive
Sugarberry Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Bechtel Road
Summit Drive South Egypt Road
Sunset Avenue (TR 446) North Egypt Road
Sunset Avenue (TR 446) South Hollow Road
§ 169-47 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-47
165:510
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Tallowood Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Paperbirch Drive
Tara Drive [Added 5-19-2003
by Ord. No. 427]
East Mingo Road
Tawneyberry Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Bechtel Road
Tawneyberry Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Persimmon Drive
Third Avenue [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Vaughn Road
Third Avenue [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West New Street
Third Avenue (MC) (TR 505) South Sowers Avenue
Thomas Road (TR 430) North Vaughn Road
Thomas Road (TR 430) South Second Avenue
Thornhill Drive (2) [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Longford Road (2)
Timber Lane East Hollow Road
Timber Lane West Summit Drive
Township Line Road (SR 4014) -- --
Trotter Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
Both Morgan Lane
Trotter Way -- --
Troutman Road (TR 405) North Arcola Road
Troutman Road (TR 405) South Black Rock Road
Twilight Circle [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Ridgeview Drive
Union Street (TR 441) Both Third and Apple Streets
Union Street (TR 441) North Fourth Avenue
Union Street (TR 441) South Second Avenue
Upland Way [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Dreibelbis Road
Upland Way [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Vista Drive
Upper Indian Head Road (TR
400) [Added 11-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 453]
Both Cider Mill Road (TR 514)
§ 169-47 (RESERVED) § 169-47
165:511
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Upper Indian Head Road (TR 400) [Repealed 5-19-2003 by Ord. No.
427]
Upper Indian Head Road (TR
400)
West Black Rock Road
Valley View Road [Added
11-4-2013 by Ord. No. 533]
North Hasson Road and Wilson
Road
Valley View Road (TR 450)
Vaughn Road (TR 436) North Lewis Road
Vaugh Road (TR 436) South Second Avenue
Vista Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Dreibelbis Road
Vista Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Vista Drive
Von Steuben Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Minuteman Drive
Walnut Street (TR 408) -- --
Wampenog Circle (TR 473) West Cochise Lane
Wartman Road (SR 4012) West Township Line Road
Weatherlea Lane [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Morgan Lane
Whitaker Avenue (TR 305) North Egypt Road
White Crow Circle (TR 509) South Cheyenne Road
Whitford Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Rosemont Lane
Whitford Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Fruit Farm Road
Willowbrooke Lane South Yeager Road
Willow Drive (TR 502) [Repealed 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
Willow Drive (TR 502) [Added
12-19-2011 by Ord. No.
520]
North Laurel Lane (TR 442)
Willow Drive (TR 502) South Egypt Road
Willowwood Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Pin Oaks Drive
Willowwood Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Buckthorn Lane
Wilson Road [Added
11-4-2013 by Ord. No. 533]
South Hasson Road and Valley
View Road
§ 169-47 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-47
165:512
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Winding Ridge Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East Upper Indian Head Road
Winding Ridge Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Olympic Road
Windward Court [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North Mennonite Road
Windy Knoll Drive [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Hidden Valley Drive
Winterberry Lane (2) [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Persimmon Drive (2)
Winter Street -- --
Woodland Avenue -- --
Woodlyn Drive (TR 510) West Church Road (Greenwood
Avenue)
Wyeth Drive (2) [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South Arcola Road (2) [at 500
Arcola Road and Troutman
Road]
Yeager Road (TR 320) Both Mingo and Mennonite
Roads
Yeager Road (TR 320) Both Old State Road
Yeager Road [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West Lewis Road
Yerkes Road (SR 4008) West Collegeville Road (SR 29)
Yocum Road (TR 444) North Egypt Road
Yocum Road (TR 444) South Green Street
§ 169-48. Schedule IX: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 169-15, the following described
intersections are hereby established as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be erected thereon as indicated in § 169-15.
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
PA Route 29 [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South (To) Black Rock Road
Springertown Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South (To) Second Avenue
US Route 422 [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East onramp
(From) Egypt Road
§ 169-47 (RESERVED) § 169-48
165:513
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
US Route 422 [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East onramp
(From) PA Route 29
US Route 422 [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
West onramp
(From) PA Route 29
§ 169-49. Schedule X: Closing of Certain Streets to Truck Traffic.
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 169-16, it shall be unlawful for
any person to drive any truck upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described below:
Name of Street Location
Anderson Road [Added
5-18-2015 by Ord. No.
546]
From Egypt Road to Green Street (entire
length)
Bechtel Road From Rittenhouse Road to Lewis Road to
Route 113
Canal Street From Port Providence Road to Hollow Road
Green Street [Added
5-18-2015 by Ord. No.
546]
From Anderson Road to Longford Road
(entire length)
Greentree Road From Egypt Road to Black Rock Road
Gumbes Road From Egypt Road to Black Rock Road
Hollow Road [Repealed
11-7-2016 by Ord. No.
555]
Longford Road From Egypt Road to Black Rock Road
McDade Road From Egypt Road to Route 29
Oakland Avenue From Brower Avenue to Egypt Road
Old State Road From Bechtel Road to Second Avenue
Pennsylvania Avenue From Montgomery Avenue to Oakland
Avenue
Walnut Street/Port
Providence Road
From Route 29 to Hollow Road
Willow Avenue From Egypt Road to Black Rock Road
Yeager Road From Route 113 to Mingo Road
Yocum Road [Added
5-18-2015 by Ord. No.
546]
From Egypt Road to Green Street (entire
length)
§ 169-48 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-49
165:514
§ 169-50. Schedule XI: Vehicle Weight Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 169-17, gross weight limits are
established as indicated for commercial vehicles or other tractor, trailer
or tractor-trailer combinations, upon the streets or bridges, or portions
thereof, described below, except for the purpose of making local deliveries
on said streets.
Name of Street
Max. Gross
Weight
(pounds) Location
Apple Street [Added
7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 363]
10,000 Entire length
Arcola Road [Repealed
7-15-1996 by Ord. No. 352]
Ashenfelter Road 10,000 Entire length
Char-Mar Lane [Added
7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 363]
10,000 Entire length
Fifth Avenue [Added
7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 363]
10,000 Vaughn Road to Green
Street
Fourth Avenue [Added
7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 363]
10,000 Vaughn Road to Gay Street
Gay Street [Added 7-7-1997
by Ord. No. 363]
10,000 Entire length
Maple Avenue [Added
7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 363]
10,000 Entire length
New Street [Added 7-7-1997
by Ord. No. 363]
10,000 Entire length
B. In accordance with the provisions of § 169-16, it shall be unlawful for
any person to drive any truck over 42 feet in length upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described below: [Added 1-7-2008 by Ord.
No. 481]
Name of Street Location
Amelia Street Entire length
Fegley Street Entire length
Grace Street Entire length
Jacobs Street Entire length
Norwood Street Entire length
Sowers Avenue Entire length
Spares Lane Entire length
§ 169-49 (RESERVED) § 169-50
165:515
Name of Street
Max. Gross
Weight
(pounds) Location
Olympic Road [Repealed
7-15-1996 by Ord. No. 352]
School Lane [Added
7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 363]
10,000 Vaughn Road to Schoolside
Court
Schoolside Court [Added
7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 363]
10,000 Entire length
Sixth Street [Added
7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 363]
10,000 Gay Street to Fifth Avenue
Third Avenue [Added
7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 363]
10,000 Union Street to Gay Street
Thomas Road [Added
7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 363]
10,000 Vaughn Road to end
Troutman Road [Repealed
11-7-2016 by Ord. No. 555]
Union Street [Added
7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 363]
10,000 Entire length
Vaughn Street [Added
7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 363]
10,000 Second Avenue to Lewis
Road
§ 169-51. Schedule XII: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 169-19, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle
designated:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 169-52. Schedule XIII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 169-20, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
§ 169-50 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-52
165:516
Name of Street Side Location
Amelia Street [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427;
amended 4-5-2004 by Ord.
No. 440]
East No parking here to corner
from Landis Street to a point
30 feet north thereof
Amelia Street [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427;
amended 6-4-2007 by Ord.
No. 471]
West No parking here to corner
from PA Route 29 to a point
60 feet north thereof
Arcola Road [Added
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 410]
Both Between Campus Drive and
Cidermill Road
Black Rock Park [Added
6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 385]
-- All areas designated by signs
Canal Street North From Store Street to a point
20 feet west thereof
Canal Street North From Store Street to Port
Providence Road
Cider Mill Road [Added
6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 471]
Both 1,500 feet south from the
intersection with Upper
Indianhead Road
Dreibelbis Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
Both From Upland Way to the
railroad
Egypt Road [Repealed
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
Egypt Road [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South From Station Street to
Cresson Boulevard
Gumbes Road [Added
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 410]
Both Entire length
Hollow Road [Added
11-4-2013 by Ord. No. 533]
East South of Egypt Road,
between Egypt Road and
Volpe Trucking driveway for
a distance of 2,578 feet
Hopwood Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
Both From PA Route 113 to a
point 300 feet east thereof
Jacob Street [Added 8-3-2009
by Ord. No. 502]
Both From the intersection with
Landis Street to a point 30
feet east and west thereof
Jacob Street [Added 6-7-1999
by Ord. No. 385]
Northeast From Bridge Street to a
point 95 feet northwest
therefrom
§ 169-52 (RESERVED) § 169-52
165:517
Name of Street Side Location
Jacob Street [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427;
amended 11-18-2013 by
Ord. No. 534]
South No parking here to corner
from PA Route 29 to a point
60 feet west thereof
Landis Street South From Amelia Street to Jacobs
Streets
Landis Street North From Sowers Avenue to
Amelia Street
Longford Road [Added
6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 471]
Both Between Port Providence
Road and the Railroad
Crossing
Longford Road [Added
4-5-2004 by Ord. No. 440]
East From Green Street to Egypt
Road
Lovers Lane [Added 8-3-2009
by Ord. No. 502]
South From the intersection with
Sowers Avenue to a point 30
feet south thereof
Norwood Street [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
North No parking here to corner
from Whitaker Avenue to a
point 35 feet west thereof
Norwood Street [Added
3-4-2019 by Ord. No. 573]
North No parking here to corner
from Second Avenue stop
sign to a point 30 feet east
Oakland Avenue [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South No parking here to corner
from Brower Avenue to a
point 35 feet west thereof
Oaks School Drive [Added
3-10-1997 by Ord. No. 361]
Northeast Between Green Tree Road
and the school property
Perkiomen Avenue [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
South No parking here to corner
from Brower Avenue to a
point 60 feet west thereof
Second Avenue Southeast From Sowers Avenue to
Norwood Street
Second Avenue (Mont Clare)
[Added 5-19-2003 by Ord.
No. 427]
West No parking there to corner
from Norwood Avenue to a
point 35 feet north and south
thereof
Springertown Road [Added
8-5-1996 by Ord. No. 353;
amended 5-19-2003 by Ord.
No. 427]
Both From Vaugh Road to Mingo
Road
Store Street Both Entire length
§ 169-52 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-52
165:518
Name of Street Side Location
Upper Indianhead Road
[Added 12-17-2001 by Ord.
No. 410]
Both Between Lower Indianhead
Road and Cidermill Road
Vaughn Road [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
East From the entrance to
Providence Forge to a point
115 feet south thereof
Walnut Street [Added
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
Both No parking here to corner
from PA Route 29 to a point
35 feet east thereof
Walnut Street [Added
5-1-2006 by Ord. No. 461]
North 20 feet on either side of the
intersection with Needle
Street
Walnut Street [Added
5-5-2008 by Ord. No. 487]
South From a point 35 feet east of
Route 29 to a point 110 feet
thereof
Whitaker Avenue [Added
11-18-1996 by Ord. No. 354]
East From Egypt Road to
Norwood Street
Yeager Road [Added
7-15-1996 by Ord. No. 352]
Both From Route 113 to 200 feet
west of Willowbrooke Lane
§ 169-53. Schedule XIV: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 169-21, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified below of any day, except Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Amelia Street [Added
4-5-2004 by Ord. No.
440]
East 8:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m., Monday
through Saturday
From a point 30
feet north of
Landis Street to a
point 70 feet north
of Landis Street
Walnut Street [Amended 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427; repealed
5-5-2008 by Ord. No. 487]
§ 169-54. Schedule XV: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 169-22, no person shall park a vehicle
or allow the same to remain parked upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described below, between the hours specified, for longer than the
time indicated below:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 169-52 (RESERVED) § 169-55
165:519
§ 169-55. Schedule XVI: Special Purpose Parking Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 169-23, the following are hereby
established as special purpose parking zones:
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Green Street [Added
9-8-1992 by Ord. No.
315; amended 5-19-2003
by Ord. No. 427]
East Emergency
vehicles only
From Sixth
Avenue to Spring-
Ford School
District property
§ 169-56. Schedule XVII: Snow Emergency Routes.
In accordance with the provisions of § 169-34, the following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as snow emergency routes:
Name of Street Location
Arcola Road [Added 12-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 504]
Entire length
Bechtel Road Entire length
Black Rock Road Entire length
Cider Mill Road [Added 12-7-2009
by Ord. No. 504]
Entire length
Egypt Road Entire length
Fifth Avenue From Royersford Borough line to
Vaughn Road
Gay Street Entire length
Green Tree Road Entire length
Gumbes Road Entire length
Lewis Road [Amended 5-19-2003
by Ord. No. 427]
Entire length
Lewis Road [Repealed 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
Longford Road Entire length
Mennonite Road [Amended
12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 504]
From Yeager Road to Arcola Road
Port Providence Road Entire length
Ridge Pike/Main Street [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
Entire length
Rittenhouse Road Entire length
Route 29 Entire length
Route 113 Entire length
§ 169-55 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-56
165:520
Name of Street Location
Second Avenue Entire length
Township Line Road [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 427]
Entire length
Vaughn Road Entire length
Walnut Street Entire length
§ 169-57. Schedule XVIII: Prohibition of Brake Retarders. [Added
12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 512]
In accordance with the provisions of § 169-17.1, the use of brake retarders
is prohibited on the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Location
Egypt Road [Added 10-2-2017 by
Ord. No. 566]
Between Greentree Road and
Hollow Road
Egypt Road Between Greentree Road and Mill
Road
§ 169-56 (RESERVED) § 169-57
165:521
Chapter 176
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading, excavating and filling — See Ch. 99.
Plumbing — See Ch. 130.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 143.
§ 169-57 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 169-57
176:522
ARTICLE I
Well Drilling
[Adopted 4-17-1978 by Ord. No. 201]
§ 176-1. Title and purpose.
§ 176-2. Definitions.
The following words or phrases, when used in the article or regulations
adopted thereunder, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except
where the content clearly indicates a different meaning:
BOARD — The Upper Providence Township Board of Supervisors.
CAPACITY — Except in the case of free-flowing wells, the "capacity" is
construed to mean the daily capacity of the pumps installed and not the
contemplated draft.[Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 301]
DRILLING — All action necessary to construction of wells such as drilling,
boring, coring, washing, digging, driving or letting. This shall not apply to
the drilling of blast holes in quarries or to core holes 31/2 inches or less in
diameter drilled for exploration or investigation.
PERSON — A corporation, partnership, municipal authority or association,
as well as a natural person.
UNDERGROUND WATERS — Waters of underground streams, channels,
artesian basins or other bodies of water in or under the ground, whether
percolating or otherwise.
WELL — Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven,
dug or otherwise constructed for the location, diversion or acquisition of
underground waters or the charging of water into underground strata.
WELL DRILLER — Any water well contractor, his employees or
representative in responsible charge of drilling or otherwise constructing a
well.
§ 176-3. Compliance required.
No well may be drilled within Upper Providence Township except in strict
accordance with the provisions of this article and the well-drilling
regulations adopted by the Board hereunder. Such regulations shall be
prepared and approved by resolution of the Board and when so approved
shall have the same force and effect as provisions of this article.112
A. Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Upper
Providence Township Well Ordinance of 1978."
B. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to promote and protect the
general health and welfare of the residents of the township by
conserving the supply of underground waters and preventing the
pollution thereof.
§ 176-1 WATER § 176-4
176:523
§ 176-4. Permit required.
§ 176-5. Use of wells restricted.
No well shall be drilled nor any existing wells used for the purpose of
disposal of domestic or industrial waste.
§ 176-6. Casing requirements.
All wells will be cased to a minimum of 50 feet in depth from the surface.
§ 176-7. Reports.
All well drillers shall, upon completion of the drilling of any well, file a
report in the form to be supplied by the Board.
§ 176-8. Sealing of abandoned wells.
The owner of any well shall, upon abandonment of any existing well or test
hole, effectively seal and fill such wells and test holes in accordance with
rules prescribed by the Board. A well not in operation for three or more
years or improperly maintained to prevent contamination may be deemed
to have been abandoned.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, drill or have drilled any
well, to install or have installed any related pumping equipment or to
alter an existing well or its pumping equipment until a permit for such
location, drilling, installation or alteration shall have been issued by the
duly appointed township officer. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
B. Any well driller desiring to drill to an excess of 200 feet in depth or to
tap an underground flow of excess of eight gallons per minute shall
specifically notify the Board of Supervisors, and the Board shall have
the authority to impose such conditions and make such requirements
and limitations as may, in its opinion, be necessary to protect the
citizens of the township and may issue limited and revocable permits
for such wells.
C. Anyone desiring to drill for purposes of service to multiple-unit
residential developments, apartment buildings or commercial or
industrial users shall give the exact spot of drilling to the township
inspector. The inspector will then establish the proximity of other deep
wells in the vicinity. If there is no deep well within 11/2 miles or if wells
closer than that distance are being used at less than 75% of capacity,
the permit will be granted; otherwise it will be denied.
112. Editor's Note: The current regulations are on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 176-4 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 176-9
176:524
§ 176-9. Fees.
A fee schedule shall be established in the rules and regulations adopted
under the terms of this article.113
§ 176-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
301]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this
article or the rules and regulations adopted hereunder by the Board shall be
liable, on conviction thereof, to pay a fine or penalty not exceeding $1,000
for each and every offense, and whenever such person or persons shall have
been notified by the Board or by the service of a warrant and summary
proceedings that he is committing such violations, each day thereafter that
he continues and persists in such violations shall constitute a separate
offense. Such fine and penalty shall be collected as provided by law, and in
default of the payment of the fine and penalty imposed and the costs, the
defendant may be sentenced and committed to the county jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days.
113. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 176-9 WATER § 176-10
176:525
Chapter 182
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Keeping of animals — See Ch. 53.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 60.
Garage sales — See Ch. 94.
Piggeries — See Ch. 128.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 151.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
154.
§ 176-10 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 176-10
176:526
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 182-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Upper Providence
Township Zoning Ordinance."
§ 182-2. Community development objectives.
The community development objectives of the Township are as follows:
§ 182-3. Establishment of controls.
A. Guiding the future development of the Township in accordance with
comprehensive planning of land use and population; the most beneficial
relationships among the residential, commercial, industrial and
recreational areas within the Township, having regard to their
suitability for the various uses appropriate to each of them as indicated
by topography and soil conditions, existing man-made conditions and
population trends; and considering such conditions and trends both
within the Township and with respect to the relation of the Township to
surrounding areas.
B. Protecting the character and social and economic stability of each of
such areas and guiding their orderly and beneficial growth.
C. Protecting and conserving the value of land and buildings throughout
the Township appropriate to the various zoning districts established
herein.
D. Bringing about a beneficial relationship between land use and traffic
circulation and the avoidance of congestion in the streets and the
provision of safe and convenient access appropriate to the various land
uses.
E. Fostering the efficient provision of public facilities and services and
their relationship to the orderly growth and development of the
Township.
A. For new uses and structures. In all districts, after the effective date of
this chapter, any new building or other structure or any tract of land
shall be constructed, developed and used only in accordance with the
regulations specified for each district.
B. For existing uses and structures. In all districts, after the effective date
of this chapter, any new building or other structure or any tract of land
which is not in conformity with the regulations for the district in which
it is located shall be deemed nonconforming and subject to the
regulations of Article XXI.
§ 182-1 WATER § 182-3
176:527
§ 182-4. Establishment of districts. [Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord.
No. 211; 10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 224; 4-4-1988 by Ord. No. 278;
8-6-1990 by Ord. No. 300; 6-15-1992 by Ord. No. 312; 10-4-1993 by
Ord. No. 321; 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 414; 7-15-2002 by Ord. No.
419; 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 434; 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 458;
12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 495; 9-16-2013 by Ord. No. 529]
For the purposes of this chapter, the Township is hereby divided into
districts, which shall be designated as follows:
FP Floodplain Conservation District
R-1 Residential-Agricultural District
R-2 Residential District
R-3 Residential District
R-4 Residential District
OSR Open Space Residential Community District
OSR-2 Open Space Residential Community - 2
VP Village Preservation District
GCR Golf Course Residential Community District
ARR Age-Restricted Residential Community District
CL Cluster Development District
MH Mobile Home Development District
IN Institutional District
NC Neighborhood-Convenience Commercial District
CRSC Community and Regional Shopping Center District
PBO Professional and Business Office District
M-1 Office and Limited Industrial District
IO Interchange Office District
IO-2 Interchange Office Support District
IO-3 Interchange Office, Retail, Service and Recreation District
M-2 Manufacturing Industrial District
SS Steep Slope Conservation District
OSC Open Space Conservation District
TDR Transfer of Development Rights District
VCO Village Commercial and Office District
C. Limitation on principal uses and/or buildings. Except as may be
permitted in a specific zoning district, no more than one principal use or
building may be permitted per lot. [Added 12-16-1991 by Ord. No.
307]
§ 182-3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-5
176:528
§ 182-5. Lot requirements.
Any lot, as well as the open space reserved on it, must equal or exceed the
minimum sizes prescribed by this chapter for the district in which the lot is
located.
§ 182-5.1. Corner lots. [Added 2-20-2001 by Ord. No. 401]
Corner lots shall have a front yard on each street which the lot abuts
and therefore must have a minimum of two front yards. The remaining
yards shall be side or rear yards. There shall be a minimum of one rear
yard and one side yard. The lot owner or developer may designate which
yard is the rear yard and which is the side yard. If the shape of the
lot is such that following the requirements of this provision is unclear or
infeasible, the Zoning Officer shall determine the yard designations for the
lot. The designation of the various yards shall be included on any record
plan of subdivision and be included in the deed for each corner lot. The
designations of the various yards is a single designation and, once made, is
applied to the lot in perpetuity.
§ 182-6. Zoning Map.
The areas within the Township limits as assigned to each district and the
location of boundaries of the districts established by this chapter are shown
upon the Zoning Map, which is declared to be a part of this chapter and
shall be kept on file by the Township Manager.114
§ 182-7. District boundary lines.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow center lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following plotted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following Township boundaries
shall be construed as following such boundaries.
D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be
midway between the main tracks.
E. Boundaries indicated as following streams and rivers shall be construed
to follow the center lines of the same.
F. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
in Subsections A through E above shall be so construed. Distances not
114. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map, adopted 11-3-1980 by Ord. No. 222, and all amendments
thereto, are on file in the office of the Township Secretary. A copy of the map is included in
a pocket at the end of this volume.
§ 182-5 WATER § 182-7
176:529
§ 182-8. Lots of record. [Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 231]
For a lot of public record in single and separate ownership at the time of
enactment of this chapter or applicable amendment thereto which does not
meet the minimum area or lot width requirements of the district in which it
is located, the provisions of § 182-177 herein shall apply.
§ 182-9. Reduction of lot area.
No lot shall be so reduced that the area of the lot or the dimensions of the
required open space shall be less than herein prescribed.
§ 182-10. Visibility at intersections.116
On corner lots, no physical improvements on planting areas shall be
erected, altered or maintained within the required yards which shall cause
obstruction to drivers' vision from the abutting intersection. A sight triangle
is a triangle whose legs are the sides of a cartway and an access way which
intersects it, with each leg being not less than 30 feet from the point of
intersection of the two legs.
specifically indicated on the Zoning Map shall be determined by the
scale of the map.
G. (Reserved)115
H. Where physical features existing on the ground are at a variance with
those shown on the Official Zoning Map or in other circumstances not
covered by Subsections A thorough G above, the Zoning Officer shall
make an initial determination. Thereafter, any party may appeal his
decision to the Zoning Hearing Board, which, upon appeal, shall
interpret the district boundaries.
I. When a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate
ownership as of the effective date of this chapter or a subsequent
amendment thereto, the regulations as to use in the less restrictive
district may, when authorized as a special exception, extend over the
portion of the lot in the more restrictive district, to the nearest lot line,
but in no case a distance greater than 50 feet; provided, however, that
the setbacks, coverages, height and all other developmental regulations
of the less restrictive district shall not be so extended. The Zoning
Hearing Board may require suitable buffering if the use on the abutting
lot is different than the use being extended by application of this
provision; provided, however, that this provision does not imply
permission to extend uses into either the Floodplain Conservation
District or the Steep Slope Conservation District which are not normally
permitted in those districts. [Added 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
115. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, which dealt with the use of the Schuykill Expressway
as a boundary line, was repealed 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307.
116. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 58, Brush, Grass and Weeds.
§ 182-7 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-11
176:530
§ 182-11. Access to public streets. [Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord.
No. 211; 9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 231; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 535]
No structure shall be erected without direct access over the same lot.
Such access shall be at least 50 feet wide and shall extend from the
structure to a public road. This section shall not be construed to apply
to access to individual units within the R-3 and R-4 Residential Districts,
which is provided for under §§ 182-52B(5) and 182-60B(5), respectively,
and access to parcels within the VCO District, which is provided for under
§ 182-96.3B8(a). Additionally, the Board of Supervisors may require that
access be taken from a private road with access to a public road, if a
private road borders the proposed site; all easements and other required
documentation shall be filed with the Township.
§ 182-12. Existing interior lots. [Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord. No.
231]
Existing lots for which access to a public road is not in compliance with
§ 182-11 may be built upon only when authorized by a variance. In
computing the area of such lots, the area of the strip of ground connecting
the lot with the public road shall not be included. The strip of ground
connecting the lot with the public road shall be used as access to only the
particular lot of which it is a part.
§ 182-12.1. New rear (interior) lots. [Added 12-16-1991 by Ord. No.
307]
Newly created rear lots may be allowed only upon approval of the Board of
Supervisors, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission.
A. Purposes for use of rear lots. Rear lots may be allowed when one or
more of the following purposes are served:
(1) To preserve existing farmland and/or rural appearance and
character by locating building areas remote from existing road
frontage.
(2) To permit reasonable subdivision of land which is physically
constrained by unusual configuration of the tract or limited road
frontage and which could not be subdivided in a desirable manner
using traditional road and lotting patterns.
(3) When future subdivision of a tract is contemplated and supported
by a tentative sketch of the entire parcel and when rear lotting
serves to reduce the number of access points from existing roads
by providing for a common access driveway along an access strip
which is reserved for future use as a road right-of-way.
(4) To permit an alternative to the construction of new residential
roads, where such roads cannot be justified in terms of the number
of lots served, volume of traffic generated and/or the need to
extend access to adjacent tracts.
§ 182-11 WATER § 182-12.1
176:531
§ 182-13. Permitted accessory uses.
Accessory uses authorized in this chapter shall include any of the following
or similar uses:
B. Design requirements. In addition to the regulations for rear lots
contained in § 154-24 of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development, the following design requirements shall apply to all rear
lots:
(1) For each rear lot created, there shall be a corresponding road
frontage lot containing at least the minimum lot width at the
building setback line for the applicable zoning district. The
frontage lot shall be located in front of and adjacent to the rear lot
being created.
(2) The access strip shall be a fee simple part of the rear lot and extend
from the public road to the developable portion of the lot which it
serves. The access strip shall not be a separate lot or easement
over another lot.
(3) The access strip shall be a minimum of 50 feet in width for its entire
length from the road right-of-way to the developable portion of the
lot, unless additional width is necessary or desirable for drainage,
grading or preservation of natural features.
(4) The area of the access strip shall not be part of the minimum lot
area required for the applicable zoning district.
(5) The minimum front yard depth shall be measured along the
property line which most nearly parallels the street upon which the
rear lot fronts.
A. Uses accessory to land cultivation.
(1) Greenhouses.
(2) Preparation of products produced on the premises for use by
residents only.
B. Uses accessory to dwelling. [Amended 2-21-1978 by Ord. No. 197;
6-15-1987 by Ord. No. 271]
(1) Private garage, children's playhouse, private swimming pool,
parking space, private stables, barn, shelter for pets.117
(2) Noncommercial greenhouses.
(3) Home gardening.
(4) Temporary unit for relative (in-law suite). A temporary dwelling
unit may be established as an accessory use to a principal single-
117. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 53, Animals.
§ 182-12.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-13
176:532
family dwelling unit if the following requirements are met: [Added
8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
(a) The unit shall be totally enclosed within the principal building.
(b) The principal dwelling unit shall be owner-occupied.
(c) An internal connection shall be maintained as a means of
access between the principal and accessory dwelling units.
(d) The owners shall file a written covenant in the Montgomery
County's Recorder of Deeds office that prohibits the use of the
property as two or more dwelling units. The covenant must be
approved by the Township Solicitor.
(e) Immediate family members are limited to parents,
grandparents, children, grandchildren, siblings, aunts, uncles,
stepparents, and stepchildren.
C. Uses accessory to residential subdivisions or land developments.
[Added 2-5-1996 by Ord. No. 350]
(1) Sales trailer or similar temporary structure used in connection with
the sale of lots, single-family detached houses or other dwelling
units in new residential subdivisions or land developments;
provided, however, that the trailer or structure and any ancillary
parking facilities are located only within the building envelope on
an approved residential lot in the subdivision or within the area
approved for development of residential units in the case of
development of non-single-family detached homes, and further
provided that said sales structure shall be removed within seven
days following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the
first sample in the subdivision or phase of subdivision or
development or phase of development with which the sales
structure is associated.
D. Permits required. Construction of any accessory use which is either a
structure or building, as defined in this chapter, shall require the
issuance of a zoning permit, regardless of the size of its footprint.
[Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 435]
E. Limitation on number of accessory structures and/or uses. The number
of accessory structures and/or uses on any individual lot shall be limited
as follows: No more than 3% of the lot area shall be devoted to the
cumulative total for such structures and/or uses for lots with lot areas
up to and including 20,000 square feet, and no more than 2% of the lot
area shall be devoted to the cumulative total for such structures and/or
uses for lots with lot areas greater than 20,000 square feet; provided,
however, that in no case shall the total number of accessory uses and/or
structures on any lot exceed three, exclusive of one swimming pool;
further provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to allow
greater building coverage than is otherwise permitted in the zoning
§ 182-13 WATER § 182-13
176:533
§ 182-14. Minimum setback for accessory uses. [Amended
9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 301; 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
Except where stricter requirements apply, an accessory building may be
erected within side or rear yards, provided that it is located at least as far
back from the street line as the foremost portion of the principal building
and provided, further, that the minimum distance between the building and
side and/or rear lot line is five feet.
§ 182-15. Projections into required yards.
No structure and no part of a structure shall be erected within or shall
project into any minimum required yard in any district, except that:
§ 182-16. Exceptions to maximum height restrictions.
Exceptions to the maximum height specified in each district shall be
governed by the following:
district in which the lot is located. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No.
435]
A. An unenclosed porch, not more than 14 feet in height, may be erected
to extend into a required front or rear yard a distance of not more than
10 feet, provided that in no case shall it extend into such front or rear
yard more than 1/2 the existing depth of the yard.
B. A terrace, platform or landing place not covered by a roof, canopy or
trellis, which does not extend above the level of the first floor of the
building, may be erected to extend into a required yard a distance of
not more than 12 feet, provided that it shall not extend into such yard
more than 40% of the existing depth or width of the yard.
C. A buttress, chimney, cornice, pier or pilaster of a building may project
not more than 18 inches into a required yard. [Amended 2-21-1978
by Ord. No. 197]
D. Open, unenclosed fire escapes, steps, bay windows and balconies may
project not more than three feet into a required yard.
A. Chimneys, spires, towers, skylights, tanks, radio or television aerials or
similar uses or structures shall not be included in calculating the height
where such structures are customary vertical projections of a permitted
building.
B. In any residential district the prescribed basic height limit may be
exceeded by one foot for each foot by which the width of each side yard
and the depth of each rear yard are increased beyond the minimum
requirements, up to a maximum of 10 feet.118
118. Editor's Note: Original Section 116, which followed this section, was repealed 12-10-1979
by Ord. No. 209.
§ 182-13 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-17
176:534
§ 182-17. Mobile homes and mobile home parks.
§ 182-18. Modular homes. [Added 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 209]
Modular construction may be used to create detached modular homes
(one dwelling unit per structure) or attached modular homes (two or more
dwelling units per structure). Detached modular homes are considered
single-family detached dwellings and accordingly are allowed in any zoning
district in which single-family detached dwellings are a permitted use.
Similarly, attached modular homes are allowed in any zoning district in
which similar conventionally built dwellings containing two or more
dwelling units are a permitted use. All requirements of this chapter and
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, or other regulations
applicable to single-family detached or attached dwellings, as appropriate,
are applicable to modular homes.
§ 182-18.1. Community Residential Programs. [Added 10-17-1994
by Ord. No. 329]
A. Mobile homes are a permitted use in R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential
Districts, provided that they meet the applicable requirements for
single-family detached dwellings as set forth herein. In any land
development involving mobile homes, the mobile homes shall be
considered as single-family detached dwellings requiring sewerage and
water facilities and meeting all of the requirements of the respective
district.
B. Tracts of sufficient size to accommodate more than one lot and zoned to
permit single-family detached dwellings may be utilized for the erection
of more than one mobile home, provided that all regulations of that
zoning district, all standard requirements applicable to the subdivision
of land for single-family detached dwellings and all other applicable
requirements are met. In addition, on tracts of 15 acres or greater in
size, mobile homes may be grouped in a planned mobile home
development, provided that compliance is made with all requirements
of Article X, Mobile Home Development District, of this chapter and all
regulations specified in Article VI, Mobile Home Developments, of
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, and all other
applicable regulations. [Added 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 209]
A. Community residential programs as defined within § 182-24 of this
chapter shall be permitted in any district in which other residential uses
are allowed. In any such district in which there is more than a single set
of area and width regulations, community residential programs shall
meet the area and width regulations for single-family dwellings.
Community residential programs which are intended to accommodate
more than six handicapped individuals, excluding staff who do not
reside on the property, shall only be permitted in an IN Institutional
District and shall meet the applicable requirements of that district.
§ 182-17 WATER § 182-18.1
176:535
§ 182-19. Exceptions for public utility corporations and Township.
This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed building or
extension thereof used or to be used by a public utility corporation if, upon
petition of such corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation
of the building in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience
or welfare of the public; nor shall this chapter apply to any building of
the Township, or extension thereof, or to the use of any premises by the
Township.
§ 182-20. Condominium ownership. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord.
No. 301]
No section of this chapter shall be construed to prohibit condominium
ownership as permitted by the Uniform Condominium Act (68 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 3101 et seq.).119
§ 182-21. Heliports and helistops. [Amended 12-16-1991 by Ord.
No. 307; 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 405]
B. Parking for a community residential program shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of § 182-179A(1), (2) or (3), as
applicable. In addition, one additional all-weather parking space shall
be provided for each resident who is permitted by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania to operate a motor vehicle.
C. It is the intent of this section to make reasonable accommodations in
the rules, policies and practices within this Township to afford all
handicapped or disabled persons equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling in satisfaction of the requirements of the Fair Housing Act (42
U.S.C.A. § 3601 et seq.), as amended, and the applicable regulations of
the Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission as they pertain to
housing accommodations for any person on the basis of a protected
class as such term is defined by said regulations. No provision of this
chapter shall require that a dwelling be made available to an individual
whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of
other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical
damage to the property of others.
A. Helistops are permitted uses in the CRSC, M-1, M-2 and IO Districts.
Heliports are permitted as conditional uses in the M-1 and M-2
Districts, and helistops are permitted as conditional uses in the IO-2
District, upon approval of the Board of Supervisors in accordance with
the requirements of § 182-204 of this chapter. All applications for
119. Editor's Note: Original Sections 120, Prohibition of Public Nuisances, and 121, Garage
Sales, which followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code 9-17-1990 by
Ord. No. 301; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. For current provisions, see Ch. 135,
Property Maintenance, § 135-1A, and Ch. 94, Garage Sales, § 94-5.
§ 182-18.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-21
176:536
§ 182-21.1. Wireless communications facilities. [Added 6-1-1998 by
Ord. No. 372; amended 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 559]
helistops and heliports, either as permitted uses or conditional uses,
shall be subject to the following provisions:
(1) The proposed use would not be detrimental to the health, welfare
and safety of Township residents and their property.
(2) New heliports and helistops will be designed to the current Federal
Aviation Administration's (FAA) AC150/5390 heliport design guide
or subsequently applicable FAA advisory circular. Existing heliports
and helistops will be grandfathered to the design guide under
which they were constructed.
(3) Upon the granting of approval by the Board of Supervisors, the
Zoning Officer shall issue a permit for a one-year period which
must be renewed annually. If at any time the conditions of the
approval or any other conditions imposed by the Board of
Supervisors are violated, the permit may be revoked by the Zoning
Officer.
(4) All applicable FAA and/or Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Bureau of Aviation permits and/or licenses required
to operate the facility have been granted and copies of said permits
or licenses are on file with the Township. Any restrictions imposed
by the FAA and/or Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Bureau of Aviation shall be additional to those imposed by the
Township and shall govern in the event of any conflict between
Township and FAA and/or Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Bureau of Aviation requirements. In the event of
transfer of ownership of the helistop or heliport, permission to
operate said facility shall be considered withdrawn unless and until
all appropriate FAA permits and/or licenses have been transferred
to the new owner and have been refiled with the Township.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to land, discharge, load or take off in
a helicopter any place within the Township other than at a helistop or
heliport, except:
(1) In conjunction with a special event such as an athletic contest, a
holiday celebration, parade or similar activity, after seven days'
advance notice has been given to the Zoning Officer and permission
obtained to make such landing and takeoff.
(2) When necessary for law enforcement purposes and for
emergencies.
(3) In connection with a construction project where a helicopter is to
be used to lift equipment in connection with such project.
§ 182-21 WATER § 182-21.1
176:537
A. General and specific requirements for nontower wireless
communications facilities:
(1) The following regulations shall apply to all nontower WCFs:
(a) Permitted in all zones subject to regulations. Nontower WCFs
are permitted in all zones, subject to the restrictions and
conditions prescribed below and subject to applicable
permitting by the Township.
(b) Nonconforming wireless support structures. Nontower WCFs
shall be permitted to co-locate upon nonconforming towerbased
WCFs and other nonconforming structures. Co-location
of WCFs upon existing tower-based WCFs is encouraged even
if the tower-based WCF is nonconforming as to use within a
zoning district.
(c) Standard of care. Any nontower WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable
technical, safety and safety-related codes, including but not
limited to the most recent editions of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety
Code, and National Electrical Code. Any WCF shall at all times
be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair by
qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so that the
same shall not endanger the life of any person or any property
in the Township.
(d) Wind and ice. All nontower WCF structures shall be designed
to withstand the effects of wind gusts and ice to the standard
designed by the American National Standards Institute as
prepared by the engineering departments of the Electronics
Industry Association and Telecommunications Industry
Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222, as amended).
(e) Aviation safety. Nontower WCFs shall comply with all federal
and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(f) Public safety communications. Nontower WCFs shall not
interfere with public safety communications or the reception of
broadband, television, radio or other communication services
enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
(g) Radio frequency emissions. A nontower WCF shall not, by itself
or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency
emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the
FCC, including, but not limited to, the FCC Office of
Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to
Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
§ 182-21.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-21.1
176:538
(h) Removal. In the event that use of a nontower WCF is
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Township of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the
use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned WCFs, or
portions of WCFs, shall be removed as follows:
[1] All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory facilities
shall be removed within two months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved
by the Township.
[2] If the WCF or accessory facility is not removed within two
months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within
any longer period approved by the Township, the WCF
and/or associated facilities and equipment may be
removed by the Township and the cost of removal assessed
against the owner of the WCF.
(i) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a nontower WCF
shall provide the Township with a certificate of insurance
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount
of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage
in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering
the nontower WCF.
(j) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a
nontower WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the Township, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against
any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and
property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or
connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers,
agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited
to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of the nontower WCF. Each person that owns or
operates a nontower WCF shall defend any actions or
proceedings against the Township in which it is claimed that
personal injury, including death, or property damage was
caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of a nontower WCF. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees,
court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
(k) Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following
maintenance requirements shall apply:
[1] The nontower WCF shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
maintenance or emergency repair.
§ 182-21.1 WATER § 182-21.1
176:539
[2] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the facility in order to promote the safety and
security of the Township's residents.
[3] All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than
the best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
(2) The following regulations shall apply to all co-located nontower
WCFs that do not substantially change the physical dimensions of
the wireless support structure to which they are attached, and/or
fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:120
(a) Building permit required. WCF applicants proposing the
modification of an existing tower-based WCF shall obtain a
building permit from the Township. In order to be considered
for such permit, the WCF applicant must submit a permit
application to the Township in accordance with applicable
permit policies and procedures.
(b) Timing of approval for applications that fall under the WBCA.
Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application for a
nontower WCF is filed with the Township, the Township shall
notify the WCF applicant, in writing, of any information that
may be required to complete such application. Within 60
calendar days of receipt of a complete application, the
Township shall make its final decision on whether to approve
the application and shall advise the WCF applicant, in writing,
of such decision. If additional information was requested by the
Township to complete an application, the time required by the
WCF applicant to provide the information shall not be counted
toward the Township's sixty-day review period. The timing
requirements in this section shall only apply to proposed
facilities that fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act.
(c) Related equipment. Ground-mounted related equipment
greater than three cubic feet shall not be located within 50 feet
of a lot in residential use or zoned residential.
(d) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Township's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a nontower WCF or $1,000, whichever is less.
(3) The following regulations shall apply to all nontower WCFs that do
substantially change the wireless support structure to which they
are attached, or that otherwise do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:121
120. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
121. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 182-21.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-21.1
176:540
(a) Prohibited on certain structures. No nontower WCF shall be
located on single-family detached residences, single-family
attached residences, or any residential accessory structure.
(b) Conditional use authorization required. Any WCF applicant
proposing the construction of a new nontower WCF, or the
modification of an existing nontower WCF, shall first obtain a
conditional use authorization from the Township. New
constructions, modifications, and replacements that do fall
under the WBCA shall not be subject to the conditional use
process. The conditional use application shall demonstrate that
the proposed facility complies with all applicable provisions in
the Upper Providence Township Zoning Ordinance.122
(c) Historic buildings. No nontower WCF may be located upon any
property, or on a building or structure that is listed on either
the National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic Places, or is
listed on the official historic structures and/or historic districts
list maintained by the Township, or has been designated by the
Township to be of historical significance.
(d) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant(s)
and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the Township in reviewing
and evaluating the application for approval of the WCF and,
once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
violations of the terms and conditions of these WCF provisions.
The WCF applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse
the Township for all costs of the Township's consultant(s) in
providing expert evaluation and consultation in connection
with these activities.
(e) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Township's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a nontower WCF, as well as related inspection,
monitoring and related costs.
(f) Development regulations. Nontower WCFs shall be located or
co-located on existing wireless support structures, such as
existing buildings or tower-based WCFs, subject to the
following conditions:
[1] The total height of any wireless support structure and
mounted WCF shall not exceed 20 feet above the
maximum height permitted in the underlying zoning
district.
[2] In accordance with industry standards, all nontower WCF
applicants must submit documentation to the Township
justifying the total height of the nontower WCF. Such
122. Editor's Note: See Chapter 182, Zoning.
§ 182-21.1 WATER § 182-21.1
176:541
documentation shall be analyzed in the context of such
justification on an individual basis.
[3] If the WCF applicant proposes to locate the related
equipment in a separate building, the building shall
comply with the minimum requirements for the applicable
zoning district.
[4] A security fence of not less than six feet and not more than
eight feet shall surround any separate communications
equipment building. Vehicular access to the
communications equipment building shall not interfere
with the parking or vehicular circulations on the site for
the principal use.
(g) Design regulations.
[1] Nontower WCFs shall employ stealth technology and be
treated to match the wireless support structure in order to
minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the stealth
technology chosen by the WCF applicant shall be subject
to the approval of the Township.
[2] Noncommercial usage exemption. Township residents
utilizing satellite dishes, citizen and/or band radios, and
antennas for the purpose of maintaining television, phone,
and/or Internet connections at their respective residences
shall be exempt from the regulations enumerated in this
section.
(h) Removal, replacement and modification.
[1] The removal and replacement of nontower WCFs and/or
accessory equipment for the purpose of upgrading or
repairing the WCF is permitted, so long as such repair or
upgrade does not substantially change the overall size of
the WCF or the number of antennas.
[2] Any material modification to a WCF shall require notice to
be provided to the Township and possible supplemental
permit approval to the original permit or authorization.
(i) Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any
WCF to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and any other provisions found within the Township
Code or state or federal law. The Township and/or its agents
shall have the authority to enter the property upon which a
WCF is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the
operator, to ensure such compliance.
B. Regulations applicable to all nontower WCFs located in the public
rights-of-way. In addition to the applicable nontower WCF provisions
§ 182-21.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-21.1
176:542
listed herein, the following regulations shall apply to nontower WCFs
located in the public rights-of-way:
(1) Location. Nontower WCFs in the ROW shall be located or colocated
on existing poles, such as existing utility poles or light
poles. If co-location is not technologically feasible, the WCF
applicant shall locate its nontower WCF on existing poles or
freestanding structures that do not already act as wireless support
structures with the Township's approval.
(2) Design requirements:
(a) WCF installations located above the surface grade in the public
ROW, including, but not limited to, those on streetlights and
joint utility poles, shall consist of equipment components that
are no more than six feet in height and that are compatible in
scale and proportion to the structures upon which they are
mounted. All equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly
intrusive equipment feasible.
(b) Antennas and related equipment shall be treated to match the
supporting structure and may be required to be painted, or
otherwise coated, to be visually compatible with the support
structure upon which they are mounted.
(3) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all nontower WCFs in the ROW based on public safety,
traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related
considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner
requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of the
Township and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
(4) Equipment location. Nontower WCFs and related equipment shall
be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety
hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by the
Township. In addition:
(a) In no case shall ground-mounted related equipment, walls, or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the curb
or within an easement extending onto a privately owned lot.
(b) Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible,
through the use of landscaping or other decorative features, to
the satisfaction of the Township.
(c) Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the
Township.
§ 182-21.1 WATER § 182-21.1
176:543
(d) Any graffiti on any wireless support structures or any related
equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner.
(e) Any proposed underground vault related to nontower WCFs
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township.
(5) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Township, or such longer period as the Township
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the
case of an emergency, an owner of a WCF in the ROW shall, at its
own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change
or alter the position of any WCF when the Township, consistent
with its police powers and applicable Public Utility Commission
regulations, shall have determined that such removal, relocation,
change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
(a) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(b) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in
the right-of-way;
(c) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
(d) An emergency as determined by the Township.
C. General and specific requirements for all tower-based wireless
communications facilities. The following regulations shall apply to all
tower-based wireless communications facilities.
(1) Standard of care. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable technical,
safety and safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the
most recent editions of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety Code, National Electrical
Code, as well as the accepted and responsible workmanlike
industry practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors.
Any tower-based WCF shall at all times be kept and maintained in
good condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and
construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life
of any person or any property in the Township.
(2) Notice. Upon submission of an application for a tower-based WCF
and the scheduling of the public hearing upon the application, the
WCF applicant shall mail notice to all owners of every property
within 500 feet of the proposed facility. The WCF applicant shall
provide proof of the notification to the Township.
§ 182-21.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-21.1
176:544
(3) Conditional use authorization required. Tower-based WCFs are
permitted in certain zoning districts by conditional use and at a
height necessary to satisfy their function in the WCF applicant's
wireless communications system. No WCF applicant shall have the
right under these regulations to erect a tower to the maximum
height specified in this section unless it proves the necessity for
such height. The WCF applicant shall demonstrate that the
antenna/tower/pole for the tower-based WCF is the minimum
height necessary for the service area.
(a) Prior to the Supervisors' approval of a conditional use
authorizing the construction and installation of tower-based
WCF, it shall be incumbent upon the WCF applicant for such
conditional use approval to prove to the reasonable satisfaction
of Supervisors that the WCF applicant cannot adequately
extend or infill its communications system by the use of
equipment such as redoes, repeaters, antenna(s) and other
similar equipment installed on existing structures, such as
utility poles or their appurtenances and other available tall
structures. The WCF applicant shall further demonstrate that
the proposed tower-based WCF must be located where it is
proposed in order to serve the WCF applicant's service area
and that no other viable alternative location exists.
(b) The conditional use application shall be accompanied by a
propagation study evidencing the need for the proposed tower
or other communication facilities and equipment, a description
of the type and manufacturer of the proposed transmission/
radio equipment, the frequency range (megahertz band)
assigned to the WCF applicant, the power in watts at which the
WCF applicant transmits, and any relevant related tests
conducted by the WCF applicant in determining the need for
the proposed site and installation.
(c) The conditional use application shall also be accompanied by
documentation demonstrating that the proposed tower-based
WCF complies with all state and federal laws and regulations
concerning aviation safety.
(d) Where the tower-based WCF is located on a property with
another principal use, the WCF applicant shall present
documentation to the Supervisors that the owner of the
property has granted an easement for the proposed WCF and
that vehicular access will be provided to the facility.
(e) The conditional use application shall also be accompanied by
documentation demonstrating that the proposed tower-based
WCF complies with all applicable provisions of the Upper
Providence Township Zoning Ordinance.123
123. Editor's Note: See Chapter 182, Zoning.
§ 182-21.1 WATER § 182-21.1
176:545
(4) Engineer inspection. Prior to the Township's issuance of a permit
authorizing construction and erection of a tower-based WCF, a
structural engineer registered in Pennsylvania shall issue to the
Township a written certification of the proposed WCF's ability to
meet the structural standards offered by either the Electronic
Industries Association or the Telecommunication Industry
Association and certify the proper construction of the foundation
and the erection of the structure. This certification shall be
provided during the conditional hearings or at a minimum be made
as a condition attached to any approval given such that the
certification be provided prior to issuance of any building permits.
(5) Visual appearance and land use compatibility. Tower-based WCFs
shall employ stealth technology, which may include the tower
portion to be painted silver or another color approved by the
Supervisors, or shall have a galvanized finish. All tower-based
WCFs and related equipment shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment and
shall maximize the use of a like facade to blend with the existing
surroundings and neighboring buildings to the greatest extent
possible. The Supervisors shall consider whether its decision upon
the subject application will promote the harmonious and orderly
development of the zoning district involved; encourage
compatibility with the character and type of development existing
in the area; benefit neighboring properties by preventing a
negative impact on the aesthetic character of the community;
preserve woodlands and trees existing at the site to the greatest
possible extent; and encourage sound engineering and land
development design and construction principles, practices and
techniques.
(6) Co-location and siting. An application for a new tower-based WCF
shall demonstrate that the proposed tower-based WCF cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved structure or building, or
sited on land owned and maintained by Upper Providence
Township. The Supervisors may deny an application to construct a
new tower-based WCF if the WCF applicant has not made a good
faith effort to mount the commercial communications antenna(s) on
an existing structure. The WCF applicant shall demonstrate that it
contacted the owners of tall structures, buildings, and towers
within a radius of 1/4 of a mile of the site proposed, sought
permission to install an antenna on those structures, buildings, and
towers and was denied for one of the following reasons:
(a) The proposed antenna and related equipment would exceed
the structural capacity of the existing building, structure or
tower, and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a
reasonable cost.
(b) The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing equipment for
§ 182-21.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-21.1
176:546
that existing building, structure, or tower and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(c) Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access, or height to accommodate
the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended
function.
(d) A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached
with the owner of such building, structure, or tower.
(7) Permit required for modifications. To the extent permissible under
applicable state and federal law, any WCF applicant proposing the
modification of an existing tower-based WCF, which increases the
overall height of such WCF, shall first obtain a permit from the
Township. To the extent permissible under law, nonroutine
modifications shall be prohibited without a permit.
(8) Gap in coverage. A WCF applicant for a tower-based WCF must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage or capacity
exists in the applicable area and that the type of WCF being
proposed is the least intrusive means by which to fill that gap in
wireless coverage. The existence or nonexistence of a gap in
wireless coverage or capacity shall be a factor in the Township's
decision on an application for approval of tower-based WCF.
(9) Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all tower-based
WCFs, the WCF applicant shall provide the Township with a written
commitment that it will allow other service providers to co-locate
antennas on tower-based WCFs where technically and
economically feasible. To the extent permissible under state and
federal law, the owner of a tower-based WCF shall not install any
additional antennas without obtaining the prior written approval of
the Township.
(10)Wind and ice. Any tower-based WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind gusts and ice to the standard
designed by the American National Standards Institute as prepared
by the engineering departments of the Electronics Industry
Association and Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/
EIA/TIA-222), as amended.
(11) Height. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed at the minimum
functional height. The maximum total height of a tower-based WCF,
which is not located in the public ROW, shall not exceed 200 feet, as
measured vertically from the ground level to the highest point on
the structure, including antennas and subsequent alterations.
(12) Related equipment. Either one single-story wireless
communications equipment building not exceeding 500 square feet
in area or up to five metal boxes placed on a concrete pad not
exceeding 10 feet by 20 feet in area housing the receiving and
§ 182-21.1 WATER § 182-21.1
176:547
transmitting equipment may be located on the site for each
unrelated company sharing commercial communications
antenna(s) space on the tower-based wireless communications
facility greater than 40 feet.
(13) Public safety communications. No tower-based WCF shall interfere
with public safety communications or the reception of broadband,
television, radio or other communication services enjoyed by
occupants of nearby properties.
(14) Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
(a) Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated and unattended
on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
(b) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of
the WCF in order to promote the safety and security of the
Township's residents and utilize the best available technology
for preventing failures and accidents.
(15)Radio frequency emissions. A tower-based WCF shall not, by itself
or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency
emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC,
including, but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering
Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC
Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radiofrequency
Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(16) Historic buildings or districts. A tower-based WCF shall not be
located upon a property, and/or on a building or structure that is
listed on either the National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic
Places, or eligible to be so listed, or is included in the official
historic structures and/or historic districts list maintained by the
Township.
(17) Signs. All tower-based WCFs shall post a sign in a readily visible
location identifying the name and phone number of a party to
contact in the event of an emergency. The only other signage
permitted on the WCF shall be those required by the FCC, or any
other federal or state agency.
(18) Lighting. No tower-based WCF shall be artificially lighted, except
as required by law. If lighting is required, the WCF applicant shall
provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting, demonstrating as
unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state
and federal regulations. The WCF applicant shall promptly report
any outage or malfunction of FAA-mandated lighting to the
appropriate governmental authorities and to the Township
Secretary.
§ 182-21.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-21.1
176:548
(19) Noise. Tower-based WCFs shall be operated and maintained so as
not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under
state law and the Township Code, except in emergency situations
requiring the use of a backup generator, where such noise
standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis only.
(20) Aviation safety. Tower-based WCFs shall comply with all federal
and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(21) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant and/or
expert necessary to assist the Township in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the tower-based WCF
and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
violations of the terms and conditions of these provisions. The WCF
applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse the Township
for all costs of the Township's consultant(s) in providing expert
evaluation and consultation in connection with these activities.
(22) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a tower-based WCF is filed with the Township, the
Township shall notify the WCF applicant, in writing, of any
information that may be required to complete such application. All
applications for tower-based WCFs shall be acted upon within 150
days of the receipt of a fully completed application for the approval
of such tower-based WCF and the Township shall advise the WCF
applicant, in writing, of its decision. If additional information was
requested by the Township to complete an application, the time
required by the WCF applicant to provide the information shall not
be counted toward the one-hundred-fifty-day review period.
(23) Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming tower-based WCFs which are
hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause may be
repaired and restored at their former location, but must otherwise
comply with the terms and conditions of this section. The colocation
of antennas is permitted on nonconforming structures.
(24) Removal. In the event that use of a tower-based WCF is planned to
be discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Township of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use
shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned WCFs or portions of
WCFs shall be removed as follows:
(a) All unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within 90 days of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by
the Township.
(b) If the WCF and/or accessory facility is not removed within 90
days of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any
longer period approved by the Township, the WCF and
accessory facilities and equipment may be removed by the
§ 182-21.1 WATER § 182-21.1
176:549
Township and the cost of removal assessed against the owner
of the WCF.
(c) Any unused portions of tower-based WCFs, including antennas,
shall be removed within 90 days of the time of cessation of
operations. The Township must approve all replacements of
portions of a tower-based WCF previously removed.
(25) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Township's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a towerbased
WCF, as well as related inspection, monitoring, and related
costs.
(26)FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF over 40 feet in height shall submit a copy of its current FCC
license, including the name, address, and emergency telephone
number for the operator of the facility.
(27) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF
greater than 40 feet in height shall provide the Township with a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence covering the tower-based WCF. Each person that owns
or operates a tower-based WCF 40 feet or less in height shall
provide the Township with a certificate of insurance evidencing
general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000
per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering each tower-based
WCF.
(28) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Township, its elected and appointed officials,
employees and agents, at all times against any and all claims for
personal injury, including death, and property damage arising in
whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or
omission of the person, its officers, agents, employees or
contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the tower-based
WCF. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF shall
defend any actions or proceedings against the Township in which it
is claimed that personal injury, including death, or property
damage was caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of the tower-based WCF. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court
costs and all other costs of indemnification.
§ 182-21.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-21.1
176:550
(29) Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a tower-based WCF
shall contain a seal and signature of a professional structural
engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(30) Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the
construction or placement of a tower-based WCF, the WCF
applicant shall provide to the Township financial security sufficient
to guarantee the removal of the tower-based WCF. Said financial
security shall remain in place until the tower-based WCF is
removed.
D. Tower-based wireless communications facilities outside the public
rights-of-way. The following regulations shall apply to tower-based
wireless communications facilities located outside the public rights-ofway:
(1) Development regulations.
(a) Tower-based WCFs shall not be located in, or within 50 feet of,
an area in which utilities are primarily located underground.
(b) Tower-based WCFs are permitted outside the public rights-ofway
in the following zoning districts by conditional use, subject
to the above prohibition:
[1] All nonresidential zoning districts and not including
overlay districts, except, however, tower-based WCFs shall
not be permitted in any Open Space Conservation District.
(c) Sole use on a lot. A tower-based WCF shall be permitted as a
sole use on a lot, provided that the underlying lot is a minimum
of 6,000 square feet. The minimum distance between the base
of a tower-based WCF and any adjoining property line or street
right-of-way line shall equal 100% of the proposed WCF
structure's height.
(d) Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF may be
permitted on a property with an existing use, or on a vacant
parcel in combination with another use, except residential,
subject to the following conditions:
[1] The existing use on the property may be any permitted use
in the applicable district, and need not be affiliated with
the WCF.
[2] Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall comply with the
requirements for the applicable district and shall be the
area needed to accommodate the tower-based WCF and
guy wires, the equipment building, security fence, and
buffer planting if the proposed WCF is greater than 40 feet
in height.
§ 182-21.1 WATER § 182-21.1
176:551
[3] Minimum setbacks. The minimum distance between the
base of a tower-based WCF and any adjoining property line
or street right-of-way line shall equal 50% of the proposed
WCF structure height or the minimum setback of the
underlying zoning district, whichever is greater. Where the
site on which a tower-based WCF is proposed to be located
is contiguous to an educational use, child day-care facility
or residential use, the minimum distance between the base
of a tower-based WCF and any such adjoining uses shall
equal 110% of the proposed height of the tower-based
WCF unless it is demonstrated to the reasonable
satisfaction of Supervisors that in the event of failure the
WCF is designed to collapse upon itself within a setback
area less than the required minimum setback without
endangering such adjoining uses and their occupants.
(2) Design regulations.
(a) The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact.
Application of the stealth technology chosen by the WCF
applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
(b) To the extent permissible by law, any height extensions to an
existing tower-based WCF shall require prior approval of the
Township.
(c) Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the WCF
applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for future
users.
(d) Any tower-based WCF over 40 feet in height shall be equipped
with an anticlimbing device, as approved by the manufacturer.
(3) Surrounding environs.
(a) The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation,
trees and shrubs located within proximity to the WCF structure
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
(b) The WCF applicant shall submit a soil report to the Township
complying with the standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical
Investigations, ANSI/EIA/TIA-222, as amended, to document
and verify the design specifications of the foundation of the
tower-based WCF, and anchors for guy wires, if used.
(4) Fence/screen.
(a) A security fence having a minimum height of six feet and a
maximum height of eight feet shall completely surround any
§ 182-21.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-21.1
176:552
tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in height, as well as guy
wires, or any building housing WCF equipment.
(b) Landscaping shall be required to screen as much of a newly
constructed tower-based WCF as possible. The Supervisors
may permit any combination of existing vegetation,
topography, walls, decorative fences or other features instead
of landscaping, if, in the discretion of Supervisors, they achieve
the same degree of screening. Existing vegetation shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible.
(5) Accessory equipment.
(a) Ground-mounted related equipment associated, or connected,
with a tower-based WCF shall be placed underground or
screened from public view using stealth technologies, as
described above.
(b) All related equipment, utility buildings and accessory
structures shall be architecturally designed to blend into the
environment in which they are situated and shall meet the
minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning
district.
(6) Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking shall
be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service access to
tower-based WCF. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public
or private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road grades
shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual
disturbance and minimize soil erosion. Where applicable, the WCF
owner shall present documentation to the Township that the
property owner has granted an easement for the proposed facility.
(7) Parking. For each tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in height,
there shall be two off-street parking spaces.
(8) Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any towerbased
WCF to ensure compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and
any other provisions found within the Township Code or state or
federal law. The Township and/or its agents shall have the authority
to enter the property upon which a WCF is located at any time,
upon reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
E. Tower-based wireless communications facilities in the public rights-ofway.
The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless
communications facilities located in the public rights-of-way.
(1) Location and development standards.
(a) Tower-based WCFs are prohibited in areas in which utilities
are located underground.
§ 182-21.1 WATER § 182-21.1
176:553
(b) Tower-based WCFs shall not be located in the front facade area
of any structure.
(c) Tower-based WCFs 40 feet or shorter in height shall be
permitted along certain collector roads and arterial roads
throughout the Township, regardless of the underlying zoning
district, provided that they are not situated within 50 feet of an
area in which utilities are underground. A map of such
permitted roads is kept on file at the Township Zoning Office.
(2) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all tower-based WCFs in the ROW based on public
safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and
related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and
manner requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of
the Township and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.124
(3) Equipment location. Tower-based WCFs and related equipment
shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to
otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by
the Township. In addition:
(a) In no case shall ground-mounted related equipment, walls, or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the curb.
(b) Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible,
through the use of landscaping or other decorative features to
the satisfaction of the Township.
(c) Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the
Township.
(d) Any graffiti on the tower or on any related equipment shall be
removed at the sole expense of the owner.
(e) Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs shall be
reviewed and approved by the Township.
(4) Design regulations.
(a) The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The
application of the stealth technology chosen by the WCF
applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
124. Editor's Note: See 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 182-21.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-21.1
176:554
§ 182-21.2. (Reserved)125
(b) Tower-based WCFs in the public ROW shall not exceed 40 feet
in height.
(c) To the extent permissible under state and federal law, any
height extensions to an existing tower-based WCF shall require
prior approval of the Township and shall not increase the
overall height of the tower-based WCF to more than 40 feet.
(d) Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the WCF
applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for future
users.
(5) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Township, or such longer period as the Township
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the
case of an emergency, an owner of a tower-based WCF in the ROW
shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any WCF when the
Township, consistent with its police powers and applicable Public
Utility Commission regulations, shall determine that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the
following circumstances:
(a) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(b) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in
the right-of-way;
(c) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
(d) An emergency as determined by the Township.
(6) Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as
described in this section, every tower-based WCF in the ROW is
subject to the Township's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable
fee to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such
compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to the
Township's actual ROW management costs, including, but not
limited to, the costs of the administration and performance of all
reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and other ROW
management activities by the Township. The owner of each towerbased
WCF shall pay an annual fee to the Township to compensate
the Township for the Township's costs incurred in connection with
the activities described above.
125. Editor's Note: Former § 182-21.2, Communications towers, as amended, was repealed
2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 559. See now § 182-21.1, Wireless communications facilities.
§ 182-21.1 WATER § 182-21.3
176:555
§ 182-21.3. No-impact home-based businesses. [Added 3-15-2004 by
Ord. No. 436]
No-impact home-based businesses, as defined in § 182-24 herein, must
satisfy the following requirements wherever they are permitted by the
terms of this chapter:
§ 182-21.4. Home occupations. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
Notwithstanding the provisions in this chapter for no-impact home-based
businesses, home occupations, whenever such use is specifically permitted
in any zoning district, shall meet the following standards, in addition to
those contained in the definition for this term contained in § 182-24, herein:
A. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
B. The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
C. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
D. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
E. The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood.
F. The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
G. The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
H. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
I. Permission to operate a no-impact home-based business in any district
in the Township shall not supercede any deed restriction, covenant or
agreement restricting the use of land, nor any master deed, bylaw or
other document applicable to a common interest ownership community.
A. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
B. Signage shall be permitted in accordance with § 182-142A of this
chapter.
C. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
§ 182-179A(1) of this chapter. All parking required by said section shall
be located to the side or rear of the residence. A planted buffer shall be
§ 182-21.3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-21.4
176:556
§ 182-21.5. Easements. [Added 10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 476; amended
1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 525]
The area of all public rights-of-way and public easements shall be
maintained free and clear of all accessory uses, and such areas not
containing public improvements shall be maintained open and as lawn
(where required). Fences may be permitted in public easement areas by a
special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board and the acceptance of a
restrictive covenant permitting Township removal or replacement if deemed
necessary by the Township.
§ 182-21.6. Off-site dedication in lieu of on-site recreation and open
space amenities. [Added 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
installed between any parking area and a property line where any part
of the parking area is located within 15 feet of said property line.
The buffer shall follow the planting prescription for a Buffer Type 2
as stipulated in § 154-36D(5)(c) of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development; the width of said buffer, however, shall only be required
to be 10 feet and not as prescribed in said section. An opaque fence
may substitute for the buffer required herein.
D. The home occupation shall not require servicing or deliveries by
vehicles larger than single-unit trucks, and such servicing or deliveries
shall be on a very occasional basis; any servicing or deliveries by tractor
trailer trucks shall be prohibited.
E. The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood. No use shall require any
construction or use of any equipment that would change the fire rating
of the structure or in any way significantly increase the fire danger to
neighboring structures or residences.
F. The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
G. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
H. There shall be no more than one home occupation per residence.
I. Permission to operate a home occupation in any district in the Township
shall not supercede any deed restriction, covenant or agreement
restricting the use of land, nor any master deed, bylaw or other
document applicable to a common interest ownership community.
A. When recreation and open space amenities are required to be
dedicated as part of the land development process, off-site parcels may
be proposed to the Township in lieu of that dedication. Acceptance and
§ 182-21.4 WATER § 182-21.6
176:557
§ 182-21.7. Recreation and open space requirements,
nonresidential zoning districts. [Added 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 561]
In cases where the development or significant redevelopment of a tract is
to be undertaken, the developer shall provide community and open space
areas for the comfort and convenience of prospective patrons, employees,
and residents. Such area shall be governed by the provisions of Article
IVA, Open Space and Recreational Facilities, of Chapter 154, Subdivision
and Land Development. At the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, the
developer shall provide a fee in lieu of dedication as an alternative to setting
aside open space. Said fee shall be provided in accordance with § 154-40.6
of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development. In no instance shall the
provisions of § 182-21.6 of this chapter apply to recreation and open space
requirements within nonresidential zoning districts.
§ 182-22. Interpretation of regulations.
The interpretation of this chapter is intended to be such that whenever
these requirements are at variance with Township subdivision and
development regulations or any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations,
ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants as particularly refer to area
and bulk regulations and impose higher standards, the most restrictive
requirement shall govern.
permission for this option is wholly at the discretion of the Township's
Board of Supervisors, and must conform to the following:
(1) Properties off site offered for dedication in lieu of on-site recreation
and open space amenities shall be a single lot, or a contiguous
collection of parcels wholly owned by the owner/developer of the
initial development parcel.
(2) Any proposed land offered in lieu of on-site requirements shall be
governed by the provisions of Article IVA, Open Space and
Recreational Facilities, Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(3) Any proposed land offered in lieu of on-site amenities must be
offered to Upper Providence Township for dedication. Acceptance
of the dedicated property is wholly at the discretion of the Board of
Supervisors; if the dedication is not accepted by the Township, the
use of this provision is not permitted. Preference will be given to
those properties identified for preservation in the 2006 Open Space
and Environmental Protection Plan and 2010 Comprehensive Plan.
§ 182-21.6 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-22
176:558
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 182-23. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words shall have the meanings
assigned to them, as follows:
§ 182-24. Terms defined.
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this
section, as follows:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building, the use of which is
customarily incidental to that of the principal building and is used for an
accessory use and is located on the same lot.
ACCESSORY USE or ACCESSORY — A use clearly incidental to and
customarily found in connection with a particular principal use and
conducted on the same lot as a principal use to which it is related and
located, either within the same structure or in an accessory structure or as
an accessory use of land, except that off-street parking need not be located
on the same lot.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, films for sale or
viewing on the premises by the use of motion-picture devices or any other
coin-operated means and other periodicals, which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of
such material or similar establishment to which access is limited to persons
18 years of age or older.[Added 4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 240]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — A public or private establishment
which is licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages and which
features topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar
entertainers or a similar establishment to which access is limited to persons
18 years of age or older.[Added 4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 240]
A. Words used in the present tense include the future. The singular
number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.
B. The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended
for," "maintained for" or "occupied for."
C. The word "person" includes an individual, corporation, partnership,
incorporated association or any other similar entity.
D. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specified example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
§ 182-23 WATER § 182-24
176:559
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building used
regularly and routinely for presenting material having as a dominant theme
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein or a similar
establishment to which access is limited to persons 18 years of age or
older.[Added 4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 240]
ADULT USE — A use composed of an adult bookstore, adult motion-picture
theater or adult entertainment cabaret.[Added 4-2-1984 by Ord. No.
240]
ADVERTISING SIGN — See "sign and billboard."
AGE-TARGETED DEVELOPMENT — Dwelling units designed to maximize
the unit's attractiveness to older adults, through the unit floor plan, unit
amenities, location of the master bedroom on the first living level, the
number of bedrooms proposed in the units, the type of common open
space provided, and the common area maintenance program proposed.
Further, the site plan shall be designed to encourage active adult living,
through the provision of walking trails and other amenities suitable for such
households.[Added 1-19-2010 by Ord. No. 507]
AGRICULTURE — The cultivation of the soil and the raising and harvesting
of the products of the soil, including nursery, horticulture and forestry.
ALLEY — A minor way which may or may not be legally dedicated and is
used primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties
otherwise abutting on a street.
ALTERATIONS — Include but are not limited to the following:
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels, dishes,
whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission or reception
of wireless signals. An antenna may include an omnidirectional antenna
All incidental changes or replacements in the nonstructural parts of a
building or other structures.
A.
Minor changes or replacements in the structural parts of a building or
other structure, limited to the following examples and others of similar
character or extent:
Alteration of interior partitions to improve livability in
nonconforming residential buildings, provided that no additional
dwelling units are created thereby.
(1)
Alteration of interior partitions in all other types of buildings or
other structures.
(2)
(3) Making windows or doors in exterior walls.
Strengthening the load-bearing capacity in not more than 10% of
the total floor area to permit the accommodation of a specialized
unit of machinery or equipment.
(4)
B.
§ 182-24 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-24
176:560
(rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic antenna (disc) or any other
wireless antenna. An antenna shall not include126 tower-based wireless
communications facilities,127 as defined below.[Added 2-21-2017 by Ord.
No. 559]
APARTMENT — See "dwelling, multiple."
AREA OF BUILDING — See "lot coverage."
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY or CAR-WASHING FACILITY — A structure used
for the purposes of cleaning or reconditioning the exterior and interior
surfaces of automotive vehicles, but not including an incidental one-bay
washing facility in a gasoline service station where washing facilities are
purely incidental to the operation of said service station. A self-operated
vehicular laundering facility not requiring attendants or employees,
regardless of capacity, is also considered to be an "automobile laundry."
AUTOMOTIVE AND/OR TRAILER SALES AREA — An open area, other than
a public or private street or way, used for the display or sale of new and
used automobiles, trailers, trucks or farm equipment and where no repair
work is done except that which is minor and incidental, not including body
and fender work.
AUTOMOTIVE GARAGE — Any premises used principally for the
commercial repair of vehicles, but not including automotive wrecking.
AUTOMOTIVE SALES BUILDING — A building used for the sale of, hire of
or remuneration from automotive equipment. This shall be interpreted to
include auto accessory sales rooms but not the sale of junked automotive
equipment.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood"
or "one-percent annual chance flood").[Amended 12-2-1996 by Ord. No.
357; 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 554]
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).[Added 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 554]
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.[Amended
12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 357; 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 554]
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly or completely below
the grade plane. A basement shall be considered as a story above the
grade plane where the finished surface of the floor above the basement
is:[Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 450]
A. More than six feet above the grade plane;
126. Editor's Note: See Chapter 182, Zoning.
127. Editor's Note: See Chapter 182, Zoning.
§ 182-24 WATER § 182-24
176:561
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A single-family residential building occupied by a
resident innkeeper, containing up to eight rooms for the temporary lodging
of guests for compensation and providing such lodging services to the
guests as maid service and serving meals only, to guests during their
stay.[Added 2-1-1999 by Ord. No. 380]
BERM — A linear mound or bank of earth, used especially as a barrier or to
provide insulation.[Added 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 535]
BILLBOARD — A sign other than one indicating a business conducted on
the premises and upon which advertising matter of any character is printed,
posted or lettered by any means and which is designed for such purposes.
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded by:
BUFFER — An area designed and functioning to separate the elements and
uses of land which abut it and to ease the transition between them. Unless
otherwise specified, "buffers" may be included as part of the required
setbacks and yard areas. "Buffers" are divided into three types:[Added
12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 209]
BUILDING — A structure or appendage to a structure which is permanently
affixed to the land, has one or more floors or stories and is bounded by
More than six feet above the finished ground level for more than 50%
of the total building perimeter; or
B.
C. More than 12 feet above the finished ground level at any point.
A. Streets.
B. A public park.
C. A railroad right-of-way, excluding siding and spurs.
D. Township boundary lines.
BUFFER SCREEN — A buffer comprised of natural and/or man-made
material arranged in a certain specified depth, height and density to
effectively block the view from one side to another during all seasons of
the year and to reduce the transmittal of noise and odors between the
sides.
A.
BUFFER SOFTENING — A buffer comprised of natural and/or manmade
material arranged in a certain specified depth, height and density
to ease and soften, but not essentially block, the view from one side to
another and to reduce the transmittal of noise and odors between the
sides.
B.
BUFFER, OPEN — A buffer normally comprised of grass, ground cover
and/or possibly other landscaping material having a specified depth,
but not necessarily having significant vertical components to achieve a
certain height or density, the purpose of which is to achieve adequate
spacing and attractive landscaping between two or more actively used
areas.
C.
§ 182-24 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-24
176:562
either lot lines or yards. A "building" shall not include such structures as
billboards, fences or other structures with interior surfaces not normally
accessible to human use such as gas tanks, grain elevators, coal bunkers
or similar structures. A "building" may accommodate more than one family
and have more than one dwelling unit and may be used for residential,
commercial, industrial, public or semipublic purposes.
BUILDING FRONTAGE — For the purposes of calculating the allowable
total sign area, the building frontage is defined as follows:[Added 5-5-2003
by Ord. No. 426]
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line within a property defining the required
distance between the face of any structure to be erected and the adjacent
street (ultimate right-of-way) line. This line as measured to the major
portion of the structure includes sun parlors, foyers, bay windows, porches,
projecting eaves, dormers, gutters, steps and any other solid
entrances.[Amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
CAPPED SEWERS — Sewage facilities which are in all respects consistent
with the requirements for public sewer mains and laterals, but which are
not connected to sewage treatment facilities.
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
deceased, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and
mortuaries when operated in conjunction with the "cemetery" and within
the boundaries.
CHURCH — A building used for public worship by a congregation, excluding
buildings used exclusively for residential, education, burial, recreational or
other uses not normally associated with worship.
CLINIC — Ambulatory health care facility, generally including a number of
medical, dental, and/or mental health specialties, in which examinations,
diagnostic and preventive health services, and treatment are provided for
patients on an outpatient basis, generally on a walk-in or first-come, firstserved
basis; a clinic is characterized by centralized facilities and services,
including patient records storage/management, waiting areas, and
laboratory and other diagnostic and testing facilities. It is typically managed
The linear footage of a building face which serves as the principal
approach to a building and which building face or wall front upon a
public street, a shopping center driveway, parking area or pedestrian
mall or walkway. Building face shall include all wall faces that are
approximately parallel to each other and that face a public street,
shopping center driveway, parking area, pedestrian mall or walkway.
A.
For corner lots, or buildings contained within a shopping center, such
footage may be calculated separately for the principal approach and
one adjacent face if such face also fronts on a public street or a
shopping center driveway, public parking area, pedestrian mall or
public walkway. The sign area calculated for each frontage shall be
erected on that frontage only and shall not be increased by the sign
area calculated for another frontage.
B.
§ 182-24 WATER § 182-24
176:563
by a single institution or corporation and is distinguished from a medical
office building wherein individual offices or suites are leased or sold to
a health care provider or group of same and wherein the health care
provider(s) in one office or suite does not necessarily have any corporate,
managerial or similar relationship to the health care provider(s) occupying
other offices or suites in the building.[Added 10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 476]
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A development pattern wherein structures
are arranged in closely related groups, reducing lot sizes and preserving
land for open space.
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more WCFs, including antennas,
on an existing tower-based WCF, or on any structure that already supports
at least one nontower WCF.[Added 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 559]
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water
or a combination of land and water within a development site intended
and designed for the use or enjoyment of residents of the development,
not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set aside for public
facilities. Common open space shall be substantially free of structures but
may contain such improvements as are in the development plan as finally
approved and as are appropriate for the recreation of residents.
COMMON PARKING — Any parking area used by three or more dwelling
units and having space for six or more motor vehicles.128[Amended
12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 209]
COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL PROGRAM — An establishment, sometimes
referred to as a "community living arrangement" or a "group home,"
licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, that provides a home for
not more than six handicapped individuals, excluding staff who do not
reside on the property, who live and cook together as a single housekeeping
unit. This definition shall not include a facility housing persons released
from or under the jurisdiction of a government bureau of corrections or
similar institution. "Handicapped" means, with respect to a person, a
physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of
such person's major life activities; a record of having such an impairment;
or being regarded as having such an impairment; but such term does
not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance
as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C.
§ 802).[Added 10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 329]
CONDOMINIUM — An estate in real property consisting of an undivided
interest in a portion of a parcel, together with a separate interest in a space
within a structure. This form of ownership may be applied in residential,
professional office, industrial and commercial land uses.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure,
including the placement of mobile homes.
128. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "communications antenna," "communications
equipment building" and "communications tower," which immediately followed this
definition, were repealed 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 559.
§ 182-24 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-24
176:564
CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL CENTER — A minor commercial facility
generally containing no more than five units and occupying no more than
three acres, designed to serve everyday needs of residents in its immediate
vicinity and whose commercial goods and hours of operation encourage
short stops for specific items rather than extensive shopping trips. Its
primary component is a drugstore or a small food and household goods
store but not a supermarket, and the center may contain a few other
establishments as well, such as a beauty shop, laundry and dry-cleaning
establishment or similar facilities.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No.
209]
CONVERSION — The remodeling or alteration of a structure so as to
accommodate the provision of more dwelling units than were originally
intended. "Conversions" include the alteration of a nonresidential structure
into a dwelling unit for at least one family, the modification of a singlefamily
structure so as to accommodate two or more dwelling units and the
alteration of a multifamily structure so as to accommodate more units than
originally intended.
COVERAGE — See "lot coverage."
DAY-CARE CENTER — Any facility that provides care for individuals on
a less than sixteen-hour-per-day basis. All day-care centers shall meet all
applicable design, site, and area standards as set forth by the Pennsylvania
Department of Welfare or Department of Aging, whichever agency is
applicable to the proposed use. The definition includes child day care and
adult day care. Child day care is further defined as for seven or more
children under the age of six years of age, excluding care from relatives
and care provided by places of worship during religious services; provided,
however, that before-and after-school care may be provided for children
up to the age of 16. Adult day care is further defined as those facilities in
which care is provided for a senior citizen through a structured, communitybased
program which provides health, social, and other related support
services.[Added 10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 451]
DENSITY — The number of units (persons, families or dwellings) per acre
or square mile.
DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling which has yard areas on all four
sides.
DEVELOPABLE ACREAGE — That portion of a tract excluding land within
existing rights-of-way of public roads and utility lines, all floodplains as
defined herein and all steep slopes in excess of 15% as defined in Article
XVIII of this chapter. This definition shall be used in calculating the
maximum number of dwelling units permitted in certain residential districts
where so specified.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 209; 9-20-1982
by Ord. No. 231; 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 419]
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
§ 182-24 WATER § 182-24
176:565
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.[Amended
12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 357; 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 554]
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — Network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.[Added 2-21-2017
by Ord. No. 559]
DWELLING TYPES — When described in the pertinent Articles herein, the
various dwelling types are intended to have the following meanings:
Single-family.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING (or SINGLE-FAMILY
DWELLING) — A building designed for and occupied exclusively as
a residence for only one family and having no party wall in common
with an adjoining building.
(1)
TOWNHOUSE (or SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING)
[Repealed 10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 329]
(2)
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING — A building designed
for and occupied exclusively as the residence for one family,
attached to another similar unit(s) by means of one or more vertical
party walls. Examples of "single-family attached dwellings" include,
but are not limited to, townhouse and quadraplex units. Any
reference to "townhouse" throughout this chapter shall be
construed to mean "single-family attached dwelling." [Added
10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 329]
(3)
A.
Two-family.
DUPLEX (or TWO-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING) — A building
designed for and occupied by two families, one living above the
other, having a common partition between them and having no
party wall in common with an adjoining building.
(1)
SEMIDETACHED HOUSE (TWIN) — A house surrounded on three
sides by yard area and to be constructed so that one wall is on
a side lot line and abuts the neighboring house. [Amended
9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 231]
(2)
B.
Multifamily.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A detached building occupied by
three or more families, each living independently of the other.
"Multifamily dwelling" includes, but is not limited to, a garden
apartment, which is a multifamily dwelling 35 feet or less in height.
Any reference throughout this chapter to "garden apartment" shall
be construed to mean "multifamily dwelling." [Amended
10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 329]
(1)
C.
§ 182-24 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-24
176:566
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms for living purposes, together with
separate cooking and sanitary facilities, accessible from the outdoors either
directly or through an entrance hall shared with other dwelling units and
used for or intended to be used by one or more persons living together and
maintaining a common household.
EASEMENT — The legal right or privilege of a person, persons or entity
to use the land of another person, persons or entity for a special purpose
consistent with the rights of the underlying property owner.[Added
10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 476]
EASEMENT, PUBLIC — An easement inuring to the benefit of Upper
Providence Township, the Upper Providence Township Municipal Authority,
the County of Montgomery, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the United
States of America, any departments, agencies, instrumentalities and
authorities created thereby, and public utilities such as, but not limited
to, sanitary sewer, public water, cable, gas, electric, telephone.[Added
10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 476]
EMERGENCY — A condition that constitutes a clear and immediate danger
to the health, welfare, or safety of the public, or has caused or is likely to
cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be unusable and result in loss of the
services provided.[Added 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 559]
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area of an existing building, an
increase in size of another structure or an increase in that portion of a tract
of land occupied by an existing use.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies, of an underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution system or a collection, communication, supply
or disposal system.
FAMILY — A single person occupying a dwelling unit and maintaining a
household or two or more persons related by blood or marriage or adoption
occupying a dwelling unit, living together and maintaining a common
household, including not more than three unrelated persons occupying a
common household. The term "family" shall include a community residential
program for not more than three unrelated individuals.[Amended
10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 329]
FARM — A tract or piece of land containing not less than five contiguous
acres upon which are maintained, grown and produced for sale or use
domestic livestock, dairy products, poultry, eggs, fruit and vegetables and
such.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.[Added 2-21-2017 by Ord.
No. 559]
FLOODPLAIN — Refer to Article III.
(2) GARDEN APARTMENT [Repealed 10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 329]
§ 182-24 WATER § 182-24
176:567
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.[Added 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 357; 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 554]
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross livable area of the several floors of
a building or buildings measured from the face of exterior walls or from
center lines of walls separating two buildings. In particular, "floor area"
includes but is not limited to the following:
GARAGE —
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — An area of land, together with any
structure thereon, used for:
A. Basement space, if it meets the requirements of a building story.
Elevator shafts, stairwells and attic space, whether or not a floor has
been laid, providing structural headroom of eight feet or more.
B.
Roofed terraces, exterior balconies, breezeways or porches, provided
that over 50% of the perimeter of these is enclosed.
C.
Any other floor space used for dwelling purposes, no matter where
located within a building.
D.
Accessory buildings, excluding space used for accessory off-street
parking or used for loading berths.
E.
Any other floor space not specifically excluded, excluding space used
for air-conditioning machinery or cooling towers and similar
mechanical equipment serving the building and cellar space.
F.
PRIVATE — An accessory building or a part of a principal building used
for the storage of motor vehicles owned and used by the owner or
tenant of the premises and for the storage of not more than two motor
vehicles owned and used by persons other than the owner or tenant of
the premises. No more than one commercial vehicles or truck may be
stored in a private garage.
A.
PUBLIC — A building other than a private or storage garage, one or
more stories in height, used solely for the commercial storage, service
or repair of motor vehicles.
B.
STORAGE — A building, not a private or public garage, one story
in height, used solely for the storage of motor vehicles other than
trucks, but not for the service or repair thereof nor for the sale of fuel,
accessories or supplies.
C.
The retail sale of motor fuel and lubricants and incidental services, such
as lubrication and handwashing of motor vehicles; and
A.
The sale, installation or minor repair of tires, batteries or other
automobile accessories.
B.
§ 182-24 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-24
176:568
GRADE PLANE — A reference plane representing the average of finished
ground level adjoining the building at exterior walls. Where the finished
ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall
be established by the lowest points within the area between the building
and the lot line, or where the lot line is more than six feet from the building,
between the building and a point six feet from the building.[Added
5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 450]
GROSS LEASABLE AREA — The total floor area designed for tenant
occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines and upper
floors, expressed in square feet and measured from the center line of
partitions and from outside wall faces; not including public or common
areas, such as public toilets, corridors, stairwells, elevator, lobbies or
enclosed mall spaces.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the grade
plane to the average height of the roof surface, provided that chimneys,
spires, towers, mechanical penthouses, tanks, water towers and radio
antenna and similar structures not intended for human occupancy, whether
attached to a building or freestanding, shall not be included in calculating
the height. If there are two or more separate roofs on a single building,
the height of such building shall be calculated based upon the highest
roof. For the purpose of calculating height of building, the average height
of a roof is the mid-height between the roof eaves and the roof ridge.
Parapet walls are not considered in measuring the height of building. In
the case where a basement would contribute to the building height based
upon its relationship to the grade plane, and it is used primarily for offstreet
parking, or a first floor used similarly, in either case with no space
intended for human occupancy, the building height shall be measured from
the finished floor elevation of the story immediately above said basement
or first floor; provided, however, that this provision is not applicable to any
form of single-family or two-family dwelling types as defined in this chapter.
[Amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307; 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 450]]
HEIGHT OF COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — The vertical distance
measured from the ground level to the highest point on a communications
tower, including antennas mounted on the tower.[Added 6-1-1998 by Ord.
No. 372; 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 450]
HEIGHT OF SIGN — The vertical distance measured from ground level to
the highest point on the sign or its supporting structure.
HEIGHT OF A TOWER-BASED WCF — The vertical distance measured
from the ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point on a
tower-based WCF, including antennas mounted on the tower and any other
appurtenances.[Added 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 559]
HELIPORT — An area to accommodate all phases of operation of rotorwing
aircraft (helicopters), with suitable space to allow the development of
service facilities as desired.
HELISTOP — An area on a roof or on the ground to accommodate
touchdown and liftoff of rotor-wing aircraft (helicopters) for the purpose of
§ 182-24 WATER § 182-24
176:569
picking up and discharging passengers or cargo, with no service facilities.
The heliport-helistop relationship is comparable to a bus terminal-bus stop
relationship with respect to the extent of services provided or
expected.[Amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307; 8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
405]
HIGHWAY ACCESS POINT — The point at which vehicular ground level to
the highest point on the sign, or its supporting structure.
HOME BASED BUSINESSES — Two types of businesses accessory to a
residential use are recognized in this chapter and are defined as
follows:[Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436129]
HOTEL — A building having six or more rental rooms or suites for transient
guests, which rooms are entered exclusively from an interior lobby or
corridor from a common entrance.[Amended 11-21-1988 by Ord. No.
289; 10-6-2014 by Ord. No. 541]
HOME OCCUPATION — A use which:
Is clearly incidental or secondary to the residential use of the
dwelling unit; or
(1)
Is customarily carried on within a dwelling unit or accessory
building by one or more occupants of such dwelling units, except
that in conjunction with the practice of a profession, one person not
residing in such dwelling unit may be employed; and
(2)
Occupies not more than 25% of the total floor area of such dwelling
unit or 500 square feet, whichever is less.
(3)
Does not include the following operations:
(a) Selling articles produced elsewhere than on the premises.
(b) Having exterior displays of goods visible from the outside.
Storing materials or products outside a principal or accessory
building or other structure.
(c)
Making external alterations which are not customary in
residential buildings.
(d)
(4)
Does not constitute a no-impact home-based business as defined
herein.
(5)
A.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESSES — A business or commercial
activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly
secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no
customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian,
pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises in excess
of those normally associated with residential use.
B.
129. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definition of "home occupation," as
amended 2-21-1978 by Ord. No. 197.
§ 182-24 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-24
176:570
HOUSE TRAILER — See "mobile home."
JUNKYARD — An area of land with or without buildings, used for the
storage, outside a completely enclosed building, of used and discarded
materials including, but not limited to wastepaper, rags, metal, building
materials, house furnishings, machinery or vehicles or parts thereof, with
or without the dismantling, processing, salvage, sale or other use or
disposition of the same. The deposit or storage on a lot of one or more
unlicensed, wrecked or disabled vehicles or the major part thereof shall be
deemed to constitute a "junkyard."
LABORATORY — A building or group of buildings in which are located
the facilities for research, investigation, testing or experimentation.[Added
4-4-1988 by Ord. No. 278]
LOT — A tract or parcel of land held in single or separate ownership
or leasehold, condominium or any other form of interest in land which
is or may be occupied by a building, including the open spaces required
under this chapter. Nonconforming lots of record, including those which
are contiguous to each other, are regulated in § 182-177 of this
chapter.[Amended 2-21-1978 by Ord. No. 197; 12-16-1991 by Ord. No.
307]
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of the individual
parcels of land, excluding any area within any ultimate right-of-way and any
area within driveway entrance strips leading to rear lots, but including the
area of any easement.
LOT AVERAGING — A development pattern wherein structures are
arranged on a variety of larger and smaller lots, provided that they do not
yield a greater number of lots than permitted under the normal zoning
district requirements, and which may or may not lead to the preservation of
land for open space.
LOT, CORNER — A lot bounded on at least two sides by streets, whenever
the lines of such streets, extended, form an interior angle of 135° or less.
LOT COVERAGE (BUILDING COVERAGE) — The aggregate of the
maximum horizontal cross-section areas of all buildings on a lot, including
sun parlors, foyers, porches and breezeways, but excluding projecting
eaves, gutters, awnings, steps and unenclosed patios.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line identical with the street line (ultimate rightof-
way line).[Amended 2-21-1978 by Ord. No. 197]
LOT LINE, REAR — Any lot line, except a front lot line, which is parallel
to or within 45° of being parallel to and does not intersect any street line.
In the case of a corner lot, the owner or developer may make a different
designation. See the definition of "lot, corner" for requirements.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
In the case of a corner lot, the owner or developer may make a different
designation. See the definition of "lot, corner" for requirements.
§ 182-24 WATER § 182-24
176:571
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at
right angles to the lot depth.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement).[Added 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 357]
MANUFACTURED HOME — A single-family detached dwelling unit
intended for permanent occupancy which meets the standards set by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, contained
in one unit or in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral
unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives
at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used
with or without a permanent foundation, including any roofed additions
such as extra rooms, covered patios, porches, etc. The term includes park
trailers, travel trailers, recreational and similar vehicles which are placed
on a site for more than 180 days. Any reference throughout this chapter
to "mobile home" shall be construed to mean "manufactured
home."[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 209; 12-2-1996 by Ord. No.
357130]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.[Added 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 554]
MARKET AREA — The expected service or trade area of a given type
and size of commercial use or group of uses, determined by the number
of households, income levels and existing retail outlets within a given
geographical area.
MEDICAL OFFICE — A facility for the examination and treatment of ill and
afflicted human outpatients; provided, however, that patients are not kept
overnight except under emergency conditions, and includes doctors' and
dental offices and clinics.
MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT[Repealed 10-17-1994 by Ord. No.
329] —
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home development
provided with the necessary utility connections, a patio and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home
and the exclusive use of its occupants, though it may instead be designed,
developed and used for a modular or conventionally built single-family
detached home rather than a mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which
has been planned and improved in compliance with the requirements of
the Mobile Home Development District for the placement of mobile homes,
conventionally built or modular single-family detached homes or
combinations thereof, for nontransient use, and consisting of two or more
mobile home lots and 15 acres or greater in size. Any reference to "mobile
130. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for the replacement of the former definition of
"mobile home" with the definition of "manufactured home."
§ 182-24 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-24
176:572
home development" throughout this chapter shall be construed to mean
"mobile home park."[Added 10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 329]
MODULAR HOME — A single-family or multifamily dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, made by assembling one or more factory-produced
three-dimensional sections into an integral living unit, whose construction
materials and specifications conform to those of conventionally built
units.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 209]
MONOPOLE — A WCF or site which consists of a single pole structure,
designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure, to support
communications antennas and connecting appurtenances.[Added
2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 559]
MOTEL-HOTEL — A building or a group of buildings having units containing
sleeping accommodations which are available for temporary rental
occupancy by transients and providing sufficient off-street parking facilities
adjacent or convenient thereto.
MOTOR HOME — A travel trailer which combines the living section and the
power source into a single unit.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 209]
MUSEUM — A place devoted to the procurement, care, study, and display
of objects of lasting interest or value.[Added 3-7-2010 by Ord. No. 514]
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any lawful building or
other structure which does not conform to one or more of the applicable
area and bulk regulations of the district in which it is located, either on
the effective date of this chapter or as a result of a subsequent amendment
thereto.
NONCONFORMING LAND — Any lawful lot which does not conform to
one or more of the applicable area regulations of the district in which it
is located, either on the effective date of this chapter or as a result of a
subsequent amendment thereto.
NONTOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NONTOWER
WCF) — All nontower wireless communications facilities, including, but
not limited to, antennas and related equipment. Nontower WCFs shall not
include support structures for antennas or any related equipment that is
mounted to the ground or at ground level.[Added 2-21-2017 by Ord. No.
559]
OFFICE PARK — A planned, integrated development of two or more
buildings devoted primarily to office use and which may also include
support retail and service uses and which contains an aggregate minimum
gross floor area of 100,000 square feet of office space.[Added 3-15-2004
by Ord. No. 436]
OFF-SITE SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL — A sanitary sewage collection
system in which sewage is carried from individual lots by a system of
pipes to a temporary central treatment plant, generally serving only a
neighborhood area.
§ 182-24 WATER § 182-24
176:573
OFF-SITE SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, PUBLIC — A sanitary sewage
collection system, owned and operated by the Township or an
instrumentality of the Township, in which sewage is carried from individual
lots by a system of pipes to a permanent central treatment and disposal
plant.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that has one chance in 100 or
a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any one year; for
the purposes of this chapter, the one-hundred-year flood (base flood) as
defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), in the
Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), Upper
Providence Township. All references to the Flood Insurance Study in this
chapter shall be construed to be to the most current version of said study.
In addition, all references to the "Federal Insurance Administrator" or the
"Federal Insurance Administration" shall be construed to be references to
FEMA.[Amended 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 357]
ON-SITE (SEPTIC TANK) SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL — A covered
watertight settling tank in which raw sewage is biochemically changed into
solid, liquid and gaseous states to facilitate further treatment and final
disposal on the site.
OPEN SPACES — Common greens, other recreation space or generally
open areas available to the public or yards or other open areas provided in
connection with residential developments which are intended for the sole
use of the residents of such developments and their guests.
PARKING SPACE — An open, covered or enclosed area with an all-weather
surface for the storage of one automobile, accessible from a public way and
which must conform to the setback requirements of the district in which it
is situated.[Amended 12-2-1985 by Ord. No. 253; 12-16-1991 by Ord.
No. 307]
PERSONAL CARE HOME or ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility
licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in which some or all of the
following activities of daily living are provided, such as food, shelter and
personal assistance or supervision, and care for the persons who require
assistance or supervision in matters such as dressing, bathing, diet, or
medication prescribed for self-administration, but do not require
hospitalization or care in a skilled nursing facility.[Added 8-19-2013 by
Ord. No. 530]
PUBLIC RECREATION — Leisure-time activities, including but not limited
to sports and entertainment, that are open to anyone without restriction
except for rules and standards of conduct and use.
PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER — A structure, owned and
operated by a public utility electric company regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, designed and used to support overhead
electricity transmission lines.[Added 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 372]
PUBLIC WATER FACILITIES — A centralized water supply system approved
by the appropriate governmental health agencies and certified by and
operating under the jurisdiction of the Public Utility Commission.
§ 182-24 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-24
176:574
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single chassis;
not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light-duty truck; and not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.[Added 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 357]
RELATED EQUIPMENT — Any piece of equipment related to, incidental to,
or necessary for the operation of a tower-based WCF or nontower WCF. By
way of illustration, not limitation, related equipment includes generators
and base stations.[Added 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 559]
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY — A facility consisting of individual
residential living units exclusively for persons who are 62 years of age or
older, and for married couples with one spouse or both spouses age 62
years or older. Such facility may provide personal care and health-care
services, including resident nursing beds and nursing care for the living
units.[Added 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 338; amended 8-19-2013 by Ord.
No. 530]
SECTIONAL HOME — See "modular home."[Amended 12-10-1979 by
Ord. No. 209]
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments built on a
site planned, developed, owned and managed as an integrated entity with
defined points of access, customer and employee parking provided on-site,
provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, developed
with unified aesthetic standards, and may include protection from the
elements.[Amended 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 426]
SIGN — Any identification, description, illustration or device, illuminated
or nonilluminated, which is visible from any public place or is located on
private property and exposed to the public and which directs attention to a
product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation,
including any permanently installed or situated merchandise; or any
emblem, painting, banner, pennant, placard or temporary sign designed
to advertise, identify or convey information, with the exception of window
displays and national, state or local governmental flags.
NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING CENTER — A shopping center providing
for the sale of convenience foods (food, drugs and sundries), personal
services such as laundry and dry-cleaning, hairstyling and shoe repair
and for similar daily needs of an immediate neighborhood.
A.
COMMUNITY SHOPPING CENTER — A shopping center providing for
the sale of a variety of goods and service and general merchandise for
several neighborhoods.
B.
REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTER — A shopping center providing for
the general merchandise, apparel, furniture and other major and minor
items, serving several communities.
C.
§ 182-24 WATER § 182-24
176:575
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which offers services or goods produced or
available somewhere other than on the lot on which the sign is located. The
words "advertising sign" include the word "billboard." Neither directional,
warning nor other signs posted by public officials in the course of their
public duties shall be construed as "advertising signs."
SIGN AREA — The area of the largest single face of the sign within a
perimeter, which forms the outside shape, including any frame, and forms
an integral part of the display, but excluding the necessary supports or
uprights on which the sign may be placed. If the sign consists of more than
one section or module, all areas will be totaled. Sign area shall include all
written copy and logos.[Added 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 426]
SIGN, AWNING — A sign that is mounted or painted on, or attached
to, an awning, canopy, or marquee that is otherwise permitted by
ordinance.[Added 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 426]
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which offers services or goods available on the
lot on which the sign is located.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — Signs limited to directional messages, principally
for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as one-way, entrance and
exit.[Added 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 426]
SIGN, GROUND — Any sign, other than a pole sign, placed upon or
supported by the ground independent of any other structure.[Added
5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 426]
SIGN HEIGHT LINE[Added 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 426] —
A structure erected on supports or suspended or projecting from a
building, including a banner or flag.
A.
The fastening of a board or other prepainted material having
prepainted or printed thereon letters, words or insignia.
B.
The erecting or superimposing of separate cutout letters on the walls
of a building or the placing of said letters on a plane surface which
projects from the wall of the building.
C.
For double-faced signs or V-type signs, the interior angle of which does
not exceed 45°, only one face shall be applicable in computing the sign
area; and
A.
For V-type signs, the interior angle of which exceeds 45°, both faces
shall be applicable in computing the sign area.
B.
The height at which the structural bearing wall or the structural
bearing steel or concrete beams or the columns behind a nonbearing
wall support the roof load.
A.
In the case of a gable end wall or a building end wall which does not
support a roof load, the sign height line shall be the height of a straight
line which shall be drawn so as to connect the top of the structural
B.
§ 182-24 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-24
176:576
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — A sign for the purpose of identifying the
occupant of a residence, the name of the property or the address of the
property.[Added 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 426]
SIGN, INCIDENTAL — A sign erected off the public right-of-way for the
convenience or safety of the public while on the subject's property,
containing no advertising.[Added 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 426]
SIGN, MONUMENT — Any sign that incorporates a decorative base, often
of stone or masonry, placed upon or supported by the ground. Monument
signs may not include support posts or other column-like structures to raise
the bottom of the sign above the grade surrounding the sign. Monument
signs typically accent the sign with landscaping, lighting, and other features
to incorporate the sign into the landscape.[Added 5-5-2003 by Ord. No.
426]
SIGN, MULTIPLE DIRECTORY — A sign listing the name of various
industrial, commercial or business establishments within a defined
contiguous area as determined by the Zoning Officer, to be erected
primarily as a service to the motoring or pedestrian public.[Added
5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 426]
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a
building for support and which projects horizontally more than 24 inches
from such building.[Added 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 426]
SIGN, ROOF — A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or which is
wholly dependent upon a building for support and which projects above the
point of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gambrel,
gable or hip roof or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof.[Added
5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 426]
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign which offers premises for sale, rent or
development or advertises the services of professionals or building trades
during the construction or alteration of the premises upon which the sign is
located.
SIGN, WALL — A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or
structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure
for or forms the background surface of the sign and which does not project
more than 24 inches from such building or structure.[Added 5-5-2003 by
Ord. No. 426]
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot by one or
more persons, partnerships or corporations, which ownership is separate
and distinct from that of any adjoining lot.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS[Added 4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 240] —
Defined as:
bearing walls or structural beams or columns, where such walls, beams
or columns support the roof load, of the two adjacent walls.
A. Less than completely and opaquely covered:
§ 182-24 WATER § 182-24
176:577
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES[Added 4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 240] —
Defined as:
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications towers, antennas and other facilities which render them
more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing
structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally
visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited
to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure, and facilities constructed
to resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles.[Added 2-21-2017 by Ord. No.
559]
STEEP SLOPE — Those areas having slopes of 15% or greater as defined in
Article XVIII of this chapter.[Amended 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 345]
STREET — A right-of-way, or portion thereof, intended for general public
use to provide means of approach for vehicles and pedestrians. The word
"street" includes the words "road," "highway," "thoroughfare" and "way."
STREET LINE — The same as the definition of "ultimate right-of-way line"
herein.[Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 231]
STORY — That portion of a building, other than the basement as defined
herein, including the space between the surface of any floor and the surface
of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it, then the space
between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting members of
a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders,
or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on
the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground,
including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured home.[Amended 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 554]
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land,
(1) Human genitals or pubic region.
(2) Buttock.
Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
(3)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
The fondling or other erotic touching of the human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast.
C.
§ 182-24 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-24
176:578
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to an heir or
devisee or transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new streets or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.[Added 8-1-2011 by
Ord. No. 517]
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE[Added 2-21-2017
by Ord. No. 559] —
SUCCESSOR PARCEL — A parcel that 1) was subdivided from a larger
parcel and 2) was promptly given a new parcel number by the Montgomery
County Board of Assessment Appeals as a result of such subdivision and 3)
contains all of the improvements associated with the institutional use that
were part of the previous, unsubdivided parcel. All successor parcels must
be approved by resolution by the Board of Supervisors.[Added 12-16-2013
by Ord. No. 535]
SWIMMING POOL — Any pool which is constructed, used or maintained to
provide recreational facilities for swimming, bathing or wading and which
is capable of containing water to a depth greater than 18 inches and all
buildings, equipment and appurtenances thereto. Such definition does not
include farm ponds.
TENURE — The form of occupancy of a unit, i.e., fee-simple sale, rental,
condominium, cooperative, etc.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 209]
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWERBASED
WCF) — Any structure that is used for the purpose of supporting
one or more antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility poles and light poles. DAS hub
facilities are considered to be tower-based WCFs.[Added 2-21-2017 by
Ord. No. 559]
TRACT AREA — The total acreage within the lot lines, excluding that area
continuously covered by water and rights-of-way of existing public roads
and overhead utility lines.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 209]
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDR) TERMS — When described
in pertinent articles herein, the various terms associated with TDRs are
intended to have the following meanings:[Added 12-15-2008 by Ord. No.
495]
Any increase in the height of a wireless support structure by more than
10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation
from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever
is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed wireless
communications facility may exceed the size limits set forth herein if
necessary to avoid interference with existing antennas; or
A.
Any further increase in the height of a wireless support structure which
has already been extended by more than 10% of its originally approved
height or by the height of one additional antenna array.
B.
§ 182-24 WATER § 182-24
176:579
TRAVEL TRAILER — A recreational vehicle requiring a separate power
source for pulling it, which may include living, sleeping, eating and sanitary
facilities but which is designed for vacation travel and not for long-term or
permanent occupancy.[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 209]
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right-of-way width of a street or other
corridor as computed from the center line, which is expected to be needed
in the future to adequately and properly accommodate the anticipated
vehicular and pedestrian traffic and related appurtenances, based on the
function of the road in the circulation system, as shown on the Upper
Providence Township Ultimate Right-of-Way Map.131[Amended 9-20-1982
by Ord. No. 231; 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 301]
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The line parallel to the established
center line of a street or other corridor which defines the outside boundary
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION — An enterprise that is actively engaged
in the commercial production and preparation for market of crops,
livestock and livestock products and in the production, harvesting and
preparation for market or use of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural,
silvicultural and aquacultural crops and commodities. The term
includes an enterprise that implements changes in production
consistent with practices and procedures that are normally engaged by
farmers or are consistent with technological development within the
agricultural industry.
A.
DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS — The rights of the owner of a parcel of land,
under applicable zoning regulations, to configure that parcel and the
structures thereon to a particular intensity of use.
B.
RECEIVING DISTRICT — One or more districts in which the
development rights of parcels in the sending district may be used.
C.
SENDING DISTRICT — One or more districts in which the development
rights of parcels in the district may be designated for use in one or more
receiving districts.
D.
TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDRs) — The attaching
of development rights to specified lands which are desired by Upper
Providence Township to be kept undeveloped, but permitting those
rights to be severed and transferred from those lands so that the
development potential which they represent may occur on other lands
where more intensive development is deemed to be appropriate.
E.
TRANSFEREE — The person or legal entity, including a person or
legal entity that owns property in a receiving area, who purchases the
development rights.
F.
TRANSFEROR — The person or legal entity, including a person or legal
entity that owns property in a sending district.
G.
131. Editor's Note: See Ch. 151, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. IV.
§ 182-24 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-24
176:580
of the ultimate right-of-way as defined herein.[Amended 9-20-1982 by
Ord. No. 231]
USE — Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of
land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied or any
activity, occupation, business or operation carried on in a building or other
structure on a tract of land.
WBCA — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S.
§ 11702.1 et seq.).[Added 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 559]
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves, including, but not
limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio
signals.[Added 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 559]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The antennas, nodes,
control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics and
other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless communications
services.[Added 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 559]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF APPLICANT)
— Any person that applies for a wireless communication facility building
permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the public right-of-way
(ROW) or other Township-owned land or property.[Added 2-21-2017 by
Ord. No. 559]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as
a tower-based wireless communications facility or any other support
structure that could support the placement or installation of a wireless
communications facility if approved by the Township.[Added 2-21-2017 by
Ord. No. 559]
YARD — An open space at grade between a yard line and the adjoining lot
lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the
ground upward.
YARD, FRONT — The yard extending along the full length of the building
setback line, being the minimum horizontal distance between the building
setback line, or the building or any projection thereof other than steps, and
the street line or ultimate right-of-way line, provided that such distance
is no less than the minimum distance prescribed in the applicable zoning
district. For rear lots, the minimum front yard depth shall be measured
along the property line which most nearly parallels the street.[Amended
2-21-1978 by Ord. No. 197; 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
YARD LINE — A line drawn parallel to the corresponding lot lines at a
distance specified for the required depth of a yard in each respective case.
YARD LINE, FRONT — A line bounding the front yard and parallel to the
front lot line.
YARD LINE, REAR — A line bounding the rear yard and parallel to the rear
lot line.
§ 182-24 WATER § 182-24
176:581
YARD LINE, SIDE — A line bounding the side yard and parallel to the side
lot lines.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full length of the rear lot line and being
the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear yard
line or the rear of the building or any projections other than steps.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending along the side lot line from the required
front yard to the required rear yard and being the minimum horizontal
distance between the side lot line and the side yard line or the side of the
building or any projections other than steps.
§ 182-24 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-24
176:582
ARTICLE III
Floodplain Conservation District
[Amended 2-21-1978 by Ord. No. 197; 6-26-1978 by Ord. No. 202;
4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 241; 2-16-1987 by Ord. No. 263; 9-17-1990 by
Ord. No. 301; 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307; 8-7-1995 by Ord. No.
345; 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 357; 3-17-2003 by Ord. No. 423;
3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 484; 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 554]
§ 182-25. Statutory authorization; legislative intent.
A. The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the
passage of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,132
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
floodplain management regulations to promote public health, safety,
and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors
of Upper Providence Township does hereby order as follows.
B. In addition to the purpose and statement of community development
objectives found in Article 1, § 182-2, the specific intent of this district
shall be to protect areas of the floodplain subject to and necessary for
the containment of floodwaters and to permit and encourage the
retention of open space land uses which will be so located and utilized
as to constitute a harmonious and appropriate aspect of the continuing
physical development of Upper Providence Township. Furthermore, in
light of the Township's certification as eligible for federal flood
insurance, and to comply with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act of 1978, it is the intent of this district to provide
adequate protection for flood-prone properties within Upper
Providence.
C. In advancing these principles and the general purpose of this chapter
and the Comprehensive Plan, the following shall be the specific
objectives of the Floodplain Conservation District:
(1) To combine with present zoning requirements certain restrictions
made necessary for flood-prone areas to promote the general
health, welfare and safety of the Township.
(2) To prevent the erection of structures in areas unfit for human usage
by reason of danger from flooding, unsanitary conditions, or other
hazard.
(3) To minimize the danger to public health by protecting the quality
and quantity of surface and subsurface water supplies adjacent to
and underlying flood hazard areas and promoting safe and sanitary
drainage.
(4) To permit only those uses which can be appropriately located in the
floodplain as herein defined and which will not impede the flow or
132. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 670.101 et seq.
§ 182-25 WATER § 182-25
176:583
§ 182-26. Definition and establishment of district.
storage of floodwaters or otherwise cause danger to life and
property at, above or below their locations along the floodplain.
(5) To protect those individuals who might choose, despite the flood
dangers, to develop or occupy land on a floodplain.
(6) To protect adjacent landowners, and those both upstream and
downstream, from damages resulting from development within a
floodplain and the consequent obstruction or increase in flow of
floodwaters.
(7) To protect the entire Township from individual uses of land which
may have effect upon subsequent expenditures for public works
and disaster relief and adversely affect the economic well-being of
the Township.
(8) To maintain the undisturbed ecological balance between those
natural systems' elements, including wildlife, vegetation and
marine life, dependent upon watercourses and water areas.
(9) To protect other municipalities within the same watershed from the
impact of improper development and the consequent increased
potential for flooding.
(10) To provide areas for the deposition of flood-borne sediment.
(11) To require that uses vulnerable to floods be developed so as to be
protected from flood damage, in accordance with the requirements
of the Federal Flood Insurance Program, P.L. 93-234.133
A. The Floodplain District is defined and established as those areas of the
Township subject to flooding as defined below:
(1) Those areas of Upper Providence Township, classified as special
flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the most recently published version
of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), including all digital data developed
as part of the FIS, for the Township of Upper Providence,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, as prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), available at the
Township offices, and effective as of March 2, 2016. All referenced
FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and amendments,
are hereby adopted by Upper Providence Township and declared to
be part of this chapter. The FIS and FIRM floodplain areas include
the following specific areas:
(a) The Floodway Area/District shall be those areas identified in
the FIS and FIRM as floodway which represents the channel of
133. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 4001 et seq.
§ 182-25 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-26
176:584
a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include
floodway areas which have been identified in other available
studies or sources of information for those special flood hazard
areas where no floodway has been identified in the FIS and
FIRM.
[1] Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including
fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development shall be permitted unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that the proposed encroachment would not result
in any increase in flood levels within the community during
the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
[2] No new construction or development shall be allowed,
unless a permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
(b) The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE
Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for
which base flood elevations have been provided.
[1] The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS
prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have
been provided and a floodway has been delineated.
[2] AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as
an AE zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by
FEMA for which base flood elevations (BFE) have been
provided but no floodway has been determined.
[a] No permit shall be granted for any construction,
development, use, or activity within any AE Area/
District without floodway unless it is demonstrated
that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development would not, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the
BFE more than one foot at any point.
[b] No new construction or development shall be located
within the area measured 50 feet landward from the
top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the Department
of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
(c) The A Area/District shall be the areas identified as an A Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for
§ 182-26 WATER § 182-26
176:585
which no BFE has been provided. For these areas, elevation
and floodway information from other federal, state, or other
acceptable source shall be used when available. Where other
acceptable information is not available, the elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary
of the Floodplain Conservation District which is nearest the
construction site. In lieu of the above, the municipality may
require the applicant to determine the elevation with
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic
and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods
used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the
municipality.
(d) The AO and AH Area/District shall be those areas identified as
Zones AO and AH in the FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are
subject to inundation by one-percent annual chance shallow
flooding where average depths are between one foot and three
feet. In Zones AO and AH, drainage paths shall be established
to guide floodwaters around and away from structures on
slopes.
(2) Community-identified Flood Hazard Areas shall be those areas
within Upper Providence Township has identified local flood hazard
or ponding areas, as delineated and adopted on a local flood hazard
map using best available topographic data and locally derived
information such as flood of record, historic high-water marks,
soils, or approximate study methodologies.
(3) Soils with a frequency of flooding of 1% or greater per year, as
delineated by the Natural Resources Conservation Service, United
States Department of Agriculture Web-Based Soil Survey (available
online at http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/), including the
following soils:
Bowmansville (Bo)
Gilbraltar (Gc)
Hatboro (Ha)
Knauers (Bo)
Rowland (Rt)
Rowland (RwA)
Rowland (RwB)
Urban land occasionally flooded (UIA)
§ 182-26 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-26
176:586
B. Studies used to establish the boundaries shall be available in the
Township Municipal Building for reference.
C. The data used in the studies referred to in Subsection A above shall be
plotted on a map designated as the Upper Providence Township
Floodplain Conservation District Map and shall be available to the
public in the Township Municipal Building. Whenever there is a
difference between the map and the data contained in the studies, the
data contained in the studies shall determine the boundary of the
district.
(1) Floodplain limit modification requests shall be in accordance with
the following procedure:
(a) Changes within the areas designated in the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) study shall be changed in
accordance with FEMA regulations and approved by FEMA.
(b) Changes which may be requested in relation to areas defined
by the Soil Survey of Montgomery County shall be as follows:
[1] Confirmation of the soil type by any qualified agronomist
or soil scientist from the Soil Conservation Service,
Department of Agriculture. In no case shall the soil limits
be less than that determined by the one-hundred-year
floodplain computations specified under Subsection
C(1)(b)[2].
[2] Delineation of the one-hundred-year floodplain limits by a
detailed on-site survey, hydrologic and hydraulic design.
This method would also include any other material
consideration necessary by the Township to minimize
damages which may be caused by storm drainage. Field
data and drainage computations must be approved by the
Township.
(2) The following items shall only apply to a floodplain which has been
defined by the soils classification:
(a) Changes shall not modify the existing ground cover, contour or
terrain within the revised floodplain limits.
(b) Buildings shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the
revised floodplain limits.
(c) Changes to the district boundary as defined by the soils
classification shall not allow any structures to be located within
the alluvial soil area as shown in the Soil Survey of
Montgomery County, 1967, unless field testing indicates that
such soil has been improperly classified in accordance with the
procedures outlined in this article.
§ 182-26 WATER § 182-26
176:587
§ 182-26.1. Definitions applicable to Floodplain Conservation
District.
The following words and phrases within the Floodplain Conservation
District shall have the meanings given in this section, as follows:
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
(3) The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the
Board of Supervisors where studies or information provided by a
qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision.
However, prior to any such change to the special flood hazard area,
approval must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such
information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of
the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting
technical or scientific data. See § 182.32L for situations where
FEMA notification is required.
D. All subsequent boundary changes shall be indicated on the map if, as,
and when feasible.
E. In lieu of the above, Upper Providence Township may require the
applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to
allow a thorough technical review by the Township.
F. The Floodplain Conservation District shall be delineated according to
FEMA's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Upper Providence
Township which is hereby made a part of this article, and additional
area based on soils as described herein. The FIRM is available for
inspection at the Township office.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Upper Providence Township unless a
permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
H. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
§ 182-26 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-26.1
176:588
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — An umbrella term that includes all of
the areas within which the community has selected to enforce floodplain
regulations. It will always include the area identified as the special flood
hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study,
but may include additional areas identified by the community.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum
Commission (PHMC) as meeting the criteria for individual listing on the
National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Pennsylvania Historical
and Museum Commission (PHMC) as contributing to the historic
significance of a National Register historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the PHMC to be eligible for listing in the
National Register; or
B.
Designated as historic by a municipal ordinance either individually or
as part of a local historic district.
C.
§ 182-26.1 WATER § 182-26.1
176:589
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such storage space is not designed and
built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this chapter.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement
of part of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective start date of this floodplain
management ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. Any construction started after July 3, 1978, and before the
effective start date of this floodplain management ordinance is subject to
the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the start
of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — Is a structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated July 3,
1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — Is a structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or
before the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated July
3, 1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
REDEVELOPMENT AREA — A census tract or group of census tracts
eligible for the Montgomery County Revitalization Program and identified
in an adopted municipal revitalization plan.
§ 182-26.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-26.1
176:590
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25%
of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes the substantial improvement and
other proposed new development and the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days from the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss, as defined herein, regardless
of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include
any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
the state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
§ 182-26.1 WATER § 182-26.1
176:591
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted The International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the State floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
§ 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be
in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 182-27. Overlay concept.
The Floodplain Conservation District shall be deemed an overlay on any
zoning district now or hereafter applicable to any lot.
§ 182-27.1. Designation and duties of Floodplain Administrator.
A. Should the Floodplain Conservation District be declared inapplicable to
any tract by reason of action of the Township Supervisors in amending
this chapter or the Zoning Officer, the Zoning Hearing Board or any
court of competent jurisdiction in interpreting the same or the Zoning
Hearing Board or any court of competent jurisdiction in determining a
legal effect of the same, the zoning applicable to such lot shall be
deemed to be the district in which it is located without consideration of
this district.
B. Should the zoning of any parcel or any part thereof on which the
Floodplain Conservation District is located be changed through any
legislative or administrative actions or judicial discretion, such change
shall have no effect on the Floodplain Conservation District unless such
change was included as part of the original application.
C. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of
this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a
decision shall not affect the remaining portions of the article,
Ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this
purpose the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be
severable.
D. This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provision which may be
in effect in the Floodplain Conservation District. However, any other
ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent
that those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict
between any of the provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall
apply.
§ 182-26.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-27.1
176:592
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this
chapter and is referred to herein as the "Floodplain Administrator." The
Floodplain Administrator may:
(1) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations,
(2) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations
to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and
other employees; or
(3) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
agency or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of
these regulations.
B. Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall
not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as
set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR § 59.22. In the
absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Township Manager.
C. A permit issued by the Floodplain Administrator shall be required
before any construction of development is undertaken within any area
of Upper Providence Township.
(1) A permit shall not be required for those repairs to existing
buildings or structures that are considered minor repairs by the
Township's Zoning Officer.
D. Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
(1) The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has
been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be
in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator
shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other
necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended134); the
Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended135); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394,
as amended136); and the United States Clean Water Act, Section
404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this
determination has been made.
134. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
135. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
136. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 182-27.1 WATER § 182-27.1
176:593
§ 182-27.2. Application procedures and requirements.
(3) In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
(4) During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or
other authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine
that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable
municipal laws and ordinances. The Floodplain Administrator shall
make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work
as are necessary.
(5) In the discharge of his or her duties, the Floodplain Administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises
or development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation
of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
(6) In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work
does not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws
and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator
shall revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of
Supervisors for whatever action it considers necessary.
(7) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all
records associated with the requirements of this chapter, including,
but not limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting,
inspection and enforcement.
(8) The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for
submitting a biennial report to FEMA concerning community
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(9) The responsibility, authority and means to implement the
commitments of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated
from the person identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies
with the person identified in the floodplain ordinance as the
Floodplain Administrator.
(10) The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of
the 34 Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest
revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by Upper Providence
Township. Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
§ 182-27.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-27.2
176:594
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location, including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
§ 182-27.2 WATER § 182-27.2
176:595
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood; and Floodway Area when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the base flood elevation at any point.
(b) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an AE Area/District without floodway
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot at any point within the community.
(c) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(d) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 182-28, including:
§ 182-27.2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-27.2
176:596
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in § 182-28.1J which are intended
to be used, produced, stored or otherwise maintained on
site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in
§ 182-28.1J during a base flood.
(e) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Planning Module for Land
Development.
(f) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
(g) Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee,
payable to the municipality based upon the estimated cost of
the proposed construction as determined by the Floodplain
Administrator.
D. Additional regulations.
(1) Review by County Conservation District. A copy of all applications
and plans for any proposed construction or development in any
identified floodplain area to be considered for approval shall be
submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance
of a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District
shall be considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible
incorporation into the proposed plan.
(2) Review of application by others. A copy of all plans and applications
for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval may be submitted by
the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate agencies
and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal Engineer,
etc.) for review and comment.
(3) Changes. After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain
Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to the
application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other
documents submitted with the application without the written
consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests for
any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
(4) Placards. In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator
shall issue a placard which shall be displayed on the premises
§ 182-27.2 WATER § 182-27.2
176:597
§ 182-27.3. Enforcement and appeals.
during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show
the number of the permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by
the Floodplain Administrator.
(5) Start of construction.
(a) Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin
within 180 days after the date of issuance of the development
permit. Work shall also be completed within 12 months after
the date of issuance of the permit, or the permit shall expire
unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the
Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of development permit
does not refer to the zoning approval.
(b) The "actual start of construction" means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it
include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
(c) Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is
submitted by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and
reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve
such a request and the original permit is compliant with the
ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the extension is
granted.
A. Enforcement.
(1) Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized municipal representative determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall give notice of such
alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(a) Be in writing;
§ 182-27.2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-27.3
176:598
(b) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(c) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for
the performance of any act it requires;
(d) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case
may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall
be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by
any other method authorized or required by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
(e) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will
effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a
fine to Upper Providence Township, of not less than $25 nor more
than $600 plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above
penalties all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action
in equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter. The imposition
of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this
chapter shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it
to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy
such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any
development initiated or any structure or building constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated, in noncompliance
with this chapter may be declared by the Board of Supervisors to be
a public nuisance and abatable as such.
B. Appeals.
(1) Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of
this chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal
must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision,
determination or action of the Floodplain Administrator.
(2) Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider the appeal in accordance with the Municipalities Planning
Code and any other local ordinance.
(3) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board
may seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the
laws of this state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act.137
137. Editor’s Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 182-27.3 WATER § 182-28
176:599
§ 182-28. Permitted uses.
A. The following uses and no other will be permitted in a Floodplain
Conservation District:
(1) The cultivation and harvesting of crops in accordance with the
recognized soil conservation practices.
(2) Pasture and grazing land in accordance with recognized soil
conservation practices.
(3) An outdoor plant nursery or orchard in accordance with recognized
soil conservation practices.
(4) A wildlife sanctuary, woodland preserve or arboretum and passive
recreation or parks, including hiking, bicycle and bridle trails, but
including no facilities subject to damage by flooding.
(5) Forestry, lumbering and reforestation in accordance with
recognized natural resource conservation practices, but permitting
no structures.
(6) Utility transmission lines.
(7) Sealed public water supply wells, with the approval of the Township
Engineer.
(8) Sanitary sewers, with the approval of the Township Engineer.
(9) Required lot area for any district, provided that such area shall not
be used for on-lot sewage disposal or for nonwire fences or any
other structure.
(9.1) Paved roads, driveways and parking lots, when required by the
regulations for the district applicable to the lot, without
consideration of this district, provided that:
(a) In the case of roads and driveways, no such facilities shall be
permitted if alternative alignments are feasible.
(b) In the case of parking facilities, no such facility shall be
permitted unless adequate signage is erected identifying the
area as flood prone and warning motorists not to park in that
area during large storm events or satisfactory evidence is
submitted demonstrating that such parking will not be utilized
during periods of flood flow, thus posing no threat to the safety
of the vehicles, their users and/or downstream properties.
Temporary parking for periods not to exceed one hour and/or
parking for recreation uses would be examples of exceptions of
parking not to be utilized in periods of flood flow.
(c) Any road, driveway or parking lot located within the Floodplain
Conservation District shall be constructed of pervious paving
§ 182-28 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-28
176:600
§ 182-28.1. Prohibited uses.
The following uses shall be specifically prohibited in a Floodplain
Conservation District:
materials in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(d) No increases in the original ground elevation of the floodway
shall be allowed. Increases in the original ground elevation of
the floodway fringe may be allowed by special exception in
accordance with the provisions, standards and criteria of
§ 182-29C herein.
(9.2) Outlet installations for sewage treatment plants and sewage
pumping stations, with the approval of the Township Engineer and
appropriate sewer authorities, and provided that the impact on
flood levels during a one-hundred-year storm event are within the
limits established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).
(10) The following uses are permitted only in Floodplain Conservation
Districts defined and established pursuant to § 182-26A:
(a) (Reserved)
(b) Storm sewers, if approved by the Township Engineer and
subject to the floodproofing regulations in applicable
ordinances.
(c) Water detention or impoundment basins, if approved by the
Township Engineer and subject to the floodproofing
regulations in applicable ordinances, provided that the runoff
at a storm frequency of 100 years, assuming full development
of the area under existing zoning, is less than 75 cubic feet per
second.
B. All permitted uses are subject to floodproofing regulations in applicable
codes.138 Any of the uses in Subsection A above shall not be permitted
within the designated floodway unless the effect of such proposed
activity on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying stream
improvements.
A. All freestanding structures, buildings, and retaining walls.
B. Detention or erosion control basins, storm drainage systems, pipes,
culverts, bridges and the relocation of any watercourse unless
approved by the Board of Supervisors of Upper Providence Township,
which shall first have received favorable acceptance from the Township
Planning Commission, Township Engineer and Montgomery County
138. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 60, Uniform Construction Codes.
§ 182-28 WATER § 182-28.1
176:601
Conservation District. All required permits or approvals must be
obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Dams, Waterways and Wetlands. FEMA and the
Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources shall
be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
All improvements within the FEMA area must receive approval from
FEMA and all adjacent communities, and the Pennsylvania Department
of Conservation and Natural Resources must be contacted prior to the
construction of any of the improvements. Copies of such notification
shall be sent to FEMA. The flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
C. Sanitary landfills, dumps, junkyards and the outdoor storage of vehicles
and/or materials.
D. On-site sewage disposal systems or subsurface sewage disposal areas.
E. Private water supply wells.
F. The construction, enlargement or expansion of manufactured homes,
manufactured home parks, and manufactured home subdivisions. This
includes the construction or expansion of mobile homes, mobile home
parks and mobile home subdivisions.
G. The construction, enlargement or expansion of hospitals (public or
private).
H. The construction, enlargement or expansion of nursing homes (public
or private).
I. The construction, enlargement or expansion of jails or prisons.
J. The construction, enlargement or expansion of any structure which
would be used for the production, storage or maintenance of a supply of
the following toxic chemicals which are dangerous to human life:
acetone, ammonia, benzine, calcium carbide, carbon disulfide,
celluloid, chlorine, hydrochloric acid, hydrocyanic acid, magnesium,
nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen, petroleum products (gasoline, fuel
oil, etc.), phosphorus, potassium, sodium, sulphur and sulphur
products, pesticides (including, without limitation, insecticides,
fungicides and rodenticides), radioactive substances insofar as such
substances are not otherwise regulated, and any other dangerous
materials or substances regulated by the appropriate federal or state
agencies.
K. The grading or regrading of lands within the floodway, including the
deposit of topsoil or any other fill material and the grading thereof, and
the construction of retaining walls.
L. Fully or partially enclosed space below the first floor (including
basement) shall be prohibited in any structure in the floodplain.
M. Sod farming.
§ 182-28.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-28.1
176:602
§ 182-28.2. Improvements to existing structures in Floodplain
Conservation District.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any Floodplain Conservation District:
N. Clearing of all existing vegetation, except where such clearing is
necessary to prepare land for a use permitted under the Floodplain
Conservation District, herein, and where the effects of these actions are
mitigated by adequate reestablishment of vegetation.
O. New construction of buildings or placement of fill within the onehundred-
year floodplain is prohibited.
P. Stormwater basins, including necessary berms and outfall facilities.
Q. Parking lots.
R. Roads or driveways, except where permitted as corridor crossings in
compliance with § 182-28, herein.
S. Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any area not designed to
accommodate adequately the type and volume.
T. Recreational vehicles.
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the elevation
of the base flood elevation.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
undertaken in the direction of the streambank.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
D. Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this chapter must
comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause
removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained by the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any
exemption from the ordinance requirements will be the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
§ 182-28.1 WATER § 182-28.2
176:603
§ 182-28.3. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
F. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any AE Area/District with floodway that would, together with all
other existing and anticipated development, increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point.
G. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation. The design
and construction standards and specifications contained in the
2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009
International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent revisions
thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405,
as amended) shall be used.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 182-26A(1)(c) of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
§ 182-28.2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-28.3
176:604
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have its lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
(4) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards.
(5) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be used.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
§ 182-28.3 WATER § 182-28.3
176:605
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Accessory structure.
(1) Structures accessory to a principal building need not be elevated or
floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a minimum, with
the following requirements:
(a) The structure shall not be designed or used for human
habitation, but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to
the storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the
principal use or activity.
(b) Floor area shall not exceed 100 square feet.
(c) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(d) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(e) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the
regulatory flood elevation.
(f) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(g) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(h) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation
or movement and shall be designed to automatically provide
for the entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
E. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage and the infiltration of floodwaters.
§ 182-28.3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-28.3
176:606
§ 182-29. Special requirements for certain uses.
The following list of uses shall require a special exception when the
proposed use is located within the Floodplain Conservation District, as
defined in § 182-26A herein. The use may be allowed or denied by the
Zoning Hearing Board after recommendations by the Township Planning
Commission, pursuant to the standards set forth in these regulations:
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
#348, Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damages and The
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
F. Anchoring.
(1) All recreational vehicles, buildings and structures shall be firmly
anchored in accordance with accepted engineering practices to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
A. A game farm, fish hatchery or hunting and fishing preserve for the
protection or propagation of wildlife, but permitting no structures.
B. A commercial recreation use, whether open to the public or restricted
to private membership, such as parks, camps, picnic areas, golf courses
or fishing, sport or boating clubs, not to include enclosed structures
excepting toilet facilities, but permitting piers, docks, floats or shelters
usually found in developed outdoor recreation areas. Any toilet facilities
provided shall be connected to public water and sewage systems and
subject to the floodproofing regulations in applicable ordinances.
C. The grading or regrading of lands located in areas described by
§ 182-26A(1)(b), (c) and (3) herein, and the construction of retaining
walls shall be performed in accordance with all of the following, unless
any specific criterion is determined to be inapplicable by the Zoning
Hearing Board:
(1) The applicant must provide a road impact analysis of the existing
roads leading to the site. The road impact analysis must document
the existing condition of all existing roads that will be used by
trucks and other vehicles and equipment used to haul the fill
§ 182-28.3 WATER § 182-29
176:607
material to the fill site and for the grading thereof. This
documentation must include a written report, as well as an existing
conditions video, and this documentation must be in a form
satisfactory to the Township Engineer. Prior to the commencement
of fill/grading activities, the applicant must provide an escrow to
the Township sufficient to ensure the repair of all damage to the
existing roads.
(2) Operation at the site shall be restricted to the hours from 7:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. on Saturdays. No operation on the site shall be performed on
Sundays.
(3) The applicant will be required to control noise levels at the site to
Township-required levels.
(4) The applicant must obtain approval of an erosion and
sedimentation control plan for the fill site from the Montgomery
County Conservation District. The applicant will be required to
implement and maintain the approved erosion and sedimentation
control plan for the project site at all times.
(5) The applicant must obtain approval for the filling and grading of
areas designated as floodplains from the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP) as a prerequisite to the
Township's grant of a special exception.
(6) The applicant must perform a wetland investigation of the project
site as a prerequisite to the Township's grant of a special exception
and prior to the commencement of any fill operation. The applicant
shall submit a report to the Township certifying that no wetlands
are present in the proposed fill area. If wetlands are present, the
applicant must provide to the Township copies of all permits
allowing the filling of the wetland or waters of the United States
from all applicable agencies having jurisdiction over wetlands or
waters of the United States as a prerequisite to the Township's
grant of a special exception.
(7) As a prerequisite to the Township's grant of a special exception, the
applicant must submit detailed floodplain calculations to the
Township Engineer demonstrating that the postfill condition of the
floodplain will not adversely impact the flood levels during a onehundred-
year storm event and are within the limits established by
FEMA. Such calculations shall be in a form satisfactory to the
Township Engineer.
(8) The applicant must make application to and obtain from FEMA a
conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) as a prerequisite to the
Township's grant of a special exception. The applicant shall
supplement this application with an as-built plan confirming the
actual map revision to FEMA within 30 days after the site has been
stabilized.
§ 182-29 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-29
176:608
§ 182-30. Zoning permit application procedures.
(9) The duration of the filling/grading operation shall not exceed six
months; however, if the Township Engineer determines that special
circumstances exist, the time frame may be extended for a period
of time deemed appropriate by the Township Engineer, but in no
event shall the time period exceed 12 months.
(10) The applicant shall make application to Upper Providence
Township for a grading permit in accordance with the Code of the
Township of Upper Providence, Chapter 99, Grading, Excavating
and Filling, as part of the special exception application. The
Township Engineer shall not issue a grading permit unless the
applicant has first obtained a special exception to allow the
proposed grading.
D. All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least
50 lots or at least five acres, whichever is lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where BFE data are not available, shall be supported by
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base
flood elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be
prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format supported by
FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision.
Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility
of the applicant.
E. Other uses similar to those above.
A. In a floodplain as defined in § 182-26 herein, a zoning permit shall be
required for any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, the storage of materials and equipment,
excavating or drilling operations. Applications for a zoning permit shall
be filed with the Zoning Officer, who shall make an initial determination
on the application. For a use other than those permitted in § 182-28, an
application seeking approval of a special exception or variance shall be
forwarded to the Zoning Hearing Board for all requests subject to
§ 182-26A(1) and (2) and to the Board of Supervisors for all requests
subject to § 182-26A(3). All requests shall be forwarded with the
required studies or information and the findings of the Zoning Officer.
B. The application for all use requests shall be accompanied by the
following:
(1) Detailed engineering studies indicating the effects on drainage and
streams on all adjacent properties as well as the property in
question.
§ 182-29 WATER § 182-30
176:609
§ 182-31. Procedures for consideration of special exceptions or
variances.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer, or landowner,
Upper Providence Township may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements. All applications for approval of special
exceptions or variances shall be considered using standards listed in
§ 182-32.
(2) An application for amending the boundaries of the Floodplain
Conservation District if the boundaries will be affected by the
proposed special exception or use by variance.
(3) A review of a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan by the Soil
Conservation Service. The results of said review and any
recommendations of the Soil Conservation Service shall be
considered by the Zoning Officer in his decision concerning the
issuance of a zoning permit.
C. Upon receipt of an application for a zoning permit in a floodplain, the
Zoning Officer shall request the review and recommendations of the
Upper Providence Township Planning Commission. Said review and any
recommendations therefrom shall be considered by the Zoning Officer
in the issuance and/or conditions of said permit.
D. A permit shall not be required for those repairs to existing buildings or
structures that are considered minor repairs by the Township's Zoning
Officer.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hold a public hearing within 60 days
after an application is filed pursuant to public notice.
B. Prior to submission of an application for special exception or variance
to the Zoning Hearing Board, the applicant shall submit a soil erosion
and sedimentation control plan to the Soil Conservation Service for
review. The results of said review and any recommendations of the Soil
Conservation Service shall be submitted as part of said application.
C. The Zoning Officer shall request, upon receipt of an application to the
Zoning Hearing Board, the review and recommendations of the Upper
Providence Township Planning Commission. Said review and any
recommendations therefrom shall be forwarded to the Board of
Supervisors for any appropriate action.
D. The Zoning Hearing Board may request the review and
recommendation of technical agencies or appropriate planning
agencies to assist in determining the impact of the proposed use. Any
such review shall be requested at least 30 days prior to the public
hearing.
§ 182-30 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-31
176:610
§ 182-32. Standards for granting of special exceptions or variances.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall exercise discretion in allowing only those
uses which are substantially in accord with the stated objectives in § 182-25
herein. The Zoning Hearing Board, in considering special exceptions or
variance applications, shall consider the following:
E. The Zoning Hearing Board shall render a decision within 45 days after
the public hearing. In rendering a decision, the Zoning Hearing Board
may impose special measures or conditions as deemed necessary and
appropriate for the use to conform to the intent of the chapter.
A. The effect of the use shall not substantially alter the cross-section
profile of the stream and floodplains at the location of the proposed use.
B. Lands abutting the waterway, both upstream and downstream, shall not
be unreasonably affected by the proposed use.
C. The general welfare or public interest of Upper Providence Township or
of other municipalities in the same watershed shall not be adversely
affected.
D. Any new structures permitted by special exception or by variance shall
be constructed and placed on the lot so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwaters. Such
structures shall be elevated in accordance with the provisions
contained in § 182-28.3, Elevation and Floodproofing Requirements,
within this chapter.
E. Any new structure permitted as a special exception or by variance shall
be floodproofed in accordance with the provisions contained in
§ 182-28.3, Elevation and Floodproofing Requirements, within this
chapter.
(1) All such structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement.
(2) All such structures shall be constructed so as to prevent the
entrance of floodwaters into the water supply and waste treatment
systems as well as other utility and facility systems. In addition,
waste treatment systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
discharges from the systems into the floodwaters.
F. Any additions to existing structures permitted as a special exception or
by variance shall be elevated to the greatest extent possible according
to the provisions contained in § 182-28.3, Flood Damage Prevention, of
this chapter. However, any portion of the structure not so elevated shall
be floodproofed, also in accordance with § 182-28.3, Elevation and
Floodproofing Requirements, within this chapter.
§ 182-31 WATER § 182-32
176:611
G. An affirmative decision shall not be issued by the Zoning Hearing Board
for an application within the designated floodway unless the effect of
such proposed activity on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying
stream improvements.
H. The Zoning Hearing Board shall notify the applicant in writing, over the
signature of community officials, that the issuance of a decision to allow
construction of a structure below the base flood elevation will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance and that such construction
below the base flood elevation increases risk to life and property. Such
notification shall be maintained with a record of all decisions as
required in Subsection I below.
I. The Zoning Hearing Board shall:
(1) Maintain a record of all decisions, including the jurisdiction for
their issuance.
(2) Report such decisions issued in its annual report submitted to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
J. No special exception or variance shall be granted which would allow
any of the uses specifically prohibited by § 182-28.1, Subsections C, D,
F, G, H, I and J.
K. Within any FA floodplain areas, no new construction or development
shall be located within the area measured 50 feet landward from the
top of bank of any watercourse.
L. In granting any variance Upper Providence Township shall attach the
following technical provisions to the proposal for which the variance
has been granted. These conditions and safeguards are necessary in
order to protect public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of
this municipality.
(1) Pertaining to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
(a) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities
which may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have
been first obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
(b) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the
activity will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
(c) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development shall be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
§ 182-32 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-32
176:612
(2) The municipality shall require technical or scientific data to be
submitted to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR) within six
months of the completion of any new construction, development, or
other activities resulting in changes in the base flood elevation. A
LOMR or conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is required
for:
(a) Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway;
(b) Any development occurring in an AE Area/Zone without a
designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one
foot in the base flood elevation; or
(c) Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited
to installing culverts and bridges.)
(3) Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed by
variance within any Floodplain Conservation District shall be
undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in
this chapter and any other applicable codes, ordinances, and
regulations. In addition, when such development is proposed within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top of bank of any
watercourse, a permit shall be obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
(4) Where permitted by variance within any identified floodplain area,
any new or substantially improved nonresidential structure shall be
built in accordance with § 182-28.3, including:
(a) Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood.
(c) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry
floodproofing contained in the publication Flood-Proofing
Regulations (United States Army Corps of Engineers, June
1972 as amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent
watertight standard.
(5) If a variance for a recreational vehicle is granted, the following
shall apply:
(a) The recreational vehicle will be on the site for fewer than 180
days.
(b) The recreational vehicle shall be fully licensed and ready for
highway use, or shall meet the permit requirements for
manufactured homes within this article.
§ 182-32 WATER § 182-32
176:613
§ 182-33. Additional standard for approval of uses by variance.
A property owner of a lot of record, as of the date of the enactment of this
article, who is able to prove that the strict enforcement of this article would
create undue hardship by denying a reasonable use of an existing lot which
is situated either wholly or partially in the Floodplain Conservation District,
may seek relief by applying for a variance from the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 182-34. Boundary disputes and appeals procedure.
(6) Whenever a variance is granted, Upper Providence Township shall
notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board, after deciding upon the merits of the
application, may permit the applicant to make some reasonable use of
the property in question, while ensuring that such use will not violate
the basic objectives of this district as specified in § 182-25 herein.
B. In considering a use as a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider those standards outlined in § 182-32 herein.
C. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with the following:
(1) Affirmative decisions shall only be issued by the Zoning Hearing
Board upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the appeal would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of an appeal will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense or create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local
laws or ordinances.
(2) Affirmative decisions shall only be issued upon determination that
it is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
provide relief.
D. Should any variances be issued to permit fully or partially enclosed
spaces below the lowest floor (including basement) for a structure in
the floodplain, the design requirements of Section 60.3(d) of the
National Flood Insurance Program shall be enforced.
§ 182-32 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-34
176:614
§ 182-35. Nonconforming uses or structures.
Following the adoption of this article, any use or structure which is situated
within the boundaries of the Floodplain Conservation District and which
does not conform to the permitted uses specified in § 182-28 herein shall
become a nonconforming use or structure, regardless of its conformance to
the district in which it is located, without consideration of this article.
A. Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary area
arise, an initial determination shall be made by Upper Providence
Township, and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination
may appeal to the Township Zoning Hearing Board. The burden of proof
shall be on the applicant.
B. Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Officer as to the
boundaries of the Floodplain Conservation District as defined above,
which may include the grounds that said map referred to therein is or
has become incorrect because of changes due to natural or other
causes or changes indicated by future detailed hydrologic and hydraulic
studies, may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board as provided in Article
XIV of this chapter and §§ 182-31, 182-32 and 182-33 herein. The
burden of proof in such an appeal shall be on the appellant.
C. Insofar as various natural conditions, including the Floodplain
Conservation District as herein defined, may change, such changes may
be validated by detailed on-site survey techniques approved by the
United States Army Corps of Engineers, Philadelphia District. Whether
a proposed use is within the Floodplain Conservation District shown on
the Floodplain Conservation District Map shall, upon appeal from the
decision of the Zoning Officer, be determined by the Zoning Hearing
Board upon receipt of the findings of the detailed on-site survey by the
petitioner. The Zoning Hearing Board, in addition to other evidence and
standards, may consider the recommendations of the Township
Planning Commission and the validation of the United States Army
Corps of Engineers, Philadelphia District, and/or other municipal
agencies.
D. The Zoning Hearing Board shall request a review and recommendation
of the Soil Conservation Service at least 30 days prior to the public
hearing.
E. All changes to the boundaries of the Floodplain Conservation District
are subject to the review and approval of the Federal Insurance
Administrator.
A. The expansion or continuance of nonconforming use or structure which
is nonconforming with respect to the district in which it is located,
without consideration of this article, shall be governed by the
requirements of Article XXI of this chapter. However, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall ensure that the standards contained in § 182-32
§ 182-34 WATER § 182-35
176:615
§ 182-36. Rebuilding of destroyed structures.
Structures located within the floodplain may be rebuilt if destroyed by fire
or other catastrophe, provided that the reconstruction will not result in an
increase in the base flood elevation, as referenced in the Flood Insurance
Study, Township of Upper Providence. Such reconstruction must be in
compliance with the floodproofing or elevation requirements of this article.
§ 182-37. Municipal liability.
§ 182-38. Interpretation.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in
effect in the Floodplain Conservation District. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
herein are applied to the expansion or continuance of said
nonconforming use or structure.
B. The expansion or continuance of a nonconforming use or structure
which is rendered nonconforming by the adoption of this district shall
be governed by the standards contained in § 182-32 herein. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall ensure that these standards are enforced with
respect to said nonconforming use or structure.
A. The grant of a zoning permit or approval of a subdivision plan in the
Floodplain Conservation District shall not constitute a representation,
guarantee or warranty of any kind by the Township or by any official or
employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use and
shall create no liability upon the Township or its officials or employees.
B. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
C. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Upper Providence
Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 182-35 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-38
176:616
ARTICLE IIIA
OSC Open Space Conservation District
[Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 414]
§ 182-38.1. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the community development objectives contained in Article
I, § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of this article
with respect to the OSC Open Space Conservation District to establish
reasonable standards and criteria to protect major open space lands, parks,
preserves and agriculturally utilized lands in the Township. It shall further
be the intent of this District:
§ 182-38.2. Permitted uses
In an OSC Open Space Conservation District, land may be used and
occupied for the following uses or combination of the following uses and no
other:
A. To provide appropriate restrictions for such lands consistent with the
recommendations of the Township's Comprehensive Plan, and Open
Space and Environmental Resource Protection Plan and to ensure that
lands are dedicated to such use for the future.
B. To protect the existing vistas into and rural character of large tracts of
undeveloped land in the Township.
C. To protect unique landforms and visual and physical access to the
Schuylkill River and Perkiomen Creek which are major amenities, and
which form portions of the Township boundaries.
D. To allow certain recreational uses which are consistent with the open
space preservation goals of this District.
E. To reduce the negative impacts of suburbanization and sprawl, and to
protect these areas from inappropriate uses.
A. Open space preserve, including natural areas, wildlife sanctuary, forest
or woodland preserve, reforested land, or similar uses.
B. Municipal parkland devoted to active and passive recreational uses.
C. Agriculture as defined in this chapter, as well as the raising and sale of
livestock and fowl, including associated grazing or pastureland.
D. Municipal buildings, offices, garages and other municipal uses,
provided that no more than five percent(5%) of a tract located in the
OSC District may be devoted to any one or combination of such uses.
E. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses,
provided that no more than 5% of a tract located in the OSC District
may be devoted to any one or combination of accessory uses.
§ 182-38.1 WATER § 182-38.2
176:617
§ 182-38.3. Conditional uses.
In an OSC Open Space Conservation District, the following conditional uses
may be permitted when authorized by the Board of Supervisors, subject
to the procedural requirements set forth in Article XXIV, § 182-204 of this
chapter.
§ 182-38.4. Standards for conditional use approval.
In addition to requirements stipulated in § 182-38.3 herein, compliance
with the additional standards enumerated herein shall be demonstrated
in any application for conditional use. In addition, procedures outlined in
§ 182-204 shall be applicable.
§ 182-38.5. Development regulations
The following general regulations shall apply in the OSC Open Space
Conservation District:
(1) Accessory uses in an OSC District may include a single-family
house occupied by a groundskeeper, security guard, maintenance
worker or by an individual(s) performing similar functions;
provided, however, that such house shall be considered in the
above five-percent limitation.
(2) Accessory uses for agricultural uses in an OSC District may include
stands for the sale of products harvested on-site, subject to the
restrictions of Article IV, § 182-40C(4) of this chapter.
F. Communications antennas, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 182-21.1 of this chapter, mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, existing building or other existing structure, and
communications equipment buildings. Communications towers are
permitted only as a conditional use pursuant to § 182.38.3. herein.
A. Communications towers in accordance with the provisions of
§ 182-21.2. of this chapter and the standards contained in § 182-38.4
herein.
A. Said uses shall be sited on areas of the tract which are least visible from
any abutting public road(s) and from residences on abutting lots or
tracts.
B. Said uses shall be sited in such manner that causes the least practical
disturbance to the tract's natural features. Compliance with the
provisions of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development,
§§ 154-35 and 154-35.1, shall be demonstrated.
A. Area and width. No specific lot area or lot width shall be required in the
OSC District. However, adequate area shall be provided to meet all
other requirements of this district and sufficient width to allow safe
access/egress shall be provided, subject to the review and approval of
§ 182-38.2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-38.5
176:618
the Township Engineer and/or the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, depending upon the jurisdiction of the road(s) upon
which a lot in the district abuts.
B. Height. The height for principal and accessory structures shall be
governed by the provisions of § 182-42 of this chapter. In addition, the
height for communications towers shall be governed by the
requirements contained in § 182-21.2. of this chapter, should said use
be approved as a conditional use.
C. Building coverage. The maximum building coverage on any lot in the
OSC District shall be 5%.
D. Impervious coverage. The maximum impervious coverage on any lot in
the OSC District shall be 10%.
E. Parking. Any parking necessary to serve any of the permitted or
conditional uses in this District shall be provided in accordance with the
regulations of Article XXII of this chapter. Wherever practical, gravel or
other all-weather porous pavement treatments shall be utilized in this
District. Handicapped parking shall be paved.
F. Setbacks and buffers. Setbacks and buffers for any buildings associated
with a permitted use, and for parking associated with a permitted or
conditional use, shall be provided as prescribed in § 182-81F of this
chapter.
§ 182-38.5 WATER § 182-38.5
176:619

ARTICLE IV
R-1 Residential-Agricultural District
§ 182-39. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives
contained in § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of
this article with respect to R-1 Residential-Agricultural Districts to establish
reasonable standards of performance and to promote the desirable benefits
which agricultural uses and single-family detached dwellings will have in
those areas of Upper Providence Township not presently served by public
sewer and water facilities.
§ 182-40. Permitted uses. [Amended 2-21-1978 by Ord. No. 197]
In an R-1 Residential-Agricultural District, a building may be erected,
altered or used and a lot or premises may be used or occupied for any of the
following uses and no other:
A. Agricultural uses, provided that a tract of not less than five acres is
available and further provided that any building used in the keeping or
raising of livestock or poultry shall be located not less than 100 feet
from an ultimate right-of-way line and not less than 50 feet from any
other property line.139
B. A single-family detached dwelling.
C. Any of the following uses when authorized as a special exception:
(1) A greenhouse.
(2) Noncommercial recreation uses, including golf, tennis and
swimming clubs.
(3) (Reserved)140
(4) A stand, for use more than six months in any calendar year, for the
sale of products of the farm on which it is located.
(5) Communications antennas, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 182-21.1, mounted on an existing public utility transmission
tower, existing building or other existing structure, and
communications equipment buildings, only upon a showing, in
addition to any other that may be required under this chapter, that
denial of such a special exception would have the effect of
prohibiting the provision of personal wireless service.
Communications towers are not permitted. [Added 6-1-1998 by
Ord. No. 372]
139. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 53, Animals.
140. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(3), regarding public utility facilities, was repealed
8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 345.
§ 182-39 WATER § 182-40
176:621
§ 182-41. Area, width and yard regulations. [Amended 9-20-1982 by
Ord. No. 231; 7-6-1998 by Ord. No. 374]
The following area, width and yard regulations shall apply in the R-1
Residential-Agricultural District:
Lot Area
(square
feet = a)
Building
Coverage
(percentage
= b)
Width
(feet = c)
Front
Yard
(feet =
d)
Side Yard
(minimum)
(feet = e)
Rear Yard
(feet = f)
43,560 10 150 40 20 50
§ 182-42. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings or structures, except for farm buildings
and silos, erected or enlarged in the R-1 Residential Agricultural District
shall be:
D. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any
permitted use.
E. Home occupations, provided that all of the requirements of § 182-21.4
herein can be met. [Amended 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
F. No-impact home based businesses in accordance with the standards set
forth in § 182-21.3 herein. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
A. A lot area of not less than a square feet per dwelling unit.
B. Total building coverage of not more than b percent of the total lot area.
C. A lot width at the building setback line of not less than c feet measured
along the building line.
D. A front yard depth of not less than d feet measured from the street line.
E. An aggregate side yard total of 60 feet, of which neither side shall be
less than e feet.
F. A rear yard depth of not less than f feet, except that an accessory use
may be erected with the rear or side yard not closer than five feet to the
rear or side property line.
A. For any principal building: 35 feet.
B. For any accessory building: 15 feet.
C. Accessory farm buildings on a tract of five acres or more: 75 feet.
§ 182-40 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-43
176:622
§ 182-43. Recreation and open space amenities. [Added 2-21-1978
by Ord. No. 197; amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307; 8-7-1995 by
Ord. No. 342; 2-7-2000 by Ord. No. 388]
In cases where development of a tract of land of at least 15 acres is to
be undertaken, the developer shall provide community areas, playgrounds
and tot-lots for the comfort and convenience of the prospective residents
in this district. In this regard, the developer shall provide at least 10%
of the total site area as usable open space. Such open space shall be
governed by the provisions of Article IVA, Open Space and Recreational
Facilities Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development. At the discretion
of the Board of Supervisors, the developer may provide a fee in lieu of
dedication as an alternative to setting aside open space. Said fee shall be
provided in accordance with § 154-40.6 of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development. For development of a tract of fewer than 15 acres,
a fee in lieu of dedication shall be required, also in accordance with the
provisions of § 154-40.6 of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development.
§ 182-44. Flexible lot sizes. [Added 4-4-1988 by Ord. No. 280]
A. Intent. It is the intent of this section to provide a means of developing
single-family detached dwellings on lots some of which are larger and
some of which are smaller than is otherwise required, incorporating
areas of open space within the development; all lots, when combined,
represent the average lot size of 30,000 square feet as stated herein. It
is further the intent of this option to:
(1) Consolidate otherwise scattered development.
(2) Encourage the creation of internalized development patterns.
(3) Preserve open space through a combination of deed-restricted
easements and consolidation of common areas, similar to the
concept of clustering allowed in other articles of this chapter.
B. Minimum tract size. In order to qualify for subdivision pursuant to this
section, a tract of land shall contain not less than 35 acres in area.
Flexible lotting may be permitted on tracts smaller than 35 acres as a
conditional use when approved by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to
the procedures contained in § 182-204 of this chapter, and provided
that the applicant demonstrates that one or more of the following
criteria are met: [Amended 2-20-2001 by Ord. No. 401]
(1) A significant portion of the tract contains natural features which
would be lost under traditional lotting. Features which would be
considered include, but are not limited to, floodplains, wetlands,
steep slopes, ponds or other water bodies, woodlands, and
hedgerows.
(2) The open space preserved through flexible lotting would preserve
one of the properties, or a portion thereof, as identified in the
§ 182-43 WATER § 182-44
176:623
Township's Open Space and Environmental Resource Protection
Plan (1995) or subsequent amendments thereto, or properties
identified for preservation in the currently adopted Township
Comprehensive Plan. The open space preserved through flexible
lotting could also serve to link open spaces either currently
preserved or identified for preservation in the aforementioned
documents.
(3) An historic farmstead, its ancillary uses and/or buildings or
structures would be preserved and proposed for viable reuse.
(4) The use of flexible lotting would better achieve the Township's
goals for maintaining its rural character than would development
under standard R-1 requirements.
C. Lot size. A minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet and a maximum lot
size of five acres (217,800 square feet) shall be permitted. An overall
average lot size of 30,000 square feet shall be required.
D. Required yard areas. A front yard of at least 40 feet from the ultimate
right-of-way line must be provided. Two side yards of not less than 20
feet each with an aggregate width of 50 feet shall be provided. The rear
yard shall be the normally provided rear yard in an R-1 Residential-
Agricultural District of 50 feet.
E. A lot width of at least 100 feet shall be provided. Section 154-24D of
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, regarding corner lot
sizes, shall not apply to subdivisions pursuant to this section; provided,
however, that corner lots shall have a minimum width of 125 feet on
each street on which they abut. The maximum building coverage shall
not exceed 15% of the lot.
F. Open space requirements. An open space area of not less than 20% of
the gross land area of the entire tract shall be provided. Such open
space shall be governed by the provisions of Article IVA, Open Space
and Recreational Facilities, of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development; ownership and maintenance for the open space shall be
governed by the provisions of § 154-40.5 therein. All common open
space shall be reasonably accessible to the residents in the proposed
subdivision. In calculating the open space requirement, excluded from
the gross land area shall be existing rights-of-way for roadways and
utilities. [Amended 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 342; 6-1-1998 by Ord.
No. 373; 2-20-2001 by Ord. No. 401]
G. Calculation of density. Each site is unique; it has physical features
which are rarely duplicated precisely on another site. Portions of sites
that contain valuable nonreproducible natural resources will be left
protected and undisturbed. The purpose of this section is to determine
the appropriate intensity of use to which a specific tract may be put.
Initially, when applying for the lot-averaging alternative pursuant to
this section, an applicant shall submit a plan accurately delineating
§ 182-44 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-44
176:624
woods and tree lines, steep slopes, floodplains and wetlands, as well
as a road and lot layout drawn pursuant to the normal R-1 Residential-
Agricultural District requirements. In addition to any other information
required herein, this plan shall comply in all respects with the
requirements for a tentative sketch plan, pursuant to § 154-11 of
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, as well as all other
applicable requirements of that chapter and of the Township Zoning
Ordinance. It is the intent of this section to protect the environmentally
sensitive areas as well as the existing character of the Township.
However, the applicant shall be entitled to the total number of dwelling
units permitted pursuant to the R-1 Residential-Agricultural District
regulations. Once the number of dwelling units that is achievable
through the R-1 District has been ascertained through the review of the
submitted plan, then that number of dwelling units may be incorporated
into a plan pursuant to this section. [Amended 6-18-1990 by Ord. No.
299]
H. Further subdivision. Any lot which under the R-1 Residential
Agricultural District would be capable of further subdivision shall not
be included in determining average lot area unless the possibility of
further subdivision is eliminated by deed restriction in a form
acceptable to the Township Solicitor and duly recorded in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds for the County of Montgomery.
I. Sewer and water. Any development pursuant to this cluster
development alternative shall provide public sewers and a centralized
water system.
J. Berms, buffers and large lots. In addition to the preservation of
environmentally sensitive areas, the intent of this section is to preserve
the rural atmosphere of Upper Providence Township. Consequently, any
plan submitted hereunder shall internalize the development, and lots
fronting on all existing public roads must create the impression of a
rural community through the use of large lots, landscaping and/or
berming or any combination of these items. [Amended 12-16-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
(1) The phrase "large lots" shall be defined as those meeting the
following dimensional criteria:
(a) Minimum lot width at the building line: 200 feet.
(b) Minimum front yard setback: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum lot area: 1.5 acres.
(2) Where residential development other than a large lot, as defined
above, occurs adjacent to any existing roads in the areas deemed
appropriate by the Board of Supervisors, a fifty-foot landscaped
buffer of deciduous and coniferous plant materials shall be
installed, forming a substantially visually impervious buffer at a
minimum height of eight feet at the time of installation and which
§ 182-44 WATER § 182-44
176:625
may be maintained at a minimum height of not less than 15 feet
upon maturity. An earth berm of a minimum height of six feet may
be constructed, in which case the Board of Supervisors may lessen
its requirements for plant materials. The Board of Supervisors may
waive the requirements for buffering if equivalent screening is
provided by parks or by topography or other natural conditions.
Such a buffer area is required to diminish the visual encroachment
of residential development on scenic rural areas and roadways.
(3) Buffer areas shall be measured horizontally and at right angles to
either a straight lot or street lines or the tangent lines of a curved
lot or street lines. No above-surface structure or activity, storage of
materials or parking or vehicles shall be permitted in the buffer
area. All buffer areas shall be planted and maintained with grass or
ground cover, together with a dense screen of trees, shrubs or
other plant materials meeting the following requirements:
(a) Planting plans shall be prepared by a registered landscape
architect and shall be so certified.
(b) Plant materials used in screen planting shall be at least six feet
in height when planted and be of such density as deemed
appropriate for the activities involved. The plant materials
shall be of a species common to the area, be of nursery stock
and shall be free of insects and disease.
(c) Buffer areas shall be permanently maintained, and plant
material which does not live shall be replaced within one year
or one growing season.
(d) The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity the
plant material will be no closer than three feet from any street
or property lines.
(e) The Board, at its discretion, may consult with a landscape
architect regarding the appropriateness of the landscaping
plan as it relates to the physical characteristics of the site.
§ 182-44 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-44
176:626
ARTICLE V
R-2 Residential District
§ 182-45. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives
contained in § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent
of this article with respect to R-2 Residential Districts to enhance the
attributes which single-family detached dwellings will have in those areas
of the Township that are presently served or planned to be served by public
sewer and water service.
§ 182-46. Permitted uses.
In an R-2 Residential District, a building may be erected, altered or used
and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following uses and no other:
§ 182-47. Area, width and yard regulations. [Amended 9-20-1982 by
Ord. No. 231; 7-6-1998 by Ord. No. 374]
The following area, width and yard regulations shall apply in the R-2
Residential District, except as specifically provided for in Article IX, the CL
Cluster Development District:
A. Any uses permitted in the R-1 Residential-Agricultural District.
B. Cluster development as a conditional use, subject to the provisions of
Article IX and § 182-204. [Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 231]
C. No-impact home based businesses in accordance with the standards set
forth in § 182-21.3 herein. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
A. Lot area. A lot area shall be provided for single-family detached
dwellings in the R-2 Residential District in accordance with the
following table:
Lot Area
(square feet) Utility Required
43,560 With no public sewer and water
30,000 With public sewer or water
15,000 With public sewer and water
B. Width and yard regulations. The following table shall be used to
determine the required width and yard regulations with respect to a
given required lot area in the R-2 Residential District:
§ 182-45 WATER § 182-47
176:627
§ 182-48. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings or structures erected or enlarged in the
R-2 Residential District shall be:
§ 182-49. Recreation and open space areas. [Added 2-21-1978 by
Ord. No. 197; amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307; 8-7-1995 by
Ord. No. 342; 2-7-2000 by Ord. No. 388]
In cases where development of a tract of at least five acres (with facilities
available), 10 acres (only one facility available) and 15 acres (no facilities
available) is to be undertaken, the developer shall provide community areas,
playgrounds and tot-lots for the comfort and convenience of the prospective
residents in this district. In this regard, the developer shall provide at least
10% of the total site area as usable open space. Such open space shall be
Lot Area
(square
feet = a)
Building
Coverage
(percentage
= b)
Width
(feet =
c)
Front
Yard
(feet =
d)
Side Yard
(minimum)
(feet = e)
Rear
Yard
(feet = f)
43,560 10 150 40 20 50
30,000 15 125 40 15 40
15,000 20 100 30 15 40
(1) A lot area of not less than a square feet per dwelling unit.
(2) A total building coverage of not more than b percent of the total
area.
(3) A lot width at the building setback line of not less than c feet
measured along the building line.
(4) A front yard depth of not less than d feet measured from the street
line.
(5) An aggregate side yard total of 60 feet of which neither side yard
shall be less than e feet for a lot area of 43,560 square feet; an
aggregate side yard total of 50 feet of which neither side yard shall
be less than e feet for a lot area of 30,000 square feet; and an
aggregate side yard total of 40 feet of which neither side yard shall
be less than e feet for a lot area of 15,000 square feet.
(6) A rear yard depth of not less than f feet, except that any accessory
use may be erected within the rear or side yard not less than five
feet to the rear or side property line.
A. For any principal building: 35 feet.
B. For any accessory building: 15 feet.
C. Accessory farm buildings on a tract of five acres or more: 75 feet.
§ 182-47 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-49
176:628
governed by the provisions of Article IVA, Open Space and Recreational
Facilities, of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development. At the
discretion of the Board of Supervisors, a fee in lieu of dedication may be
permitted as an alternative to setting aside open space. Said fee shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of § 154-40.6 of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development. For development of a tract of less than
five acres (with facilities available), 10 acres (only one facility available)
and 15 acres (no facilities available), a fee in lieu of dedication shall be
required, also in accordance with the provisions of § 154-40.6 of Chapter
154, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 182-49 WATER § 182-49
176:629

ARTICLE VI
R-3 Residential District
§ 182-50. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives
contained in § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of
this Article with respect to R-3 Residential Districts to establish reasonable
controls and standards of performance for single-family, two-family and
townhouse dwellings in those areas of Upper Providence Township where
the existing community character and the presence or planned extension of
sewer and water facilities would most readily accommodate. Furthermore,
it is the intent of this Article to encourage the optional intermixing of twofamily
and townhouse dwellings and/or single-family detached dwellings
on smaller tracts and the required intermixing of at least two of these
dwellings on larger tracts in order to promote a variety of income levels
and life styles within a single, planned development in the Township's
developing neighborhoods, which would have the essential facilities, open
spaces and amenities to support such an intermixing, for the benefit of the
residents of the development and in furtherance of the general welfare of
Upper Providence Township.
§ 182-51. Permitted uses.
In an R-3 Residential District, a building may be erected, altered or used
and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following uses or a
combination of the following uses and no others:
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Two-family dwellings.
C. Townhouses.
D. Parks, playgrounds, tot-lots and open spaces.
E. Mixed-dwelling-type developments, including a single-family detached
dwelling, two-family dwellings and townhouses or combinations of any
two of these uses in accordance with the requirements of § 182-54
herein.
F. Cluster development, as a conditional use, subject to the provisions of
Article IX and § 182-204. [Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 231]
G. The following additional conditional uses, when authorized by the
Board of Supervisors, in compliance with § 182-204: [Amended
9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 231]
(1) An indoor recreation facility, community center or similar use,
provided that it is intended solely for the prospective residents of
the development.
§ 182-50 WATER § 182-51
176:631
§ 182-52. District regulations.
The following regulations shall apply in the R-3 Residential District, except
as specifically provided for in § 182-53 herein, concerning townhouse
developments; § 182-54 herein, concerning mixed-dwelling-type
(2) A professional office or studio use in conjunction with a residential
development, provided that such use(s) shall not exceed 10% of the
total floor area of each principal building, unless it is included
within a commercial development as described in Article XII
herein.
(3) Limited, small-scale commercial use(s) such as retail shops and
stores and service businesses intended primarily for the needs of
residents of the development, when proposed in conjunction with a
development plan of at least 50 acres. In no case, however, shall
such uses occupy more than 10% of the total acreage of a proposed
development in the R-3 Residential District, and further provided
that the area proposed for commercial development shall be
subtracted from the area used in calculating the maximum number
of dwelling units proposed for development. All commercial uses
shall comply with the requirements of Article XII, NC
Neighborhood-Convenience Commercial District, of this chapter, as
well as the requirements of the signs and off-street parking and
loading articles of this chapter.
(4) Mobile home developments in conformance with Article X.
[Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 209]
H. Accessory uses on the same lot with and incidental to any permitted
use.
I. Home occupations, provided that all of the requirements of § 182-21.4
herein shall be met. [Added 2-21-1978 by Ord. No. 197; amended
3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
J. A principal use permitted herein, other than a single-family detached or
two-family dwelling owned in fee simple, may be constructed on the
same lot with another permitted principal use(s). [Added 12-16-1991
by Ord. No. 307]
K. As a special exception only, communications antennas, in accordance
with the provisions of § 182-21.1, mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, existing building or other existing structure, and
communications equipment buildings only upon a showing, in addition
to any other that may be required under this chapter, that denial of such
a special exception would have the effect of prohibiting the provision of
personal wireless service. Communications towers are not permitted.
[Added 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 372]
L. No-impact home based businesses in accordance with the standards set
forth in § 182-21.3 herein. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
§ 182-51 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-52
176:632
developments; and Article IX of this chapter, concerning cluster
development.
A. General regulations. The following general regulations shall apply for
any development proposal within the R-3 Residential District.
Development of the tract shall commence in earnest within 36 months
of approval under this article or the zoning of said tract shall revert to
its former classification. The transfer of ownership to another applicant
prior to the commencement of construction shall render the
development agreement required in Subsection A(4) herein void. Said
agreement shall then be renegotiable between the new owner(s) and
the Board of Supervisors. [Amended 2-21-1978 by Ord. No. 197]
(1) Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one
ownership or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by
the owners of the entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract
will be developed under single direction in accordance with an
approved plan.
(2) Sewer and water facilities. The tract of land shall be served by
public water facilities and public sewer facilities deemed
acceptable by the Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of
the Township Engineer.
(3) Development plan. The application for development shall be
accompanied by a plan or plans showing the detailed use of the
entire tract, which plan or plans also shall comply with all
requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development,
and other applicable ordinances, unless these ordinances are
relaxed in accordance with § 182-57 herein. The plan shall clearly
designate the proposed use(s) of each area of the tract.
(4) Development stages and permits. The development of a tract
carried out in either a single phase or in stages shall be executed in
accordance with a development agreement. The owner, developer
and Township shall enter into said agreement embodying all details
regarding compliance with this article to assure the binding nature
thereof on the overall tract and its development, which agreement
shall be recorded with the final development plan.
(5) Community impact. The application for development in the R-3
Residential District shall be accompanied by a community impact
statement, prepared by qualified professionals. The purpose of this
statement is to assure that the proposed development will have a
beneficial impact upon the site, the surrounding neighborhood or
the facilities and services of the Township. The community impact
statement is described more fully in § 182-55 herein.
(6) Development mix. In order to encourage the intermixing of the
permitted dwelling types in this district, preserve the planned
character and density of the Township's neighborhoods in
§ 182-52 WATER § 182-52
176:633
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and diminish the
potential for overburdening the Township's community facilities
and services, the following general guidelines for all development
proposals within the R-3 Residential District shall apply:
Optional Development Mix Alternatives
and Minimum Tract Sizes
Tract Size Mix Options
Less than 5 acres None (5-acre minimum tract size required
for all development proposals in the R-3
Residential District)
5 to less than 40
developable acres
(mixing optional)
1. 100% single-family detached dwelling
2. 100% 2-family dwellings
3. 100% townhouses
4. 2-family dwellings and single-family
detached dwellings
5. 2-family dwellings and townhouses
6. Townhouses and single-family detached
dwellings
40 developable acres
or more (mixing
required)
1. Single-family detached dwellings,
2-family dwellings and townhouses
2. Single-family detached dwellings and
2-family dwellings
3. Single-family detached dwellings and
townhouses
4. 2-family dwellings and townhouses
(a) A tract of land which is proposed for development having at
least five acres but less than 40 acres, excluding the rights-ofway
of existing public roads, may be developed for either 100%
of the uses permitted in this article or a combination of any two
of said uses.
(b) A tract of land which is proposed for development having at
least 40 acres, excluding the rights-of-way of existing public
roads, shall be developed for either a combination of any two of
the uses permitted in this article or a combination of all three
of said uses.
(7) Future subdivision or resubdivision. The tract of land to be
developed within the R-3 Residential District shall not have been
subdivided to yield a tract or tracts, excluding the rights-of-way of
existing public roads, that are less than the required acreage for a
§ 182-52 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-52
176:634
mixed dwelling type development solely to avoid the more stringent
requirements of such developments as required in § 182-54 herein.
If an application to develop a permitted use in the R-3 Residential
District is submitted which does not include a contiguous vacant
parcel owned by the same applicant and said parcels together will
equal 40 acres or more, excluding the rights-of-way of existing
public roads, the community impact statement for the proposed
development of both parcels shall be in accordance with the
requirements of this article.
B. Development regulations. The following development regulations shall
be followed by all proposed developments within the R-3 Residential
District:
(1) Utilities. All utility lines (electric, telephone, etc.) shall be placed
underground.
(2) Height regulations. The maximum height of buildings or structures
erected or enlarged within the R-3 Residential District shall be:
(a) For any dwelling: 35 feet.
(b) For any nonresidential building permitted herein: 40 feet.
(c) For any building accessory to a dwelling or nonresidential
building: 15 feet.
(3) Parking regulations. The following standards shall control required
parking spaces in the R-3 Residential District:
(a) Not fewer than two off-street automobile parking spaces shall
be required for each dwelling unit (an attached garage may be
counted as a single parking space). The required spaces, when
they are not an integral part of the building design, shall be
arranged within a court or separate parking area(s), as
deemed suitable upon review by the Township Planning
Commission.
(b) No parking area of three or more cars shall be located closer
than 20 feet to a side or rear property line of the development
tract or closer than 25 feet to an ultimate right-of-way line.
[Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 231]
(c) For a parking area storing 10 or more cars, not less than 10%
of the area devoted to parking facilities shall consist of interior
parking lot landscaping.
(4) Signs. Signs shall be permitted subject to the requirements of
Article XIX of this chapter.
(5) Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and
egress to and from public streets and highways serving the R-3
residential development without causing undue confusion or
§ 182-52 WATER § 182-52
176:635
interference with the normal traffic flow. The Planning Commission
shall satisfy itself concerning the adequacy of the thoroughfare
to carry the additional traffic generated by the R-3 residential
development, as well as to the street frontage of the proposed
development.
(6) Common areas and facilities. The provision of certain facilities
serving the entire development, such as parking lots, interior
pedestrianways, driveways or alleys, lighting facilities, landscape
planting areas, buffers, open space and recreation facilities, etc.,
are hereby encouraged and may be located either on individual lots
or in common areas. In cases where they are provided in common
areas, provisions satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors must be
made for their perpetual maintenance and care. The use of these
facilities may be restricted to the residents of the development,
where practical, and may be maintained by the developer, a
homeowners' association or similar instrument. Any common area
shall be first offered to the Township by the developer; however, the
Township need not accept dedication of the open space but shall
maintain first option to acquire with 12 months' notice, if said open
space shall ever become available.
(7) Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as needed
and arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and
neighboring properties from unreasonable direct glare or
hazardous interference of any kind. Lighting facilities shall be
required for the safety and convenience of the residents of the
development and shall be installed by the developer at his expense
and shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township,
§ 154-40. [Amended 6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 416]
(8) Landscaped planting. Shade trees shall be provided along street
frontage occupied by an R-3 residential development in accordance
with the requirements of the Board of Supervisors after review by
the Upper Providence Township Park and Recreation Committee.
(9) Buffer area. An R-3 residential development shall provide a
permanent landscaped Buffer Type 1, as described in § 154-36D(5)
of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, to screen any
residential, commercial, and industrial uses which are adjoining
and contiguous to the development. [Amended 8-1-2011 by Ord.
No. 517]
(10) Recreation and open space; amenities. The developer shall provide
community areas, laundry facilities, playgrounds and tot-lots and
other services necessary for the comfort and convenience of the
prospective residents in the R-3 Residential District. In this regard,
the developer shall provide a minimum of 10% of the total site area
as usable open space in a two-family dwelling development; 15% of
the total site area as usable open space in a townhouse
§ 182-52 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-52
176:636
development; and 20% of the total site area as usable open space
in a mixed-dwelling-type development. Such open space shall be
governed by the provisions of Article IVA, Open Space and
Recreational Facilities, of Chapter 154, Subdivision of Land
Development. [Amended 2-21-1987 by Ord. No. 197; 8-7-1995
by Ord. No. 342]
(11) Maximum building coverage. Not more than 25% of the area
proposed for development in the R-3 Residential District shall be
covered by buildings.
C. Minimum tract size. In the R-3 Residential District the following
minimum tract sizes shall be required prior to the submission of a
development proposal.
(1) For any use permitted in this district or a combination of any two of
said uses, the minimum tract size shall be five acres, excluding the
rights-of-way of existing public roads.
(2) For a mixed-dwelling-type development containing all three of the
permitted uses in this district, the minimum tract size shall be 40
acres, excluding the rights-of-way of existing public roads.
D. Density. In the R-3 Residential District, the maximum permitted density
shall be as follows:
(1) For single-family detached dwellings: four dwelling units per
developable acre.
(2) For two-family dwellings: six dwelling units per developable acre.
(3) For townhouses: six dwelling units per developable acre.
E. Area, width, yard and coverage regulations for single-family and twofamily
dwellings. The following regulations shall apply, subject to the
maximum density permitted in § 182-54B herein: [Amended
9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 231; 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
Dwelling Type
Dwellings
Development
Requirements
Single-Family
Two-Family
Detached
Dwellings Twin Duplex Townhouses
Minimum lot
area (square
feet)a
10,000 7,000 7,000 2,000
Minimum lot
width (feet)b
80 50 50 20
§ 182-52 WATER § 182-52
176:637
§ 182-53. Development regulations for townhouse developments.
The following additional development regulations shall apply for townhouse
development proposals:
Dwelling Type
Dwellings
Development
Requirements
Single-Family
Two-Family
Detached
Dwellings Twin Duplex Townhouses
Minimum front
yard (feet)c
30 20 20 25
Minimum side
yard (feet)d
15 10 (1
side)
15 See
§ 182-53C
and D
Minimum rear
yard (feet)e
40 25 25 20
Maximum
building
coverage
(percentage)f
25 30 25 60
NOTES:
a Per dwelling unit.
b Per dwelling unit measured along the building line.
c Measured from the ultimate right-of-way line.
d Measured from the property line. For townhouses, the minimum
side yard shall be governed by § 182-53C and D. For single-family
detached dwellings, there shall be an aggregate side yard of 40 feet,
of which neither side yard shall be less than 15 feet.
e Except that an accessory use may be erected within the rear yard
not closer than five feet to the rear property line.
f Calculated as a percentage of lot area.
A. Lot area. Where applicable, no townhouse dwelling shall have a lot area
of less than 2,000 square feet.
B. Building size. There shall be no more than eight dwelling units in a
continuous attached row, and no more than three contiguous units shall
have a uniform setback from a right-of-way line or parking area. Such
variation shall be a minimum of three feet.
C. Distance between buildings. The minimum horizontal distance between
any two buildings shall be 25 feet.
§ 182-52 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-53
176:638
§ 182-54. Development regulations for mixed-dwelling-type
developments.
The following additional development regulations shall apply to all mixeddwelling-
type developments in the R-3 Residential District:
§ 182-55. Community impact statement required. [Amended
12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
To ensure that a proposed development within the R-3 Residential District
will not have an adverse effect upon the natural features of the site, as
well as upon the provision of light and air, water, transportation, police and
fire protection, schools, utilities and other public facilities, the Board of
Supervisors and Township Planning Commission shall evaluate the impact
of the development upon the site, the surrounding neighborhood and the
facilities and services of Upper Providence Township as listed below. The
applicant shall provide all of the information, data and studies needed to
reach conclusive evaluations of these items for any development proposed
in this district or for any request for a rezoning to this district.
D. Setbacks. The following minimum building setbacks shall be applicable
and shall replace any in § 182-52E when there is a conflict between the
requirements therein and the setbacks listed in this subsection. These
setbacks shall also replace yard setbacks contained in § 182-52E in
those instances in which a development is proposed which does not
include individual lots for each dwelling unit. [Amended 12-16-1991
by Ord. No. 307; 10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 329]
(1) From the R-3 Residential District boundary line or property line of
an R-3 development tract: 40 feet, within which Buffer Type 2 of at
least 15 feet in width shall be installed. The buffer shall be planted
as described in § 154-36D(5) of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development. [Amended 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
(2) From the right-of-way line of a vehicular accessway: 25 feet.
(3) From any parking area: 20 feet.
A. The maximum percentage of a single dwelling type in a mixed-dwellingtype
development shall be no more than 75% of the total dwelling units
if two dwelling types are mixed and no more than 60% of the total
dwelling units if three dwelling types are mixed.
B. For the purposes of calculating net densities, single-family detached
dwellings may be developed at four dwelling units per acre, two-family
dwellings at six dwelling units per acre and townhouses at six dwelling
units per acre.
A. The conformance of the proposed development with the Comprehensive
Plan of Upper Providence Township and compatibility with existing and
proposed land uses adjacent to the site.
§ 182-53 WATER § 182-55
176:639
B. The impact on any existing floodplains, heavily wooded areas, rock
outcroppings, steep slopes and other sensitive natural features, if any.
C. The impact on the Township and regional transportation system and the
ability of adjacent streets and intersections to efficiently and safely
handle the traffic generated by the proposed development.
D. The impact on the Township's school district, including an estimate of
new pupils generated by the proposed development.
E. The impact on nearby commercial facilities within the Township and
surrounding municipalities.
F. The impact on public utilities, including but not limited to sewage
disposal, garbage and rubbish disposal, water supply, storm drainage
and electrical utilities.
G. The impact upon provision of police and fire protection to the proposed
development.
H. The impact on the open space and recreation facilities of Upper
Providence Township.
I. The impact upon the character of the surrounding neighborhood. The
applicant must show that the proposed development will not adversely
affect the neighborhood by reason of noise, odors, smoke or vibration.
J. Required documentation shall include the following:
(1) The location and size of the site, with evidence supporting the
general adequacy for development.
(2) The proposed residential density of the development and the
percentage mix of the various dwelling types.
(3) The location, size, accessibility and proposed use of the open space,
the manner of ownership and maintenance and a copy of the
covenant to be incorporated in the individual deeds, if applicable.
(4) The height and placement of buildings, with evidence of variation
in setbacks from rights-of-way and variation of lot sizes so as to
create aesthetically pleasing frontages and lots.
(5) The feasibility of proposed utility and drainage systems.
(6) The relative income levels of the prospective development
residents.
(7) Plans and renderings indicating the design, unity and aesthetic
relationship of buildings and landscaping within the proposed
development.
(8) The text of covenants, easements and existing restrictions or those
to be imposed upon the land or structure, including provisions for
§ 182-55 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-55
176:640
§ 182-56. Evaluation of community impact statement.
§ 182-57. Plan modifications.
The Board of Supervisors may grant modifications from the specific
requirements herein, and those of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development, provided that the spirit and intent of this article and the
statement of community development objectives contained in § 182-2 are
observed and that the overall densities specified herein are maintained. Any
such variations shall be embodied in the development agreement specified
in § 182-52A(4) herein.
public utilities and trails for such activities as hiking or bicycling, if
desired.
(9) In the case of plans involving staged development over a period
exceeding two years, a schedule showing the time and manner of
completion of all phases of construction.
A. The community impact statement required in § 182-52A(5) herein shall
be evaluated to determine the suitability of the site in question to
accommodate the magnitude of development proposed, as well as the
impact of the proposed development on the community facilities and
services of Upper Providence Township.
B. The following alternative findings shall result from the evaluation
process:
(1) Evaluations which lead to an overall negative assessment for a
proposed development shall lead to a denial by the Board.
(2) Evaluations which lead to an overall negative assessment for a
proposed development may lead to a conditional approval by the
Board either when the developer agrees to undertake activities or
improvements which will compensate or correct deficiencies or
negative impacts caused by the implementation of the proposed
development or when the developer agrees to implement the
proposed development at a lower density, as specified by the Board.
§ 182-55 WATER § 182-57
176:641

ARTICLE VII
R-4 Residential District
§ 182-58. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives
contained in § 182-2 of this chapter it is hereby declared to be the intent of
this article with respect to R-4 Residential Districts to establish reasonable
controls and standards of performance for garden-apartment dwellings in
those areas of Upper Providence Township where the existing community
character, superior highway access, proximity to commercial and
employment centers and the presence or planned extension of sewer and
water facilities would most readily accommodate the highest intensity of
residential dwelling types permitted in the Township, for the benefit of the
residents of the development and in furtherance of the general welfare of
Upper Providence Township.
§ 182-59. Permitted uses.
In an R-4 Residential District, a building may be erected, altered or used
and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following uses and no
others:
A. Multifamily dwellings. [Added 10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 329141]
A.1. Buildings which contain any combination of multifamily dwellings
and single-family attached dwellings. [Added 10-17-1994 by
Ord. No. 329]
B. Parks, playgrounds, tot-lots and open spaces.
C. The following conditional uses, when authorized by the Board of
Supervisors, and in compliance with § 182-204: [Amended 9-20-1982
by Ord. No. 231]
(1) An indoor recreation facility, community center or similar use,
provided that it is intended solely for the prospective residents of
the development.142
D. Accessory uses on the same lot with and incidental to any permitted
use.
E. A principal use permitted herein may be constructed on the same lot
with another permitted principal use(s). [Added 12-16-1991 by Ord.
No. 307]
141. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection A, Garden apartments.
142. Editor's Note: Former Subsections C(2), specifying professional office or studio use in
conjunction with a residential development, and C(3), specifying limited small-scale
commercial uses, which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 10-17-1994
by Ord. No. 329.
§ 182-58 WATER § 182-59
176:643
§ 182-60. District regulations.
The following regulations shall apply in the R-4 Residential District:
F. As a special exception only, communications antennas, in accordance
with the provisions of § 182-21.1, mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, existing building or other existing structure, and
communications equipment buildings, only upon a showing, in addition
to any other that may be required under this chapter, that denial of such
a special exception would have the effect of prohibiting the provision of
personal wireless service. Communications towers are not permitted.
[Added 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 372]
G. No-impact home based businesses in accordance with the standards set
forth in § 182-21.3 herein. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
H. Home occupations, provided that all of the requirements of § 182-21.4
herein shall be met. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
A. Development of the tract shall commence in earnest within 36 months
of approval under this article or the zoning of said tract shall revert to
its former classification. A transfer of ownership other than by
mortgage to another applicant prior to the commencement of
construction shall render the development agreement required in
Subsection A(4) herein void. Said agreement shall then be renegotiable
between the new owner(s) and the Board of Supervisors.
(1) Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one
ownership or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by
the owners of the entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract
will be developed under single direction in accordance with an
approved plan.
(2) Sewer and water facilities. The tract of land shall be served by
water facilities and public sewer facilities deemed acceptable by
the Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Township
Engineer.
(3) Development plan. The application for development shall be
accompanied by a plan or plans showing the detailed use of the
entire tract, which plan or plans also shall comply with all
requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development,
and other applicable ordinances, unless these ordinances are
relaxed in accordance with § 182-63 herein. The plan shall clearly
designate the proposed use(s) of each area of the tract.
(4) Development stages and permits. The development of a tract
carried out in either a single phase or in stages shall be executed in
accordance with a development agreement. The owner, developer
and Township shall enter into said agreement embodying all details
regarding compliance with this article to assure the binding nature
§ 182-59 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-60
176:644
thereof on the overall tract and its development, which agreement
shall be recorded with the final development plan.
(5) Community impact. Any application for development in the R-4
Residential District or for any request for a rezoning to this district
shall be accompanied by a community impact statement, prepared
by a qualified professional(s). The purpose of this statement is to
assure that the proposed development will have a beneficial impact
upon the site and the surrounding neighborhood or the facilities
and services of the Township. The community impact statement is
described more fully in § 182-61 herein. [Amended 12-16-1991
by Ord. No. 307]
B. Development regulations. The following development regulations shall
be followed by all proposed developments within the R-4 Residential
District:
(1) Utilities. All utility lines (electrical, telephone, etc.) shall be placed
underground.
(2) Height regulations. The maximum height of buildings or structures
erected or enlarged within the R-4 Residential District shall be:
(a) For any dwelling: 35 feet.
(b) For any nonresidential building permitted herein: 40 feet.
(c) For any building accessory to a dwelling or nonresidential
building: 15 feet.
(3) Parking regulations. The following standards shall control required
parking spaces in the R-4 Residential District:
(a) Not less than two off-street automobile parking spaces shall be
required for each dwelling unit. The required spaces, when
they are not an integral part of the building design, shall be
arranged within a court or separate parking area(s), as
deemed suitable upon review by the Township Planning
Commission.
(b) No parking area of three or more cars shall be located closer
than 30 feet to a side or rear property line or closer than 50
feet to an ultimate right-of-way line.
(c) For parking areas storing 10 or more cars, not less than 10% of
the area devoted to parking facilities shall consist of interior
parking lot landscaping.
(4) Signs. Signs shall be permitted subject to the requirements of
Article XIX of this chapter.
(5) Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and
egress to and from public streets and highways serving the R-4
§ 182-60 WATER § 182-60
176:645
residential development without causing undue confusion or
interference with the normal traffic flow. The Planning Commission
shall satisfy itself concerning the adequacy of the thoroughfare
to carry the additional traffic generated by the R-4 residential
development, as well as to the street frontage of the proposed
development.
(6) Common areas and facilities. The provision of certain facilities
serving the entire development, such as parking lots, interior
pedestrianways, driveways or alleys, lighting facilities, landscape
planting areas, buffers, open space and recreation facilities, etc.,
are hereby encouraged and may be located either on individual lots
or in common areas. In cases where they are provided in common
areas, provisions satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors must be
made for their perpetual maintenance and care. The use of these
facilities may be restricted to the residents of the development,
where practical, and may be maintained by the developer, a
homeowners' association or similar instrument. Any common area
shall be first offered to the Township by the developer; however, the
Township need not accept dedication of the open space but shall
maintain first option to acquire with 12 months' notice, if said open
space shall ever become available.
(7) Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as needed
and arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and
neighboring properties from unreasonable direct glare or
hazardous interference of any kind. Lighting facilities shall be
required for the safety and welfare of the residents of the
development and shall be installed by the developer at his expense
and shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township,
§ 154-40. [Amended 6-2-2002 by Ord. No. 416]
(8) Landscaped planting. Shade trees shall be provided along street
frontage occupied by an R-4 residential development in accordance
with the requirements of the Upper Providence Park and
Recreation Committee.
(9) Buffer area. An R-4 residential development shall provide a
permanent landscaped Buffer Type 1, as described in § 154-36D(5)
of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, to screen any
residential, commercial, and industrial uses which are adjoining
and contiguous to the development. [Amended 8-1-2011 by Ord.
No. 517]
(10) Recreation and open space; amenities. The developer shall provide
community areas, laundry facilities, playgrounds and tot-lots and
other services necessary for the comfort and convenience of the
prospective residents in the R-4 Residential District. In this regard,
the developer shall provide a minimum of 20% of the total area as
usable open space for the use of the residents of the development.
§ 182-60 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-60
176:646
Such open space shall be governed by the provisions of Article
IVA, Open Space and Recreational Facilities, of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development. [Amended 2-21-1978 by
Ord. No. 197; 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 342]
C. Acreage and density requirement. The following minimum tract size
and maximum density shall apply in the R-4 Residential District:
(1) Minimum tract size. A proposal for any development in the R-4
Residential District shall require a minimum tract area of 20 acres,
excluding the existing rights-of-way of all public roads, before a
development plan can be submitted to the Township for
consideration. [Amended 10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 329]
(2) Maximum density.
(a) In the R-4 Residential District, the maximum permitted density
shall be 12 dwelling units per developable acre.143
(3) Building coverage. Not more than 10% of the area of each
development proposal in the R-4 Residential District may be
occupied by buildings.
(4) Setback from streets. There shall be a setback from the ultimate
right-of-way of each street on which a development in the R-4
Residential District abuts which shall not be less than 100 feet in
depth. [Amended 10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 329]
(5) Setback from boundary lines. There shall be a setback from the R-4
Residential District boundary line or any property line of not less
than 50 feet.
(6) Distance between buildings. The horizontal distance measured in
feet between parallel elements of buildings forming courts and
courtyards shall not be less than twice the height of the taller
building, measured in feet.
(a) For any two exterior-facing walls, neither of which has any
glassed window area from a living-room or bedroom, the
minimum distance apart shall be half the height of the taller
building.
(b) For any two exterior-facing walls, the buildings of which are
oriented side to side, the minimum distance apart shall be half
the height of the taller building.
(c) For any two exterior-facing walls, the buildings of which are
oriented front to front, front to rear or rear to rear [and not
143. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2)(b), which provided a formula for computing the
maximum number of bedrooms in a development proposal, was repealed 10-17-1994 by
Ord. No. 329.
§ 182-60 WATER § 182-60
176:647
§ 182-61. Community impact statement required.
To ensure that a proposed development within the R-4 Residential District
will not have an adverse effect upon the natural features of the site, as
well as upon the provision of light and air, water, transportation, police and
fire protection, schools, utilities and other public facilities, the Board of
Supervisors and Township Planning Commission shall evaluate the impact
of the development upon the site, the surrounding neighborhood and the
facilities and services of Upper Providence Township as listed below. The
applicant shall provide the same information required in a statement under
§ 182-55.
§ 182-62. Evaluation of community impact statement.
The community impact statement required in § 182-60A(5) herein shall be
evaluated as provided in § 182-56.
§ 182-63. Plan modifications.
The Board of Supervisors may grant modifications from the specific
requirements herein and those of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development, provided that the spirit and intent of this article and the
statement of community development objectives contained in § 182-2 are
observed and that the overall densities specified herein are maintained. Any
such variations shall be embodied in the development agreement specified
in § 182-60A(4) herein.
qualifying under Subsection C(6)(a)], the minimum distance
apart shall be equal to 1 1/2 the height of the taller building.
(d) For any two exterior-facing walls, the buildings of which are
oriented front to side or rear to side, the minimum distance
apart shall be equal to the height of the taller building.
(e) For the purposes of this chapter, all rectilinear buildings will be
designated with not less than one front wall and one rear wall.
Circular buildings shall have a front side only. Distances shall
be measured from the closest points of each building. Where
two facing walls are not parallel, the wall nearest the facing
orientation shall be that wall with the least angle, in degrees,
turned from an imaginary parallel line.
(7) Any proposed development that does not contain multifamily
dwellings shall be governed by § 182-52B(11) for building coverage
and § 182-53D(1) for perimeter setbacks. [Added 4-7-2014 by
Ord. No. 538]
§ 182-60 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63
176:648
ARTICLE VIIA
GCR Golf Course Residential Community District
[Added 6-15-1992 by Ord. No. 312]
§ 182-63.1. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the community development objectives contained in Article
I, § 182-2, of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of this
article with respect to GCR Golf Course Residential Community District
to establish reasonable standards and criteria to permit a Residential Golf
Course Community as a conditional use in appropriate locations within
the Township, based upon a specialized set of development regulations
appropriate for such a development.
§ 182-63.2. Use regulations.
A Golf Course Residential Community is allowed only as a conditional use
in the R-1 Residential District, provided that the tract proposed for such
development meets the criteria specified in § 182-63.3 of this article, and
that the procedural requirements for conditional uses, set forth in § 182-204
of this chapter, are followed. A Golf Course Residential Community shall be
construed to mean a planned development consisting of residential use(s)
as permitted herein, combined with the development of a regulation golf
course, along with any other recreational uses and uses incidental to such a
development, as herein after provided.
A. To provide for such development in areas consistent with the goals of
the Township's Comprehensive Plan, which would be compatible with
and protect the existing community character, and which would be
located such that they would serve as a transition from existing
residential neighborhoods.
B. To protect the existing vistas into and rural character of large tracts of
undeveloped land in the Township.
C. To provide for creative use of land in areas where it is desirable to
preserve open space, stream valleys, agricultural land heritage, tree
cover, historic buildings and other natural and man-made amenities.
D. To permit the construction of residential units, golf course, clubhouse,
other recreational uses, along with other related and ancillary facilities
consistent and compatible with such a development.
E. To encourage the creation of individual neighborhoods unified by the
golf course and other open space features of the development.
F. To permanently protect areas of open space from future development.
A. The residential uses which are permissible in a Golf Course Residential
Community are as follows:
§ 182-63.1 WATER § 182-63.2
176:649
(1) Single-family detached dwellings, provided that when these are
proposed to be developed in a separate section and/or phase in the
community, they comprise at least 10% of the aggregate number of
units proposed for all phases of the development.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Single-family attached dwellings, in any of a variety of
configurations, including those which are attached back-to-back,
side-to-side or side-to-back.
(4) Multifamily dwellings.
B. In addition to a mix of residential dwellings, a regulation golf course
shall be included in every Golf Course Residential Community.
C. Additional uses which may be developed in conjunction with a Golf
Course Residential Community may include the following; provided,
however, that none is intended as an independent, freestanding
commercial use:
(1) Clubhouse, which may include any of the following facilities:
(a) Kitchen, dining and banquet facilities.
(b) Snack bar, grille, bar or lounge; lobby(s) or other common
gathering areas.
(c) Golf and tennis pro shops.
(d) Locker rooms, rest rooms and bath facilities.
(e) Exercise rooms, massage facilities.
(f) Conference rooms, meeting rooms and ballroom not to exceed
25% of the total gross floor area contained in the clubhouse.
(g) Golf and tennis equipment repair facility; golf club storage
facility.
(h) Management offices for the clubhouse and golf course.
(2) Indoor and/or outdoor recreational facilities, community center or
similar uses. At the discretion of the owner and/or management
entity having responsibility for these facilities, said use(s) may be
made available to the general public on any day that it is open. In
addition, as a result of the unique nature of a Golf Course
Residential Community, the requirements for the development of
the golf course and other open space areas shall be as prescribed in
this article; the requirements of Article IVA, Open Space and
Recreational Facilities, of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development, shall not be applicable for development approved
pursuant to this article. [Amended 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 342]
§ 182-63.2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.2
176:650
§ 182-63.3. Prerequisites for conditional use application.
The following prerequisites shall be met for each application for approval of
a Golf Course Residential Community:
(3) Common open space, halfway house and golf course comfort
station.
(4) Accessory uses on the same lot or premises with and incidental to
the other uses permitted in this article.
(5) As a special exception only, communications antennas, in
accordance with the provisions of § 182-21.1, mounted on an
existing public utility transmission tower, existing building or other
existing structure, and communications equipment buildings, only
upon a showing, in addition to any other that may be required
under this chapter, that denial of such a special exception would
have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless
service. Communications towers are not permitted. [Added
6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 372]
D. No-impact home-based businesses in accordance with the standards set
forth in § 182-21.3 herein. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
E. Home occupations, provided that all of the requirements of § 182-21.4
herein shall be met. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
A. Any tract of ground, or contiguous group of tracts which are the subject
of an application for conditional use approval as a Golf Course
Residential Community pursuant to this article, shall contain a
minimum of 250 acres.
B. Any tract of ground, or contiguous group of tracts which are the subject
of an application for conditional use approval as a Golf Course
Residential Community pursuant to this article, shall have a minimum
of 1,000 feet of frontage, measured along the ultimate rights-of-way, on
roads with a feeder or higher classification, according to the Township's
adopted Ultimate Right-Of-Way Map. Any individual area of such
frontage less than 150 feet in length shall not be credited towards this
frontage requirement.
C. (Reserved)144
D. A traffic impact study and community impact analysis, submitted in
forms as described in § 182-120E and I of this chapter, respectively,
shall be required for any conditional use application submitted
pursuant to this article. Evaluation of the community impact analysis
shall be in accordance with the procedure set forth in § 182-56 of the
chapter. In addition to those requirements of § 182-120I, the community
144. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which required age-restricted adult units in the Golf
Course Residential Community, was repealed 11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 368.
§ 182-63.2 WATER § 182-63.3
176:651
§ 182-63.4. District regulations.
The following general regulations shall apply in the GCR Golf Course
Residential Community District:
impact analysis shall include a separate section describing the market
feasibility of the proposed community, documenting the demand for the
types of dwelling units proposed, including the demand for the number
of age-restricted units proposed. The section shall also demonstrate
the probable recreational demand for the proposed golf course and
other recreational amenities proposed. Said section shall include, but
not be limited to, a description of all proposed uses, demographic
information and projections sufficient to document the demand for the
age-restricted units, recreational demand statistics documenting the
probable use of the proposed golf course and projected usage rates
for the proposed course at initial completion and at the time of full
utilization once all dwelling units have been occupied for at least two
years.
A. Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership
or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of the
entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract shall be developed
under single direction in accordance with an approved master plan and
declaration of restrictive covenants, pursuant to §§ 182-63.8 and
182-63.9 herein, respectively, and in accordance with approved
subdivision and/or land development plans as shall be required. The
master plan, declaration of restrictive covenants and development
agreement required in Subsection D of this section shall be binding
upon all assignees or purchasers of property in the District.
B. Sewer and water facilities. The tract shall be served by public sewer
and public water facilities deemed acceptable by the Board of
Supervisors, but subject to the following conditions and exceptions:
(1) Other sources of water supply may be approved by the Board in
relation to maintaining the golf course, other landscape plantings
and open space, after receiving favorable comments from all
required reviewing agencies.
(2) Alternative sewage disposal systems may be accepted by the Board
of Supervisors which would provide a means for the preservation
and maintenance of the golf course and open space.
(3) Before any action by the Board of Supervisors, comments shall be
received for all types of water and sewer supplies from any of the
following bodies, as required by the Township: the Municipal
Authority Engineer; Upper Providence Municipal Authority;
Delaware River Basin Commission; Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection; and the Lower Perkiomen Valley
Regional Sewer Authority. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
§ 182-63.3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.4
176:652
§ 182-63.5. Development regulations.
C. Development plans. In addition to the master plan required pursuant to
§ 182-63.8 herein, actual application for development of all or part of a
tract of land in this District shall be accompanied by subdivision and/or
land development plans which shall comply with Chapter 154 of the
Township Code, Subdivision and Land Development. The plans shall be
subject to the tentative, preliminary and final plan stages, in
accordance with the requirements of that chapter.
D. Development agreement. In addition to the declaration of restrictive
covenants required pursuant to § 182-63.9 herein, approved
development of all or any portion(s) of a tract in this District shall be
executed in accordance with a development agreement in form and
substance satisfactory to the Township. The owner, developer and
Township shall enter into said agreement embodying all details
regarding compliance with this article to assure the binding nature
thereof on the overall tract and its development, which agreement shall
be recorded with the final development plan for the tract, or phases(s)
or portion(s) thereof, as appropriate. Should any final plans be amended
subsequent to original recording, an approved amended final plan shall
be recorded, together with an amended development agreement, as
necessary.
A. Density. The maximum density for development pursuant to this article
shall be 1.5 dwelling units per developable acre.
B. Lotting exclusion. In order to allow the maximum flexibility in site
design and to take maximum advantage of views of the golf course,
lotting is not required in any development built pursuant to this article,
nor is any minimum lot size. However, in cases wherein lots are utilized,
the distance between any point on a dwelling and the abutting lot line
shall not be less than 10 feet, with the following exceptions:
(1) Along lot lines wherein dwelling units are connected.
(2) Along lot lines on which any form of zero-lot line single-family
detached dwelling unit, is coincident. In such cases, a maintenance
easement shall be required on any abutting lot, the minimum width
of which shall be 10 feet.
C. Access restriction. No dwelling unit within the Golf Course Residential
Community may take access directly from any road with a feeder or
higher classification, regardless of whether said road is existing or
proposed. All dwelling units shall gain access from residential roads,
internal access roads, drives, courts or similar arrangements.
D. Setbacks from golf course.
(1) The closest point on any dwelling unit or to any outdoor living
space associated with a dwelling unit shall be set back a minimum
distance from any playing area on the golf course (which shall be
§ 182-63.4 WATER § 182-63.5
176:653
defined as the tee, fairway and green, as defined in Figure 1), in
accordance with the following:
(a) Seventy-five feet from the back tee.
(b) From the center line of a fairway, the setback distance
increases from 75 feet (at the tee) to 150 feet at a point 400
feet away from the tee. The setback then remains at 150 feet
for the remainder of the fairway.
(c) One hundred fifty feet from the center of the green.
(2) The setbacks in Subsection D(1)(a) and (c) above may be reduced if
protective screening and/or landscaping, substantially more dense
than the buffer required for these areas, as stipulated in § 182-63.7
herein, is proposed in the actual layout of the golf course when said
layout is prepared by an architect/landscape architect with the
credentials required per § 182-63.6A herein. Any such reduction in
setback shall be subject to review and approval by the Township.
E. Public road setback. A minimum building setback of 100 feet shall be
required from the ultimate right-of-way of any existing frontage
roadway or proposed public road of feeder or higher classification. A
minimum building setback of 40 feet shall be required from the ultimate
right-of-way of any existing frontage roadway or proposed public road
of residential classification.
F. Other building setbacks. Building setbacks, in addition to those
prescribed in other subsections of this section, shall be as prescribed in
this subsection, unless a greater setback is explicitly or implicitly
required by the provisions of Subsections D and E of this section or by
the buffer requirements in § 182-63.7 herein, respectively.
(1) From the right-of-way line of any internal street in the community,
or in the absence of a right-of-way line, from a line five feet back
from the edge of the cartway/curbline: 20 feet.
(2) From a common parking area serving residential units (or access
road thereto), or from a solid waste collection facility or other
service area (if separate from a parking area): 20 feet.
§ 182-63.5 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.5
176:654
(3) From a dwelling unit to an outdoor recreation facility associated
with the development but not housed in a building [as permitted in
§ 182-63.2C(2) herein]: 30 feet.
(4) From a dwelling unit to another permitted nonresidential building
or parking area serving nonresidential uses within the community
(or access road thereto): 40 feet.
(5) Setback from the tract boundary, in which no structure or parking
facility shall be placed (with the exception of entrance area guard
stations, entrance roads, ponds, stormwater basins or cart paths):
75 feet.
G. Separation of residential buildings.
(1) The minimum horizontal distance between any two residential
buildings within the same building group or cluster shall be 20 feet.
(The required master plan shall be used to determine if buildings
are within the same group or cluster; criteria to determine same
shall include but not be limited to those buildings oriented toward
the same street, cul-de-sac or courtyard; or those which are
oriented toward the same open space area).
(2) The minimum horizontal distance between any two residential
buildings not within the same building group or cluster shall be 35
feet.
H. Height regulations. The maximum height for all buildings shall be as
follows:
(1) For all residential buildings: 35 feet.
(2) For a clubhouse building: 50 feet; however, the number of habitable
stories shall not exceed three.
(3) All other permitted buildings: 18 feet.
I. Coverage standards. The following standards shall apply to the
community as a whole:
(1) Maximum building coverage: 15%.
(2) Maximum impervious coverage: 25%.
J. Utilities. All proposed utility lines (electrical, telephone, cable TV,
internal security system lines, etc.) within the Golf Course Residential
Community development shall be placed underground in accordance
with the requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development, of the Code of the Township, § 154-28D.
K. Lighting. Lighting facilities for the residential areas, clubhouse, roads,
and parking areas shall be provided as needed and arranged in a
manner which protects the existing frontage roads and neighboring
properties from direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
§ 182-63.5 WATER § 182-63.5
176:655
Lighting shall also be arranged to avoid direct glare into the proposed
residences. As a result of the unique nature of a golf course
development, in lieu of traditional streetlighting, lighting facilities may
be required of the residents of the development. Such facilities shall
be installed by the developer at his expense and shall be required
to be illuminated during hours of darkness and controlled by the
homeowners' association(s) or similar entity(ies) which shall be set up
to administer and maintain common facilities. All lighting installed in
the GCR District shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
154, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township,
§ 154-40. [Amended 6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 416]
L. Signs. All signage to be installed in any location within a golf course
development shall comply with all requirements for residential signs, as
stipulated in Article XIX of this chapter. All signage shall be of
compatible materials and design with the buildings and other street
furniture found in the development and shall be of a coordinated design
throughout the development. In addition to the foregoing, the following
additional sign regulations shall govern in a Golf Course Residential
Community:
(1) For any single residential section of the community which has a
separate identity that will distinguish it from other sections, one
identification sign with the name of that section may be permitted
at the main entrance to that section, the total area of which cannot
exceed 25 square feet. One additional identification sign may be
permitted at a secondary entrance, with an area not to exceed 15
square feet. No identification sign for any residential section shall
have a sign height exceeding 12 feet.
(2) Multiple directory signs indicating the location of separate sections
of the community and the location of the golf course and other
recreational uses may be installed, limited to the dimensional
requirements contained in § 182-151B of this chapter. No more
than four such signs may be permitted in any Golf Course
Residential Community and shall only be permitted at major
entrances to the community or at major entrances to separate
residential sections.
(3) The golf course and any other recreational uses may be identified
with separate identification signs. No more than one such sign shall
identify the golf course in the vicinity of the clubhouse and its
associated parking, and no more than one sign shall identify any
other major recreational use (such as but not limited to swim club/
pool, tennis club, etc.). Such signs shall not exceed an area of 35
square feet, and not have a sign height exceeding 15 feet. In
addition, incidental directional and street signs within the golf
course area directing patrons to various facilities may be
permitted, provided that they are internalized within the
development and not seen from existing frontage roads.
§ 182-63.5 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.5
176:656
M. Parking. Parking requirements in the GCR District shall be as follows:
(1) For the residents of each dwelling unit, parking shall be as required
in § 182-179A of this chapter.
(2) For guest parking: in addition to the parking as required in
Subsection M(1) above, 1/2 space per dwelling unit shall be
provided.
(3) For golf course patrons and users of the clubhouse facility, one
parking space shall be provided for each 300 square feet of gross
floor area of the clubhouse. In addition, one parking space shall be
provided for each employee on the largest combined shift for
employees who can conceivably be on-site at the same time, for
both the golf course and clubhouse facility. Dependent upon the
specific mix of uses proposed in the clubhouse facility, the Board
may require additional parking to be held in reserve in accordance
with the allowance contained in Subsection M(5) of this section. If
additional parking is to be installed, such additional parking shall
not exceed twice the number of spaces otherwise required by this
article.
(4) Parking lot landscaping shall be required and shall follow the
requirements contained in § 182-120.10D of this chapter.
(5) When conditions warrant, the use of reserve parking is
encouraged. The requirements of § 182-180 of this chapter shall be
applicable.
(6) All other applicable requirements for off-street parking, as
contained in Article XXII, shall be enforced in a golf course
development.
(7) At least one loading/unloading area shall be provided for the
clubhouse facility. Such area(s) shall be placed in such a location
that there is no interference between service vehicles and parking/
vehicular circulation for patron parking or golf cart circulation.
N. Dwelling mix. Throughout the entire community, a minimum of two
residential uses and/or configurations of single-family attached
dwellings, as defined in § 182-63.2A herein, shall be required. Within at
least one of those uses/configurations, a minimum of two distinctly
different architectural styles shall be required. With the exception of
the minimum percentage for single-family detached units of 10%, as
stipulated in § 182-63.2A(1) herein, there shall be no minimum
percentage for any proposed residential use or configuration of singlefamily
attached dwellings. Dwelling unit mix requirements need not be
enforced if all dwelling units throughout the community are proposed
as age-restricted adult units. The Board of Supervisors may grant
modifications from the specific mix requirements herein, provided that
the spirit and intent of this article and the statement of community
development objectives contained in § 182-2 are observed, and that the
§ 182-63.5 WATER § 182-63.5
176:657
overall density specified in § 182-63.5A herein is not exceeded. Any
such variations shall be embodied in the development agreement
specified in § 182-63.4D herein and reflected on the master plan
required in § 182-63.8 herein. Such modifications may be made at the
time of initial development plan approval for the entire community,
or may be requested and granted at subsequent times as a result of
market changes; any subsequent modifications shall be reflected in
amendments to the development agreement and master plan.
O. Trash and refuse areas. Provision shall be made for the storage of trash,
refuse, garbage and recyclables, whether inside a building(s) or within
a walled or fenced area outside the building(s). The walls or fences of
such trash and refuse areas must shield the contents of the enclosure
from direct view from any residences and shall be of compatible design
and materials with the building(s) which it services. Proper ingress and
egress must be provided for removal of the trash, refuse, garbage and
recyclables, without conflict with parked vehicles or circulation within
the parking area. Around the non-parking-lot-side(s) of any enclosure,
landscaping shall be provided to soften the appearance of the
enclosure.
P. Additional development regulations. The following additional
regulation(s) shall be applicable to a Golf Course Residential
Community, in recognition of the unique type of development which it
represents, wherein the Township believes such regulation(s) to be
adequate, based upon review and recommendation of the Township
Engineer.
(1) In instances where the road's function allows, the cartway on any
private interior roads may be reduced to a width as narrow as 24
feet. In addition, such roads shall have a minimum of five feet back
from the edge of the cartway/curbline on each side of the road, in
place of a right-of-way, such that the total width devoted to the
roadway is a minimum of 34 feet.
(2) Concrete rolled curb may be installed on private interior roads, in
lieu of the stand-up curbing required in Chapter 154 of the
Township Code, Subdivision and Land Development.
(3) Secured or gated road entrances to the development may be
permitted.
(4) Private cul-de-sac courtyards may be permitted which exceed the
maximum permitted length as stipulated in Chapter 154 of this
Code, as long as emergency access, as may be required by the
Township, is provided.
(5) Sidewalks, as normally installed in conformance with the
requirements of Chapter 154 of the Township Code, may be
eliminated and replaced with a pedestrian walkway system, as
provided for in § 182-63.8C of this article.
§ 182-63.5 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.5
176:658
§ 182-63.6. Golf course requirements.
In any development proposed pursuant to the requirements of this article,
the following specific requirements pertaining to the golf course portion of
the development shall be met:
(6) Shade trees, as normally installed in conformance with the
requirements of Chapter 154 of the Township Code, may be
eliminated. A coordinated landscape plan, showing developmentwide
landscaping, buffering (as required in § 182-63.7 herein) and
any proposed shade trees shall be implemented. Landscaping shall
be installed, and the landscape plan drafted, in accordance with the
provisions of § 182-120.10A and E, respectively, of this chapter.
A. The golf course shall contain 18 holes and shall be a minimum of 6,000
yards in length, as measured from the center of the rearmost tee to the
center of the green of each hole. The golf course shall be designed by an
architect/landscape architect who is a member of the American Society
of Golf Course Architects and/or has designed a minimum of five
regulation golf courses.
B. Building permits for a maximum of 25% of the total number of dwelling
units approved for all phases of the community may be issued prior to
commencing the construction of the golf course. At such time as 50% of
the building permits shall have been issued, the Board of Supervisors
may request that financial security be posted for the remaining
improvement costs for completion of the golf course, with the form of
financial security to be determined by the Board. The improvement
costs to be secured would be for the golf course only; costs for
construction of associated uses as permitted in § 182-63.2C herein shall
be excluded. Building permits shall not be issued for more than 75% of
the total number of dwelling units approved for all phases of the Golf
Course Residential Community, until such time as the construction of
the golf course is substantially complete, which shall be construed to
mean that the golf course is playable and is being utilized.
C. Any clubhouse must be situated such that it is internal to the Golf
Course Residential Community, with the exception that it may front
onto one of the existing frontage roads. Except for any such roadway
frontage, it shall abut any or all of the following: an internal community
roadway, the golf course, other open space associated with the
community or residential development within the Golf Course
Residential Community.
D. The clubhouse and any other permitted nonresidential buildings shall
be of a residentially compatible design. Building bulk and shapes,
rooflines and building materials shall be compatible with the residential
buildings constructed within the Golf Course Residential Community.
E. The golf course shall be maintained by an entity satisfactory to the
Board of Supervisors. If the golf course ceases to be used for the
§ 182-63.5 WATER § 182-63.6
176:659
§ 182-63.7. Landscape and buffer requirements. [Amended
8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
A coordinated landscape plan, showing golf course landscaping,
landscaping within the residential sections of the community, buffering
as required herein, and any proposed shade trees shall be submitted.
Landscaping shall be installed and the landscape plan drafted in accordance
with the provisions of §§ 154-36 and 154-12G, respectively, of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development.
operation of a golf course for any reason, the area shall be preserved
as passive open space and maintained as such. No other use shall be
permitted thereon unless and until the operation of a golf course is
resumed.
F. The golf course may be made available to the general public on any day
that it is open.
A. General landscaping requirements. Landscaping throughout the
community shall be planned in accordance with the following
guidelines:
(1) Shade trees shall be installed along all public and private streets, in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development, of the Code of the Township, § 154-36C.
However, if it is more appropriate, based upon the site design
proposed, some or all of these trees may be redistributed
elsewhere throughout the community, with the approval of the
Township.
(2) Landscaping within the golf course shall be based upon the design
and play of the course as prescribed by the Golf Course Architect.
(3) Landscaping within the golf course may be credited against the
requirements for those Type 1 buffers required in Subsections C
and D of this section. The Township may permit such credits in
those instances wherein the golf course landscaping would equal or
exceed the buffering qualities of the Type 1 buffer in a specific
location(s).
(4) Based upon review of the submitted landscape plan, the Township
may require landscaping in addition to those minimal requirements
herein where unusual field conditions exist, or if circumstances
arise which were not contemplated by this article.
B. General buffering requirements. General buffer requirements shall be
followed, as stipulated in § 182-120.10B of this chapter; specifications
for the various buffer types listed herein shall be as stipulated in
§ 182-120.10C of this chapter. In those instances in which berms are not
required, they may be used as a substitute for some of the plant
material in a specific buffer situation, if the Township concurs, in its
review of the landscape plan, that the berms equal or exceed the
§ 182-63.6 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.7
176:660
buffering qualities necessary in that specific buffer situation. Buffers
shall be installed in those situations as prescribed in Subsections C
and D of this section, unless golf course landscaping in accordance
with Subsection A(3) of this section, or berms in accordance with this
subsection, are permitted by the Township as substitutions.
C. Buffers for dwelling units:
(1) Between a dwelling unit and an existing frontage roadway: Buffer
Type 3 required.
(2) Between a dwelling unit and an abutting, off-site residential use or
district: Buffer Type 2 required.
(3) Between a dwelling unit and an abutting, off-site nonresidential use
or district: Buffer Type 3 required.
(4) Between a dwelling unit and parking areas for residential units:
Buffer Type 1 required.
(5) Between a dwelling unit and parking area serving a nonresidential
use: Buffer Type 2A required.
(6) Between a dwelling unit and the edge of a tee, fairway, or green: no
buffer required. (The Board of Supervisors shall require additional
planting where there is a high probability of the ball leaving the
playing area.)
(7) Between a dwelling unit and any other permitted building within
the golf course development: Buffer Type 2 required.
(8) Between a dwelling unit and an outdoor recreational facility
associated with the development, but not housed in a building:
Buffer Type 1 required.
(9) Between two dwelling unit groupings within the Golf Course
Residential Community: Buffer Type 1 required.
D. Buffers for golf course use:
(1) Between the golf course and an abutting, off-site residential use or
district: no buffer required. (The Board of Supervisors shall require
additional planting where there is a high probability of the ball
leaving the playing area.)
(2) Between the golf course and an abutting, off-site nonresidential use
or district: Buffer Type 3 required.
(3) Between the golf course and an existing frontage roadway: no
buffer required. (The Board of Supervisors shall require additional
planting where there is a high probability of the ball leaving the
playing area.)
§ 182-63.7 WATER § 182-63.8
176:661
§ 182-63.8. Master plan requirement.
In any development pursuant to this article, a master plan of the entire
development tract shall be submitted for approval by the Board of
Supervisors. Once approved, said plan shall be recorded prior to or
simultaneously with the recording of the initial subdivision and/or land
development plan for any portion of the tract. The following are the
minimum requirements for said plan:
A. As a minimum, said plan shall be drawn to tentative sketch plan
requirements, pursuant to § 154-11 of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development. The master plan shall show relationships between
the proposed developed areas of the tract with the golf course and
other open space areas. It shall show how development of the entire
tract, once executed in accordance with this plan, will function
cohesively as an integrated development. The master plan shall depict
proposed buildings/building groupings, lot lines, vehicular circulation,
parking, a general layout of the proposed golf course, usage of other
open space areas and a generalized landscaping scheme for the entire
tract.
B. Preservation of natural features shall be assured; demonstration of this
shall be documented through the master plan and on subsequently
required subdivision and/or land development plans and landscape
plans. The following shall be addressed in terms of natural features
preservation:
(1) Floodplains and wetlands shall be protected in accordance with the
Floodplain Conservation District, Article III of this chapter and
§ 154-12C(5)(d) of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development, respectively, as well as all applicable state and
federal regulations.
(2) Steep slopes shall be protected in accordance with the Steep Slope
Conservation District, Article XVIII of this chapter. When, in the
opinion of the Township Engineer, soils information does not
adequately depict steep slopes, topographic information shall be
used to supplement it.
(3) Disturbance of woodlands and other vegetation shall be minimized.
§ 154-35B, Tree preservation, of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development, shall be enforced. When more than 25% of the
trees with a minimum of a six-inch caliper must be removed,
compensatory planting shall be provided at a rate of one inch of
new caliper for every four inches of caliper removed. Every
replacement tree shall have a minimum of two-and-one-half-inch
caliper. Alternative types of compensatory planting may be
permitted, with the concurrence of the Township. No grade
changes, installation of impervious cover or equipment storage
shall be permitted within the dripline of any tree to be preserved;
§ 182-63.8 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.8
176:662
fencing shall be placed at the dripline before any site work is
begun, including tree removal or grubbing.
(4) Topsoil shall be protected in accordance with § 154-35C, Topsoil
preservation, of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development.
C. Pedestrian accommodations shall be included on the development tract
in locations logical to provide pedestrian movement between buildings,
between buildings and parking areas and between the residences and
the golf course and other open space areas. Said pedestrian
accommodations shall be reflected on each subsequently approved land
development plan. In addition to accommodation for pedestrians,
accommodations shall be made for golf carts and for the handicapped.
For any crossings of roadways with a feeder or higher classification in
accordance with the Township's Ultimate Right-Of-Way Map, gradeseparated
accommodations shall be provided. In any instance wherein a
pedestrian, golf cart or handicapped crossing is proposed for a roadway
of lesser classification, suitable markings and signage shall be provided
to alert motorists of the crossing.
D. Any change to proposed lots, buildings, circulation, parking, golf course
or open space configuration, landscaping or extent of natural features
preservation which is substantive in the opinion of the Board of
Supervisors will necessitate that a revised master plan to be submitted,
approved and recorded to replace any prior master plan(s). The Board
may permit modifications, including but not limited to modifications to
the layout of dwelling units within the same grouping and minor
adjustments in the location of groupings of dwelling units, without
submission of a revised master plan. However, any changes approved
which are not shown on the currently recorded master plan shall be
reflected on the master plan next required. No subdivision or land
development for any development on the subject development tract
shall be approved without a current recorded master plan.
E. The most current recorded master plan must contain a tabulation of the
ratio of open space provided on the development tract and a tabulation
of the number of dwelling units proposed and tract-wide density which
will result once said units are constructed. Said tabulations shall be
kept current through the most recently approved subdivision and/or
land development. A revised master plan must be recorded
simultaneously with the recording of each subsequently approved
subdivision and/or land development in order that the open space ratio
is continually updated. In addition, as each land development plan is
approved on an individual lot, a perpetual deed restriction shall be
placed on that lot restricting any further subdivision of that lot and
further restricting the amount of impervious coverage, to that
percentage which was approved as part of the land development plan.
F. Phasing of a development in the GCR District is expected due to its
scale. Phasing shall be reflected on the master plan, with changes to the
phasing required to be reflected on a revised master plan. Subdivisions
§ 182-63.8 WATER § 182-63.8
176:663
§ 182-63.9. Declaration of restrictive covenants.
Accompanying the master plan, a declaration of restrictive covenants must
be approved by the Township and recorded. Said declaration shall provide
all of the restrictions necessary to assure that a proposed development will
operate as depicted on the master plan. The following are the minimum
requirements for the declaration:
and/or land developments to implement all or a portion of any phase
shall be processed in accordance with the requirements for same in
Chapter 154 of the Township Code; their depiction on the master plan
is required once they are approved by the Township.
G. Subdivisions for mortgage or similar purposes may be permitted,
following the requirements set forth in § 154-10F of Chapter 154 of the
Township Code. Subdivisions, duly processed in accordance with the
usual requirements for the same as contained in Chapter 154, to allow
sections and/or phases of the residential component of the development
to be developed separately and/or at different times, may also be
permitted. All subdivisions approved by the Township, regardless of
purpose, shall be reflected on the most recent master plan.
A. Provisions for the establishment of a homeowners association(s) or
other similar entity as approved by the Township, with mandatory
membership by the current owner of each dwelling unit represented in
the master plan.
B. Parties to the declaration of restrictive covenants shall be bound by all
restrictions contained therein and shall include, at a minimum,
members of the aforementioned association(s), developer, mortgagees
of any lot and/or building on the tract, legal entity responsible for golf
course operations and entity (if different) responsible for the operations
of the clubhouse and its associated facilities, and any other parties
having any interest in all or any part of the proposed development, and
the Township. Provisions shall be included to permit Township
enforcement of the restrictions contained in the declaration in the event
that the responsible association(s) or other entities fail to do so.
C. Cross easements shall be included, which shall assure proper
circulation throughout the development and access to all common
recreation and open space areas, roadways and common parking areas.
D. Maintenance provisions shall be included for the golf course, clubhouse
and related facilities, other recreational facilities, separate rest room
facilities, halfway house, circulation network, common parking areas,
landscaping and all other areas not individually controlled by a
homeowner in fee title.
E. Provisions to ensure that development of any buildings, parking or
other similar improvements be prohibited on any lots to be utilized
§ 182-63.8 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.9
176:664
solely for open space purposes, as indicated on the most currently
approved master plan.
F. Provisions stipulating each lot owner/resident's rights with respect to
common areas.
G. Any additional restrictions which will be applied to the development
which are stricter than existing Township regulations.
H. Any change to cross easements, maintenance responsibilities or other
applicable restrictions which is substantive, in the opinion of the Board
of Supervisors, will necessitate an amendment to the declaration of
restrictive covenants to be submitted, approved and recorded to
replace any prior such document. No subdivision or land development
for any development on the subject development tract shall be
approved without a current recorded declaration of restrictive
covenants.
§ 182-63.9 WATER § 182-63.9
176:665

ARTICLE VIIB
OSR Open Space Residential Community District
[Added 10-4-1993 by Ord. No. 321]
§ 182-63.10. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the community development objectives contained in Article
I, § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of this article
with respect to an open space residential community to establish reasonable
standards and criteria to permit such a community as a conditional use in
appropriate locations within the Township, based upon a specialized set of
development regulations appropriate for such a development.
§ 182-63.11. Use regulations.
An open space residential community is allowed only as a conditional use
in the R-1 Residential District, provided that the tract proposed for such
development meets the criteria specified in § 182-63.12 of this article, and
that the procedural requirements for conditional uses, set forth in § 182-204
of this chapter, are followed. An open space residential community shall
be construed to mean a planned development consisting of single-family
residential use(s) combined with the preservation of extensive areas of
open space and/or parkland, along with any appropriate recreational uses
and uses incidental to such a development, as herein after provided. Uses
specifically permitted in an open space residential community shall be the
following:
A. To provide for such development in areas consistent with the goals of
the Township's Comprehensive Plan, which would be compatible with
and protect the existing community character.
B. To protect the existing vistas into and rural character of large tracts of
undeveloped land in the Township.
C. To provide for creative use of land in areas where it is desirable to
preserve open space, stream valleys, agricultural land heritage, tree
cover, historic buildings and other natural and man-made amenities.
D. To allow for a modest increase in permitted density in return for the
preservation of extensive areas of open space and/or parkland.
E. To encourage the creation of individual neighborhoods unified by the
open space features of the development.
F. To permanently protect areas of open space and parkland from future
development, and in so doing, implement the goals and
recommendations of the Township's adopted Open Space and
Recreation Plan.
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Neighborhood or community park.
§ 182-63.10 WATER § 182-63.11
176:667
§ 182-63.12. Prerequisites for conditional use application.
The following prerequisites shall be met for each application for approval of
an open space residential community:
C. Common open space.
D. Accessory uses on the same lot or premises with and incidental to the
other uses permitted in this article. In addition to accessory uses
customarily incidental to a dwelling unit, appropriate accessory uses
may be permitted in a park, including but not limited to uses such as
rest rooms, equipment storage building, concession stand, parking for
park users and other similar uses.
E. No-impact home based businesses in accordance with the standards set
forth in § 182-21.3 herein. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
F. Home occupations, provided that all of the requirements of § 182-21.4
herein shall be met. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
A. Any tract of ground, or contiguous group of tracts which are the subject
of an application for conditional use approval as an open space
residential community pursuant to this article, shall contain a minimum
of 250 acres.
B. Any tract of ground, or contiguous group of tracts which are the subject
of an application for conditional use approval as an open space
residential community pursuant to this article, shall have a minimum of
1,000 feet of frontage, measured along the ultimate rights-of-way, on
roads with a feeder or higher classification, according to the Township's
adopted Ultimate Right-Of-Way Map. Any individual area of such
frontage less than 150 feet in length shall not be credited towards this
frontage requirement.
C. A traffic impact study and community impact analysis, submitted in
forms as described in § 182-120E and I of this chapter, respectively,
shall be required for any conditional use application submitted
pursuant to this article. Evaluation of the community impact analysis
shall be in accordance with the procedure set forth in § 182-56 of the
chapter. In addition to those requirements of § 182-120I, the community
impact analysis shall demonstrate how the proposed application meets
the legislative intent of this article. The community impact analysis
shall also demonstrate the probable recreational demand for any
proposed park, including the specific recreational amenities proposed.
Said section shall include but not be limited to a description of amount
and location of any tract(s) proposed as a park, and all proposed
facilities to be developed therein. Said section shall indicate how the
proposed land and facilities relate to the specific findings and
recommendations of the Township's adopted Open Space and
Recreation Plan.
§ 182-63.11 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.13
176:668
§ 182-63.13. District regulations.
The following general regulations shall apply in the OSR Open Space
Residential Community District:
A. Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership
or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of the
entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract shall be developed
under single direction in accordance with an approved master plan and
declaration of restrictive covenants, pursuant to §§ 182-63.16 and
182-63.17 herein, respectively, and in accordance with approved
subdivision and/or land development plans as shall be required. The
master plan, declaration of restrictive covenants and development
agreement required in Subsection D of this section, shall be binding
upon all assignees or purchasers of property in the District.
B. Sewer and water facilities. The tract shall be served by public sewer
and public water facilities deemed acceptable by the Board of
Supervisors, but subject to the following conditions and exceptions:
(1) Other sources of water supply may be approved by the Board in
relation to maintaining open space, parkland or other landscape
plantings, after receiving favorable comments from all required
reviewing agencies.
(2) Alternative sewage disposal systems may be accepted by the Board
of Supervisors which would provide a means for the preservation
and maintenance of the proposed open space and/or parkland.
(3) Before any action by the Board of Supervisors, comments shall be
received for all types of water and sewer supplies from any of the
following bodies, as required by the Township: the Municipal
Authority Engineer; Upper Providence Municipal Authority;
Delaware River Basin Commission; Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection; and the Lower Perkiomen Valley
Regional Sewer Authority. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
C. Development plans. In addition to the master plan required pursuant to
§ 182-63.16 herein, actual application for development of all or part of a
tract of land in this District shall be accompanied by subdivision and/or
land development plans which shall comply with Chapter 154 of the
Township Code, "Subdivision and Land Development". The plans shall
be subject to the tentative, preliminary and final plan stages, in
accordance with the requirements of that chapter.
D. Development agreement. In addition to the declaration of restrictive
covenants required pursuant to § 182-63.17 herein, approved
development of all or any portion(s) of a tract in this District shall be
executed in accordance with a development agreement in form and
substance satisfactory to the Township. The owner, developer and
Township shall enter into said agreement embodying all details
regarding compliance with this article to assure the binding nature
§ 182-63.13 WATER § 182-63.13
176:669
§ 182-63.14. Development regulations.
thereof on the overall tract and its development, which agreement shall
be recorded with the final development plan for the tract, or phases(s)
or portion(s) thereof, as appropriate. Should any final plans be amended
subsequent to original recording, an approved amended final plan shall
be recorded, together with an amended development agreement, as
necessary.
A. Density. The maximum number of dwelling units which may be
permitted in a development pursuant to this article may be increased to
a number which is no more than 50% greater than that which would be
permitted under traditional design in the R-1 District. In order to
compute the number of dwelling units which would be permitted by
traditional design, the applicant shall provide a yield plan drawn in
accordance with the flexible lotting provisions in the R-1 District, as
stipulated in § 182-44G of this chapter; said yield plan shall be drawn to
comply with the open space requirement in § 182-43 herein.
B. Lot size, width and yard regulations. In order to allow the maximum
flexibility in site design and to provide maximum open space
preservation, lots may be reduced to a minimum of 12,000 square feet;
provided, however, that at least 50% of the total number of lots in an
OSR development shall have a minimum lot area of 15,000 square feet.
Minimum lot width and yard regulations for all lots in this district shall
be the same as those prescribed for fifteen-thousand-square-foot lots in
the R-2 District as contained in § 182-47B of this chapter.
C. Access restriction. No dwelling unit within the open space residential
community may take access directly from any road with a feeder or
higher classification, regardless of whether said road is existing or
proposed. All dwelling units shall gain access from residential roads,
internal access roads, drives, courts or similar arrangements.
D. Public road setbacks. A minimum setback of 250 feet shall be required
from the nearest residential lot line to the ultimate right-of-way of any
existing frontage roadway or proposed public road of collector or
higher classification. A minimum setback of 100 feet shall be required
from the nearest residential lot line to the ultimate right-of-way of any
existing frontage roadway or proposed public road of feeder
classification. These setback areas or portions thereof may be within
individual residential lots, provided the applicable building setback
(dependent upon lot orientation) is measured from the point at which
the applicable lot line setback is established, in accordance with the
aforementioned requirements of this subsection; provided, however,
that these setbacks may be considered as a portion of the required open
space as set forth in Subsection E of this section and shall adhere to the
requirements therein.
E. Open space. A minimum of 40% of the gross tract area of any
development proposed pursuant to this article shall be in open space
§ 182-63.13 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.14
176:670
and/or parkland, exclusive of the cumulative area required for the
residential lots proposed. A minimum of 50% of the required open space
shall be available, at a minimum, to all residents of the development, or
alternatively, all or a portion of the common open space may be made
available to the public at large. Prior to determining the ownership of
the required open space, the applicant shall offer, at a minimum, the
aforementioned 50% portion of it for dedication to the Township. In
deciding whether or not to accept any public open space, the Board
of Supervisors shall obtain the recommendation of the Parks and
Recreation Commission. In addition, all applicable provisions of Article
IVA, Open Space and Recreational Facilities, of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development, shall apply, except as may be
modified in Subsection F below. Any open space or required setback
area pursuant to Subsection D of this section, which is provided on
individual residential lots, shall be deed restricted to prohibit any
structural development and so as to be maintained exclusively as open
space and landscaped area. Such areas, as well as all common open
space areas not dedicated to the Township, shall be managed by a
homeowner's association, legally recognized conservation organization
or other group as approved by the Township. [Amended 8-7-1995 by
Ord. No. 342]
F. Phasing. Any land to be dedicated to the Township as parkland shall be
so dedicated prior to approval of the final plan for the first phase. No
more than 50% of the approved dwelling units shall be built until such
time as improvements are implemented, as approved by the Township,
in any proposed public park area. Financial security must be provided
for said improvements at such time if the installation of actual
improvements is to be deferred to a later date. As an alternative to
installation and/or financial security for park improvements, a fee in
lieu thereof may be paid, in accordance with the following:
(1) With the approval of the Board of Supervisors, the applicant may
provide a fee in lieu of constructing park improvements which
would otherwise be required in accordance with Article IVA, Open
Space and Recreational Facilities, of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development. [Amended 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 342]
(2) The fee applicable to the number of dwelling units in any phase, in
an amount as prescribed by the Township, shall be paid prior to
final plan approval for that phase.
(3) Any lighting, signage and parking improvements, as would
otherwise be required for parkland in accordance with Subsections
J, K, and L of this section, need not be installed in the event that a
fee in lieu of improvements is paid.
G. Height regulations. The maximum height for all buildings shall be
prescribed in the R-1 District.
§ 182-63.14 WATER § 182-63.14
176:671
H. Building coverage. The maximum building coverage on any individual
residential lot shall be 20%.
I. Utilities. All proposed utility lines (electrical, telephone, cable
television, etc.) within an open space residential community shall be
placed underground in accordance with the requirements of Chapter
154, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township,
§ 154-28D.
J. Lighting. Streetlighting for the residential areas shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development, of the Code of the Township, § 154-40. Lighting for
open space, park areas or related parking areas shall be provided as
needed and arranged in a manner which protects the existing frontage
roads and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous
interference of any kind. Lighting shall also be arranged to avoid direct
glare into the proposed residences. [Amended 6-3-2002 by Ord. No.
416]
K. Signs. All signage to be installed in any location within an open space
residential community shall comply with all requirements for
residential signs, as stipulated in Article XIX of this chapter. The
following additional sign regulations shall govern:
(1) For any section of the community which has a separate identity that
will distinguish it from other sections, one identification sign with
the name of that section may be permitted at the main entrance to
that section, the total area of which cannot exceed 25 square feet.
One additional identification sign may be permitted at a secondary
entrance, with an area not to exceed 15 square feet. No
identification sign for any residential section shall have a sign
height exceeding 12 feet.
(2) Any recreational uses may be identified with separate identification
signs. No more than one sign shall identify any major recreational
use (such as but not limited to swimming pool, tennis court area,
etc.). Such signs shall not exceed an area of 35 square feet, nor
have a sign height exceeding 15 feet. In addition, incidental
directional and street signs within the community directing
residents to various facilities may be permitted, provided that they
are internalized within the development and not seen from existing
frontage roads.
L. Parking. Parking requirements in the OSR District shall be as follows:
(1) For the residents of each dwelling unit, parking shall be as required
in § 182-179A(1) of this chapter.
(2) Parking for any proposed public parkland shall be provided in
number sufficient to service the proposed uses and facilities in the
park area. Sufficient information shall be provided within the
applicant's community impact and traffic impact reports to enable
§ 182-63.14 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.14
176:672
§ 182-63.15. Landscape and buffer requirements. [Amended
8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
A coordinated landscape plan, showing landscaping within the residential
sections of the community, buffering as required herein, and any proposed
shade trees shall be submitted. Landscaping shall be installed and the
landscape plan drafted in accordance with the provisions of §§ 154-36 and
154-12G, respectively, of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development.
the Township to determine the appropriate number of parking
spaces.
(3) Parking lot landscaping shall be required and shall follow the
requirements contained in § 154-36 of Chapter 154, Subdivision
and Land Development. [Amended 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
(4) When conditions warrant, the use of reserve parking is
encouraged. The requirements of § 182-180 of this chapter shall be
applicable.
(5) All other applicable requirements for off-street parking as
contained in Article XXII shall be enforced in an open space
residential development.
M. Additional development regulations. The following additional
regulation(s) shall be applicable to an open space residential
community, in recognition of the unique type of development which it
represents, wherein the Township believes such regulation(s) to be
adequate, based upon review and recommendation of the Township
Engineer.
(1) Concrete rolled curb may be installed on private interior roads, in
lieu of the stand-up curbing required in Chapter 154 of the
Township Code, Subdivision and Land Development.
(2) Secured or "gated" road entrances to the development may be
permitted.
(3) Private culs-de-sac or courtyards may be permitted which exceed
the maximum permitted length as stipulated in Chapter 154 of this
Code, as long as emergency access, as may be required by the
Township, is provided.
(4) Sidewalks, as normally installed in conformance with the
requirements of Chapter 154 of the Township Code, may be
eliminated in portions of the community when they are replaced
with a pedestrian walkway system, as provided for in § 182-63.16C
of this article.
A. General landscaping requirements. Landscaping throughout the
community shall be planned in accordance with the following
guidelines:
§ 182-63.14 WATER § 182-63.15
176:673
§ 182-63.16. Master plan requirement.
In any development pursuant to this article, a master plan of the entire
development tract shall be submitted for approval by the Board of
Supervisors. Once approved, said plan shall be recorded prior to or
simultaneously with the recording of the initial subdivision and/or land
development plan for any portion of the tract. The following are the
minimum requirements for said plan:
(1) Shade trees shall be installed along all public and private streets, in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development, of the Code of the Township, § 154-36C.
(2) Buffer plantings shall be designed and installed in all of the
frontage road setback areas as required in § 182-63.14D of this
article. The intent of the buffer is to provide a natural, rural
appearance and to adequately screen views from the abutting
frontage roadway to the bulk of the adjacent residential units. The
general design requirements for said buffers shall be in accordance
with those for a Type 2A buffer, as contained in § 154-36D(5) of
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development; provided,
however, that the width of said buffer shall be modified as
prescribed herein. No less than 50% of the setback width shall be
treated with plantings and/or berming. Neither treatment is
required to be continuous, and said treatments may fall anywhere
within the setback buffer area. Naturalistic planting and berm
designs shall be used in all of the setback buffer areas. With the
approval of the Township, stormwater management facilities may
be placed within the setback areas; where they fall within the
buffer area, they shall be incorporated into the buffer area design.
Modifications to the precise buffer requirements of this Subsection
A(2) may be permitted, upon review of the landscape plan by the
Township, provided that the intent of the buffer, as stated herein, is
met.
A. As a minimum, said plan shall be drawn to tentative sketch plan
requirements, pursuant to § 154-11 of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development. The master plan shall show relationships between
the proposed developed areas of the tract with the open space areas. It
shall show how development of the entire tract, once executed in
accordance with this plan, will function cohesively as an integrated
development. The master plan shall depict proposed buildings/building
groupings, lot lines, vehicular circulation, parking, usage of open space/
park areas and a generalized landscaping scheme for the entire tract.
B. Preservation of natural features shall be assured; demonstration of this
shall be documented through the master plan and on subsequently
required subdivision and/or land development plans and landscape
plans. The following shall be addressed in terms of natural features
preservation:
§ 182-63.15 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.16
176:674
(1) Floodplains and wetlands shall be protected in accordance with the
Floodplain Conservation District, Article III of this chapter, and
§ 154-12C(5)(d) of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, respectively, as well as all applicable state
and federal regulations.
(2) Steep slopes shall be protected in accordance with the Steep Slope
Conservation District, Article XVIII of this chapter. When, in the
opinion of the Township Engineer, soils information does not
adequately depict steep slopes, topographic information shall be
used to supplement it.
(3) Disturbance of woodlands and other vegetation shall be minimized.
Section 154-35B, Tree preservation, of Chapter 154, Subdivision
and Land Development, shall be enforced. When more than 25% of
the trees with a minimum of a six-inch caliper must be removed,
compensatory planting shall be provided at a rate of one inch of
new caliper for every four inches of caliper removed. Every
replacement tree shall have a minimum of two-and-one-half-inch
caliper. Alternative types of compensatory planting may be
permitted, with the concurrence of the Township. No grade
changes, installation of impervious cover or equipment storage
shall be permitted within the dripline of any tree to be preserved;
fencing shall be placed at the dripline before any site work is
begun, including tree removal or grubbing.
(4) Topsoil shall be protected in accordance with § 154-35C, Topsoil
preservation, of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development.
C. Pedestrian accommodations shall be included on the development tract
in locations logical to provide pedestrian movement between
residential areas, between residential areas and parkland and between
parkland and its associated parking lots. Said pedestrian
accommodations shall be encouraged in the common open space areas
and may replace some portions of traditional sidewalk if, in the opinion
of the Township, the pedestrian accommodations satisfy all of the
functions that the traditional sidewalk would serve. For any crossings of
roadways with a feeder or higher classification in accordance with the
Township's Ultimate Right-Of-Way Map, which would be required for
residents to access any parkland, appropriate signals, crosswalks and
other safety devices, as required by the Township, shall be installed. For
such a crossing of a roadway of lesser classification, suitable markings
and signage shall be provided to alert motorists of the crossing.
D. Any change to proposed lots, buildings, circulation, parking, open space
configuration, landscaping or extent of natural features preservation
which is substantive in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors will
necessitate a revised master plan to be submitted, approved and
recorded to replace any prior master plan(s). The Board may permit
modifications, including but not limited to minor modifications to the
layout of residential lots within the same neighborhood or cluster,
§ 182-63.16 WATER § 182-63.16
176:675
§ 182-63.17. Declaration of restrictive covenants.
Accompanying the master plan, a declaration of restrictive covenants must
be approved by the Township and recorded. Said declaration shall provide
all of the restrictions necessary to assure that a proposed development will
operate as depicted on the master plan. The following are the minimum
requirements for the declaration:
without submission of a revised master plan. However, any changes
approved which are not shown on the currently recorded master plan
shall be reflected on the master plan next required. No subdivision
or land development for any development on the subject development
tract shall be approved without a current recorded master plan.
E. The most current recorded master plan must contain a tabulation of the
ratio of open space provided on the development tract and a tabulation
of the number of dwelling units proposed and tract-wide density which
will result once said units are constructed. Said tabulations shall be
kept current through the most recently approved subdivision and/or
land development. A revised master plan must be recorded
simultaneously with the recording of each subsequently approved
subdivision and/or land development in order that the open space ratio
is continually updated.
F. Phasing of a development in the OSR District is expected due to its
scale. Phasing shall be reflected on the master plan, with changes to the
phasing required to be reflected on a revised master plan. Subdivisions
and/or land developments to implement all or a portion of any phase
shall be processed in accordance with the requirements for the same in
Chapter 154 of the Township Code; their depiction on the master plan is
required once they are approved by the Township.
A. Provisions for the establishment of a homeowners' association(s) or
other similar entity as approved by the Township, with mandatory
membership by the current owner of each dwelling unit represented in
the master plan.
B. Parties to the declaration of restrictive covenants shall be bound by all
restrictions contained therein and shall include, at a minimum,
members of the aforementioned association(s), developer, mortgagees
of any lot and/or building on the tract, any additional legal entity
responsible for open space management and any other parties having
any interest in all or any part of the proposed development and the
Township. Provisions shall be included to permit Township enforcement
of the restrictions contained in the declaration, in the event that the
responsible association(s) or other entities fail to do so.
C. Cross easements shall be included, which shall assure proper
circulation throughout the development and access to all common
recreation and open space areas, roadways and common parking areas.
§ 182-63.16 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.17
176:676
D. Provisions to ensure that development of any buildings, parking or
other similar improvements be prohibited on any lots to be utilized
solely for open space purposes, as indicated on the most currently
approved master plan.
E. Provisions stipulating each lot owner/resident's rights with respect to
common areas.
F. Any additional restrictions which will be applied to the development
which are stricter than existing Township regulations.
G. Any change to cross easements, maintenance responsibilities or other
applicable restrictions which is substantive in the opinion of the Board
of Supervisors will necessitate an amendment to the declaration of
restrictive covenants to be submitted, approved and recorded to
replace any prior such document. No subdivision or land development
for any development on the subject development tract shall be
approved without a current recorded declaration of restrictive
covenants.
§ 182-63.17 WATER § 182-63.17
176:677

ARTICLE VIIC
ARR Age-Restricted Residential Community District
[Added 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 419]
§ 182-63.18. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the community development objectives contained in Article
I, § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of this
article with respect to ARR Age-Restricted Residential Community District
to establish reasonable standards and criteria to permit an age-restricted
residential community as a conditional use in appropriate locations within
the R-1 District of the Township, based upon a specialized set of
development regulations appropriate for such a development.
§ 182-63.19. Use regulations.
An age-restricted residential community is allowed only as a conditional use
in the R-1 Residential District, provided that the tract proposed for such
development meets the criteria specified in § 182-63.20 of this article, and
that the procedural requirements for conditional uses, set forth in § 182-204
of this chapter, are followed. An "age-restricted residential community"
shall be construed to mean a planned development consisting of residential
use(s) as permitted herein, along with recreational and community uses
incidental to such a development, as hereinafter provided.
A. To recognize housing needs for residents as they get older and life-style
preferences changes.
B. To provide for developments consistent with the provisions of the
Federal Fair Housing Act amendments of 1988, or as subsequently
amended.
C. To provide for such developments consistent with the Township's
Comprehensive Plan goals.
D. To recognize that lesser impacts and smaller household sizes associated
with age-restricted communities can justify higher densities than
typical development in the underlying districts.
E. To encourage flexible site design which respects the Township's natural
features.
F. To encourage the creation of individual neighborhoods.
A. The residential uses which are permissible in an age-restricted
residential community are as follows:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family detached zero-lot line dwellings and other
nontraditional forms of single-family detached dwellings.
§ 182-63.18 WATER § 182-63.19
176:679
§ 182-63.20. Prerequisites for conditional use application.
The following prerequisites shall be met for each application for approval of
an age-restricted residential community:
B. Certain additional uses shall be developed in conjunction with an agerestricted
residential community, including the following; provided,
however, that none is intended as an independent, freestanding
commercial use:
(1) Community center for the exclusive use of residents of the
community or their guests. Development of the community center
shall occur in the first phase of any multiphase project. The
community center shall provide at least ten square feet of area for
each household in the community it is to serve; provided, however,
that it shall have a minimum of 2,000 square feet. A community
center may include the following:
(a) Kitchen, dining, and banquet facilities.
(b) Lobby(ies) or other common gathering areas; meeting rooms.
(c) Locker rooms, rest rooms, and exercise facilities.
(d) Administrative/management offices.
(2) Outdoor recreational facilities for the exclusive use of residents of
the community or their guests, including tennis courts, fitness/
jogging/walking/bicycling trails, practice golf green, or similar
facilities. In addition, as a result of the unique nature of an agerestricted
residential community, the requirements for the open
space areas shall be as prescribed in this section and § 182-63.22C
herein; the requirements of Article IVA of Chapter 154, Subdivision
and Land Development, shall not be applicable for development
approved pursuant to this article.
C. Additional uses which may be developed in conjunction with an agerestricted
residential community may include the following, provided,
however, that none is intended as an independent, freestanding
commercial use:
(1) Gate house (security hut) and appurtenances related thereto
(gates, automated card readers and similar facilities)
(2) Accessory uses customarily incidental to the other uses permitted
in this Article.
D. No-impact home based businesses in accordance with the standards set
forth in § 182-21.3 herein. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
E. Home occupations, provided that all of the requirements of § 182-21.4
herein shall be met. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
§ 182-63.19 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.20
176:680
§ 182-63.21. District regulations.
The following general regulations shall apply in the ARR age-restricted
residential community District:
A. An age-restricted residential community development shall meet all
provisions of the Federal Fair Housing Act amendments of 1988, or as
subsequently amended. As part of the declaration of restrictive
covenants as required pursuant to § 182-63.25 herein, the applicant
shall include a declaration against all dwelling units proposed to be
age-qualified. The declaration shall permanently bind a minimum of
80% of the dwelling units to be permanently occupied by at least one
person age 55 or older; a greater percentage may be so restricted as
part of the declaration. No permanent occupant of an age-qualified
dwelling unit may be less than 18 years of age.
B. Any tract of ground, or contiguous group of tracts which are the subject
of an application for conditional use approval as an age-restricted
residential community pursuant to this article, shall contain a minimum
of 50 acres, exclusive of area within the ultimate rights-of-way of
existing public roads.
C. Any tract of ground, or contiguous group of tracts which are the subject
of an application for conditional use approval as an age-restricted
residential community pursuant to this article, shall have a minimum of
350 feet of frontage, measured along the ultimate rights-of-way, on
roads with a collector or higher classification according to the
Township's adopted Ultimate Right-Of-Way Map. Any individual area of
such frontage less than 100 feet in length shall not be credited towards
this frontage requirement.
D. A traffic impact study and community impact analysis, submitted in
forms as described in § 182-120E and I of this chapter, respectively,
shall be required for any conditional use application submitted
pursuant to this article. Evaluation of the community impact analysis
shall be in accordance with the procedure set forth in § 182-56 of the
chapter. In addition to those requirements of § 182-120I, the community
impact analysis shall include a separate section describing the market
feasibility of the proposed community, documenting the demand for
age-restricted units and the types of dwelling units proposed.
A. Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership
or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of the
entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract shall be developed
under single direction in accordance with an approved master plan and
declaration of restrictive covenants pursuant to §§ 182-63.24 and
182-63.25 herein, respectively, and in accordance with approved
subdivision and/or land development plans as shall be required. The
master plan, declaration of restrictive covenants, and development
agreement required in Subsection D of this section shall be binding
upon all assignees or purchasers of property in the District.
§ 182-63.20 WATER § 182-63.21
176:681
§ 182-63.22. Development regulations.
B. Sewer and water facilities. The tract shall be served by public sewer
and public water facilities deemed acceptable by the Board of
Supervisors.
C. Development plans. In addition to the master plan required pursuant to
§ 182-63.24 herein, actual application for development of all or part of a
tract of land in this District, shall be accompanied by subdivision and/or
land development plans which shall comply with Chapter 154 of the
Township Code, Subdivision and Land Development. The plans shall be
subject to the tentative, preliminary, and final plan stages in accordance
with the requirements of that chapter.
D. Development agreement. In addition to the declaration of restrictive
covenants required pursuant to § 182-63.25 herein, approved
development of all or any portion(s) of a tract in this District shall be
executed in accordance with a development agreement in form and
substance satisfactory to the Township. The owner, developer and
Township shall enter into said agreement embodying all details
regarding compliance with this article to assure the binding nature
thereof on the overall tract and its development, which agreement shall
be recorded with the final development plan for the tract, or phases(s)
or portion(s) thereof, as appropriate. Should any final plans be amended
subsequent to original recording, an approved amended final plan shall
be recorded, together with an amended development agreement, as
necessary.
A. Density. The maximum density for development pursuant to this article
shall be 2.5 dwelling units per developable acre. A density increase of
up to .25 dwelling unit per developable acre may be permitted as a
conditional use by the Board of Supervisors (for a potential maximum of
2.75 dwelling units per developable acre) in the event a minimum of
10% additional open space, above and beyond that which is required by
§ 182-63.22C herein, is provided. Regardless of the proposed ownership
of the by right required open space, said additional open space shall be
offered for dedication to the Township, which shall have the discretion
to accept or reject the offer. In the computation of density, whether by
right or as a conditional use, the number of units shall be rounded down
to the nearest whole number. Compliance with the standards in this
article does not guarantee that the maximum number of dwelling units
will be achievable in all cases. The applicant's ability to develop the
maximum number may be reduced as a result of the applicant's choices
of dwelling types, building and/or lot sizes, physical constraints of the
development site, or other factors.
B. Lotting exclusion. In order to allow the maximum flexibility in site
design and ownership arrangements, lotting is not required in any
development built pursuant to this article, nor is any minimum lot size.
However, in cases wherein lots are not utilized, however:
§ 182-63.21 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.22
176:682
(1) There shall be an area equivalent to the normally required lot area
provided for each dwelling unit.
(2) The distances between units and road rights-of-way (or equivalent
rights-of-way in the case of private roads) shall be the same as if lot
lines are provided, with the exception that along lot lines on which
any form of zero-lot line single-family detached dwelling unit is
coincident, a maintenance easement shall be required on any
abutting lot, the minimum width of which shall be five feet.
C. Open space. A minimum of 30% of the tract shall be permanently
preserved as open space.
(1) There shall be a reasonable mix of active and passive areas, with
maximum preservation of existing environmental amenities in the
areas left for passive recreational use.
(2) Adequate open space area shall be provided for active use and shall
be developed in such manner and with facilities compatible with
the population who will reside in the community. Facilities specified
in § 182-63.19B(2) herein or alternative appropriate facilities shall
be provided.
(3) The open space and recreation plan for any development proposed
pursuant to this District shall be submitted for review by the
Township Park and Recreation Committee.
(4) All open space areas provided, exclusive of any offered for
dedication to and accepted by the Township, shall be maintained by
a homeowners' association or similar entity, as approved by the
Township Board of Supervisors.
D. Access restriction. No dwelling unit within the age-restricted
residential community may take access directly from any road with a
feeder or higher classification, regardless of whether said road is
existing or proposed. All dwelling units shall gain access from
residential roads, internal access roads, drives, courts, or similar
arrangements.
E. Public road and property boundary setback. There shall be a minimum
setback to any lot line or equivalent lot line of 50 feet from the ultimate
right-of-way of any existing frontage roadway or proposed public road
of feeder or higher classification and from any property boundary of an
age-restricted residential development.
F. Other building setbacks. In addition to those prescribed in other
subsections of this section, building setbacks shall be as prescribed in
this subsection, unless a greater setback is explicitly or implicitly
required by other provisions of this chapter or by the buffer
requirements in § 182-63.23 herein, respectively.
§ 182-63.22 WATER § 182-63.22
176:683
(1) From the right-of-way line of any internal street in the community
or, in the absence of a right-of-way line, from the equivalent rightof-
way line (defined as a line five feet back from the edge of the
cartway/curbline): 20 feet.
(2) Distance between sides of two adjacent dwelling units: 10 feet.
(3) Distance between rear of two adjacent dwelling units (or between
the side of one unit and rear of an adjacent dwelling unit): 30 feet.
(4) From a common parking area serving residential units (or access
road thereto) or from a solid waste collection facility or other
service area (if separate from a parking area): 20 feet.
(5) From a dwelling unit to an outdoor recreation facility associated
with the development but not housed in a building (as permitted in
§ 182-63.19B(2) herein): 30 feet.
(6) From a dwelling unit to another permitted nonresidential building
or parking area serving nonresidential uses within the community
(or access road thereto): 30 feet.
(7) On either side of any entry road, for a distance of at least 100 feet
along the existing intersecting roadway (measured perpendicular
to the ultimate right-of-way lines of the entry road), the setback in
which no structure or parking facility shall be placed (with the
exception of entrance area guard stations, entrance roads, ponds,
stormwater basins, or cart paths), shall be: 75 feet.
G. Height regulations. The maximum height for all buildings shall be as
follows:
(1) For all residential buildings: 35 feet.
(2) For a community center building: 40 feet; however, the number of
habitable stories shall not exceed three.
(3) All other permitted buildings: 18 feet.
H. Coverage standards. The following standards shall apply to the
development tract (tract area approved for conditional use) as a whole:
(1) Maximum building coverage: 15%.
(2) Maximum impervious coverage: 25%.
I. Architectural standards. Age-restricted dwellings shall be subject to the
following standards:
(1) The applicant shall prepare a set of architectural characteristics for
the homes and community center in the development, including
floor plans, elevations, perspective sketches, and building
materials, subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors, with the
advice of the Township Planning Commission. Building styles, bulk,
§ 182-63.22 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.22
176:684
window and door placement, roof pitch and proportions shall be
compatible with the existing character of the area. A minimum of
three different exterior designs will be required to provide a more
interesting visual variety.
(2) The architectural characteristics shall be approved as a condition
of conditional use approval and shall be recorded with the
development agreement. Significant variations from the approved
characteristics shall require additional conditional use approval
when determined necessary by the Board of Supervisors.
(3) It is not intended that the Board of Supervisors dictate the
architectural characteristics but that an acceptable set of
standards be chosen by the applicant and adhered to consistently
throughout the development. The community center shall be of a
compatible architectural design.
(4) The architectural plans should specify the basic building
configurations and provide the opportunity for specific potential
additions such as porches, patios, decks, or additional rooms.
These additional features must be compatible with the original
architectural standards.
(5) Major architectural features, such as structural bay windows,
porticoes, and dormers, shall be required for a minimum of 25% of
the age-restricted dwelling units.
J. Utilities. All proposed utility lines (electrical, telephone, cable TV,
internal security system lines, etc.) within the age-restricted residential
community development shall be placed underground in accordance
with the requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development, of the Code of the Township, § 154-28D.
K. Lighting. Lighting facilities for the residential areas, community center,
roads, and parking areas shall be provided as needed and arranged in a
manner which protects the existing frontage roads and neighboring
properties from direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
Lighting shall also be arranged to avoid direct glare into the proposed
residences. All lighting shall meet the applicable requirements of
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, § 154-40.
L. Signs. All signage to be installed in any location within an agerestricted
development shall comply with all requirements for
residential signs, as stipulated in Article XIX of this chapter. All signage
shall be of compatible materials and design with the buildings and other
street furniture found in the development and shall be of a coordinated
design throughout the development.
M. Parking. Parking requirements in the ARR District shall be as follows:
(1) For the residents of each dwelling unit, parking shall be as required
in § 182-179A of this chapter.
§ 182-63.22 WATER § 182-63.22
176:685
(2) For guest parking, the applicant shall demonstrate that there is
sufficient on-street parking available. If this cannot be
demonstrated to the Township's satisfaction, in addition to the
parking as required in Subsection (1) above, 1/2 space per dwelling
unit shall be provided.
(3) For any community center facility, the parking shall be based on the
maximum legal occupancy as defined by the Building Code.145
Three quarters of one parking space shall be provided for each
person of maximum legal occupancy. Dependent upon the specific
mix of uses proposed in the community center facility, the Board
may require additional parking to be held in reserve in accordance
with the allowance contained in Subsection M(5) of this section. If
additional parking is to be installed, such additional parking shall
not exceed twice the number of spaces otherwise required by this
article.
(4) Parking lot landscaping shall be required and shall follow the
requirements contained in Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development, § 154-36E.
(5) When conditions warrant, the use of reserve parking is
encouraged. The requirements of § 182-180 of this chapter shall be
applicable.
(6) All other applicable requirements for off-street parking, as
contained in Article XXII, shall be enforced in an age-restricted
development.
(7) At least one loading/unloading area shall be provided for any
community center facility. Such area(s) shall be placed in such a
location that there is no interference between service vehicles and
parking/vehicular circulation for patron parking.
N. Trash and refuse areas. Provision shall be made for the storage of trash,
refuse, garbage and recyclables, whether inside a building(s) or within
a walled or fenced area outside the building(s). The walls or fences of
such trash and refuse areas must shield the contents of the enclosure
from direct view from any residences and shall be of compatible design
and materials with the building(s) which it services. Proper ingress and
egress must be provided for removal of the trash, refuse, garbage and
recyclables, without conflict with parked vehicles or circulation within
the parking area. Around the nonparking lot side(s) of any enclosure,
landscaping shall be provided to soften the appearance of the
enclosure.
O. Additional development regulations. The following additional
regulation(s) shall be applicable to an age-restricted residential
community in recognition of the unique type of development which it
represents, wherein the Township believes such regulation(s) to be
145. Editor's Note: See Ch. 60, Building Construction.
§ 182-63.22 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.22
176:686
§ 182-63.23. Landscape and buffer requirements.
adequate based upon review and recommendation of the Township
Engineer.
(1) Secured or gated road entrances to the development may be
permitted.
(2) Private culs-de-sac or courtyards may be permitted which exceed
the maximum permitted length as stipulated in Chapter 154 of this
Code, as long as emergency access, as may be required by the
Township, is provided.
A. A coordinated landscape plan, showing street (shade) trees, buffering
as required herein, and any additional landscaping proposed within the
entire community, shall be submitted. Landscaping shall be installed,
and the landscape plan drafted, in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, § 154-12G.
B. General landscaping requirements. Landscaping throughout the
community shall be planned in accordance with the following
guidelines:
(1) Shade trees shall be installed along all public and private streets, in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development, of the Code of the Township, § 154-36C.
However, if it is more appropriate based upon the site design
proposed, some or all of these trees may be redistributed
elsewhere throughout the community, with the approval of the
Township.
(2) Based upon review of the submitted landscape plan, the Township
may require landscaping in addition to those minimal requirements
herein where unusual field conditions exist or if circumstances
arise which were not contemplated by this article.
C. General buffering requirements. General buffer requirements shall be
followed, as stipulated in Subsection D of this section; specifications for
the various buffer types listed herein shall be as stipulated in Chapter
154, Subdivision and Land Development, § 154-36D(5). In those
instances in which berms are not required, they may be used as a
substitute for some of the plant material in a specific buffer situation if
the Township concurs, in its review of the landscape plan, that the
berms equal or exceed the buffering qualities necessary in that specific
buffer situation. Buffers shall be installed in those situations as
prescribed herein unless berms are permitted by the Township as
substitutions.
D. Buffers for dwelling units:
(1) Between a dwelling unit and an existing frontage roadway: Buffer
Type 3 required.
§ 182-63.22 WATER § 182-63.23
176:687
§ 182-63.24. Master Plan requirement.
In any development pursuant to this article, a master plan of the entire
development tract shall be submitted for approval by the Board of
Supervisors. Once approved, said plan shall be recorded prior to or
simultaneously with the recording of the initial subdivision and/or land
development plan for any portion of the tract. The following are the
minimum requirements for said plan:
(2) Between a dwelling unit and an abutting, off-site residential use or
district: Buffer Type 2 required.
(3) Between a dwelling unit and an abutting, off-site nonresidential use
or district: Buffer Type 3 required.
(4) Between a dwelling unit and parking areas for residential units:
Buffer Type 1 required.
(5) Between a dwelling unit and parking area serving a nonresidential
use: Buffer Type 2A required.
(6) Between a dwelling unit and any other permitted building within
the age-restricted development: Buffer Type 2 required.
(7) Between a dwelling unit and an outdoor recreational facility
associated with the development, but not housed in a building:
Buffer Type 1 required.
(8) Between two dwelling unit groupings within the age-restricted
residential community: Buffer Type 1 required.
A. As a minimum, said plan shall be drawn to tentative sketch plan
requirements, pursuant to § 154-11 of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development. The master plan shall show relationships between
the proposed developed areas of the tract with open space areas. It
shall show how development of the entire tract, once executed in
accordance with this plan, will function cohesively as an integrated
development. The master plan shall depict proposed buildings/building
groupings, lot lines, vehicular circulation, parking, usage of other open
space areas, and a generalized landscaping scheme for the entire tract.
The master plan shall not replace the need for a tentative sketch plan
submission for individual phases or sections of the proposed
development as would otherwise be required by Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development, § 154-10A.
B. Preservation of natural features shall be assured; demonstration of this
shall be documented through the master plan and on subsequently
required subdivision and/or land development plans and landscape
plans. The following shall be addressed in terms of natural features
preservation:
§ 182-63.23 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.24
176:688
(1) Floodplains and wetlands shall be protected in accordance with the
Floodplain Conservation District, Article III of this chapter, and
§ 154-12C(5)(d) of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, respectively, as well as all applicable state
and federal regulations.
(2) Steep slopes shall be protected in accordance with the Steep Slope
Conservation District, Article XVIII of this chapter. When in the
opinion of the Township Engineer soils information does not
adequately depict steep slopes, topographic information shall be
used to supplement it.
(3) Disturbance of woodlands and other vegetation shall be minimized.
Section 154-35B, Tree preservation, of Chapter 154, Subdivision
and Land Development, shall be enforced. When more than 25% of
the trees with a minimum of a six-inch caliper must be removed,
compensatory planting shall be provided at a rate of one inch of
new caliper for every four inches of caliper removed. Every
replacement tree shall have a minimum of two-and-one-half-inch
caliper. Alternative types of compensatory planting may be
permitted, with the concurrence of the Township. No grade
changes, installation of impervious cover, or equipment storage
shall be permitted within the dripline of any tree to be preserved;
fencing shall be placed at the dripline before any site work is
begun, including tree removal or grubbing.
(4) Topsoil shall be protected in accordance with § 154-35C, Topsoil
preservation, of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development.
C. In addition to sidewalks which are otherwise required by Township
ordinances, pedestrian accommodations shall be included on the
development tract in locations logical to provide pedestrian movement
between buildings, between buildings and parking areas, and between
the residences and open space areas. Said pedestrian accommodations
shall be reflected on each subsequently approved land development
plan. In addition to accommodation for pedestrians, accommodations
shall be made for the handicapped. For any crossings of roadways with
a feeder or higher classification in accordance with the Township's
Ultimate Right-Of-Way Map, grade-separated accommodations shall be
provided unless the Township specifically approves an on-grade
arrangement. In any instance wherein a pedestrian or handicapped
crossing is proposed for a roadway of lesser classification, suitable
markings and signage shall be provided to alert motorists of the
crossing.
D. Any change to proposed lots, buildings, circulation, parking, or open
space configuration, landscaping, or extent of natural features
preservation which is substantive in the opinion of the Board of
Supervisors will necessitate a revised master plan to be submitted,
approved and recorded to replace any prior master plan(s). The Board
may permit modifications, including but not limited to, minor
§ 182-63.24 WATER § 182-63.24
176:689
§ 182-63.25. Declaration of restrictive covenants.
Accompanying the master plan, a Declaration of Restrictive Covenants must
be approved by the Township and recorded: Said declaration shall provide
all of the restrictions necessary to assure that a proposed development
will operate as depicted on the master plan and be in compliance with
the Federal Fair Housing Act amendments of 1988, or as subsequently
amended. The following are the minimum requirements for the declaration:
modifications to the layout of dwelling unit/lots, and minor adjustments
in the location of groupings of dwelling units, without submission of a
revised master plan. However, any changes approved, which are not
shown on the currently recorded master plan shall be reflected on
the master plan next required. No subdivision or land development for
any development on the subject development tract shall be approved
without a current recorded master plan.
E. The most current recorded master plan must contain a tabulation of the
ratio of open space provided on the development tract and a tabulation
of the number of dwelling units proposed and tract-wide density which
will result once said units are constructed. Said tabulations shall be
kept current through the most recently approved subdivision and/or
land development. A revised master plan must be recorded
simultaneously with the recording of each subsequently approved
subdivision and/or land development in order that the open space ratio
is continually updated. In addition, as each land development plan is
approved on an individual lot, a perpetual deed restriction shall be
placed on that lot restricting any further subdivision of that lot and
further restricting the amount of impervious coverage, to that
percentage which was approved as part of the land development plan.
F. Phasing of a development in the ARR District is expected due to its
scale. Phasing shall be reflected on the master plan, with changes to the
phasing required to be reflected on a revised master plan. Subdivisions
and/or land developments to implement all or a portion of any phase
shall be processed in accordance with the requirements for same in
Chapter 154 of the Township Code; their depiction on the master plan is
required once they are approved by the Township.
G. Subdivisions for mortgage or similar purposes may be permitted
following the requirements set forth in § 154-10F of Chapter 154 of the
Township Code. Subdivisions duly processed in accordance with the
usual requirements for same as contained in Chapter 154 to allow
sections and/or phase of the residential component of the development
to be developed separately and/or at different times, may also be
permitted. All subdivisions approved by the Township, regardless of
purpose, shall be reflected on the most recent master plan.
A. Provisions for the establishment of a homeowners' association(s) or
other similar entity as approved by the Township, with mandatory
§ 182-63.24 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.25
176:690
membership by the current owner of each dwelling unit represented in
the master plan.
B. Parties to the Declaration of Restrictive Covenants shall be bound by all
restrictions contained therein and shall include, at a minimum,
members of the aforementioned association(s), developer, mortgagees
of any lot and/or building on the tract, legal entity responsible for the
operations of the community center and its associated facilities and any
other parties having any interest in all or any part of the proposed
development and the Township. Provisions shall be included to permit
Township enforcement of the restrictions contained in the declaration
in the event that the responsible association(s) or other entities, fail to
do so.
C. Cross easements shall be included which shall assure proper circulation
throughout the development and access to all common recreation and
open space areas, roadways and common parking areas.
D. Maintenance provisions shall be included for any community/recreation
center and related facilities, other recreational facilities, circulation
network, common parking areas, landscaping and all other areas not
individually controlled by a homeowner in fee title.
E. Provisions to ensure that development of any buildings, parking, or
other similar improvements be prohibited on any lots to be utilized
solely for open space purposes as indicated on the most currently
approved master plan.
F. Provisions stipulating each lot owner/resident's rights with respect to
common areas.
G. Residency restrictions applicable to a development in this District shall
be included in the Declaration of Restrictive Covenants and as
additionally specified herein. Residents of an active adult community
shall be limited by deed, and by lease where applicable, to households
including at least one permanent resident age 55 years or older, and
shall prohibit occupancy by any person age 18 or younger, except as
follows:
(1) Individual units may occasionally house persons younger than age
18, such as grandchildren, provided they reside within the unit for
less than 120 days in any calendar year.
(2) This subsection shall not require members of a household to move
out of a dwelling unit if they qualified for residency at the time of
their initial occupancy and no longer meet the requirements for
residency because a resident age 55 or older died, divorced, was
placed in a nursing or other similar assisted care facility or
experienced a similar circumstance.
(3) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that an appropriate entity, such as a homeowners'
§ 182-63.25 WATER § 182-63.25
176:691
association, will have appropriate authority through deed
restrictions or similar mechanisms to ensure compliance with the
age limitations.
H. Any additional restrictions which will be applied to the development
which are stricter than existing Township regulations.
I. Any change to cross easements, maintenance responsibilities, or other
applicable restrictions which is substantive in the opinion of the Board
of Supervisors will necessitate an amendment to the Declaration of
Restrictive Covenants to be submitted, approved and recorded to
replace any prior such document. No subdivision or land development
for any development on the subject development tract shall be
approved without a current recorded Declaration of Restrictive
Covenants.
§ 182-63.25 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.25
176:692
ARTICLE VIID
OSR-2 Open Space Residential Community-2
[Added 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 458]
§ 182-63.26. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the community development objectives contained in Article
I, § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of this article
with respect to an open space residential community to establish reasonable
standards and criteria to permit such a community as a conditional use in
appropriate locations within the Township, based upon a specialized set of
development regulations appropriate for such a development.
§ 182-63.27. Use regulations.
An open space residential community is allowed only as a conditional use
in the R-1 Residential District, provided that the tract proposed for such
development meets the criteria specified in § 182-63.28 of this article, and
that the procedural requirements for conditional uses, set forth in § 182-204
of this chapter, are followed. An open space residential community shall
be construed to mean a planned development consisting of single-family
and low-density single-family attached residential use(s) combined with
the preservation of extensive areas of open space and/or parkland, along
with any appropriate recreational uses and uses incidental to such a
development, as hereinafter provided. Uses specifically permitted in an
open space residential community shall be the following:
A. To provide for such development in areas consistent with the goals of
the Township's Comprehensive Plan, which would be compatible with
and protect the existing community character.
B. To protect the existing vistas into and rural character of large tracts of
undeveloped land in the Township.
C. To provide for creative use of land in areas where it is desirable to
preserve open space, stream valleys, agricultural land heritage, tree
cover, historic buildings and other natural and man-made amenities.
D. To allow for a modest increase in permitted density in return for the
preservation of extensive areas of open space and/or parkland in
portions of the R-1 District where mixed-use development are
appropriate.
E. To encourage the creation of individual neighborhoods unified by the
open space features of the development.
F. To permanently protect areas of open space and parkland from future
development and, in so doing, implement the goals and
recommendations of the Township's adopted Open Space and
Recreation Plan.
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
§ 182-63.26 WATER § 182-63.27
176:693
§ 182-63.28. Prerequisites for conditional use application.
The following prerequisites shall be met for each application for approval of
an open space residential community:
B. Single-family attached dwellings.
C. Neighborhood or community park.
D. Common open space.
E. Accessory uses on the same lot or premises with and incidental to the
other uses permitted in this article. In addition to accessory uses
customarily incidental to a dwelling unit, appropriate accessory uses
may be permitted in a park, including but not limited to uses such as
rest rooms, parking for park users and other similar uses, subject to
approval by the Township.
(1) Accessory uses in an OSR-2 District may include a single-family
house occupied by a groundskeeper, security guard, maintenance
worker or by an individual(s) performing similar functions.
F. Communications antennas, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 182-21.1 of this chapter, mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, existing building or other existing structure, and
communications equipment buildings. Communications towers are
permitted only as a conditional use pursuant to § 182-38.3 herein.
G. No-impact home-based businesses in accordance with the standards set
forth in § 182-21.3 herein.
H. Home occupations, provided that all of the requirements of § 182-21.4
shall be met.
A. Any tract of ground or contiguous group of tracts which are the subject
of an application for conditional use approval as an Open Space
Residential Community-2, pursuant to this article, shall contain a
minimum of 100 acres.
B. Any tract of ground or contiguous group of tracts which are the subject
of an application for conditional use approval as an open space
residential community pursuant to this article shall have a minimum of
250 feet of frontage, measured along the ultimate rights-of-way, on
roads with an arterial classification that additionally has an interchange
with the Route 422 Expressway, according to the Township's adopted
Ultimate Right-of-Way Map.
C. A traffic impact study and community impact analysis, submitted in
forms as described in § 182-120E and I of this chapter, respectively,
shall be required for any conditional use application submitted
pursuant to this article. Evaluation of the community impact analysis
shall be in accordance with the procedure set forth in § 182-56 of the
chapter. In addition to those requirements of § 182-120I, the community
§ 182-63.27 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.28
176:694
§ 182-63.29. District regulations.
Any development proposed under the OSR-2 Open Space Residential
Community District-2 shall follow the district regulations under the OSR
Open Space Residential Community District, § 182-63.13 and the specific
Master Plan requirements as detailed in § 182-63.16.
§ 182-63.30. Development regulations.
impact analysis shall demonstrate how the proposed application meets
the legislative intent of this article. The community impact analysis
shall also demonstrate the probable recreational demand for any
proposed park, including the specific recreational amenities proposed.
Said section shall include, but not be limited to, a description of amount
and location of any tract(s) proposed as a park and all proposed
facilities to be developed therein. Said section shall indicate how the
proposed land and facilities relate to the specific findings and
recommendations of the Township's adopted Open Space and
Environmental Resource Protection Plan.
A. Overall development density.
(1) Density. The maximum density for development pursuant to this
article shall be 1.25 units per developable acre. A density increase
up to a maximum of 1.6 units per developable acre may be
permitted as a conditional use by the Board of Supervisors in the
event a minimum of 15% additional open space, above and beyond
that which is required by Subsection D herein, is provided.
Regardless of the proposed ownership of the by-right required
open space, said additional open space shall be offered for
dedication to the Township, which shall have the discretion to
accept or reject the offer.
(2) In the computation of density, whether by right or as a conditional
use, the number of units shall be rounded down to the nearest
whole number. Compliance with the standards in this article does
not guarantee that the maximum number of dwelling units will be
achievable in all cases. The applicant's ability to develop the
maximum number may be reduced as a result of the applicant's
choice of dwelling types, building and/or lot sizes, physical
constraints of the development site, or other factors.
(3) No more than 70% of any one dwelling type shall be permitted
within any OSR-2 development.
B. Lot size, width and yard regulations
(1) Single-family detached.
(a) Lot size: a minimum of 6,500 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 65 feet.
§ 182-63.28 WATER § 182-63.30
176:695
(c) Yard regulations shall be as follows:
[1] Front yard (measured from the ultimate right-of-way line):
20 feet.
[2] Side yard, each (measured from the property line): 10 feet.
[3] Rear yard (measured from the property line): 25 feet.
(2) Single-family attached portions of OSR-2 developments shall follow
the single-family attached lot size and setback requirements, as
outlined in § 182-52E of this chapter, unless otherwise stipulated
within this chapter.
(a) Where lots are not proposed, equivalent setback and building
spacing to those herein shall apply.
(3) Single-family attached homes will have a minimum setback from
the ultimate right-of-way of a feeder or higher classification road
abutting an OSR-2 District development of 50 feet.
(4) The minimum distance between a single-family attached home and
a single-family detached home lot line, within an OSR-2
development shall be 25 feet.
C. Access restriction. No dwelling unit within the open space residential
community may take access directly from any road with a feeder or
higher classification, regardless of whether said road exists or is
proposed. All dwelling units shall gain access from residential roads,
internal access roads, drives, courts or similar arrangements.
D. Open space. A minimum of 50% of the gross tract area of any
development proposed pursuant to this article shall be in open space
and/or parkland, exclusive of the cumulative area required for the
residential lots/units proposed.
(1) Access and potential dedication of any open space land will be
governed by the stipulations as outlined in § 182-63.14E of this
chapter; provided, however, all open space, except that needed for
yards or equivalent areas around dwelling units, shall be offered for
dedication to the Township.
E. Phasing of any development pursuant to this article shall follow
§ 183-63.14F.
F. Height regulations. The maximum height for all buildings shall be
prescribed in the R-3 District [reference § 182-52B(2)].
G. Building coverage.
(1) Single-family detached. Any individual residential lot shall have a
building coverage not greater than 35%.
§ 182-63.30 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.30
176:696
(2) Overall building coverage shall not exceed 25% of the portion of
the tract not set aside as an open space use.
H. Impervious coverage. Maximum impervious coverage for any OSR-2
development shall be 60% of the portion of the tract not set aside as an
open space use.
I. Utilities. All proposed utility lines (electrical, telephone, cable
television, etc.) within an open space residential community shall be
placed underground in accordance with the requirements of Chapter
154, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township,
§ 154-28D.
J. Lighting. Streetlighting for the residential areas shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development, of the Code of the Township, § 154-40. Lighting for
open space, park areas or related parking areas shall be provided as
needed and arranged in a manner which protects the existing frontage
roads and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous
interference of any kind. Lighting shall also be arranged to avoid direct
glare into the proposed residences. All lighting shall be as approved by
the Township.
K. All signage must meet the requirements of Article XIX of this chapter.
[Amended 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
L. Parking. Parking requirements in the OSR-2 District shall be as follows:
(1) Parking for single-family attached dwellings and parkland or
common open space shall follow the regulations as stipulated in
§ 182-63.14L.
(2) Parking for single-family attached homes:
(a) Single-family attached homes of OSR-2 developments may not
contain parking areas of three or more cars.
(b) No parking areas shall be located closer than 50 feet to a side
or rear property line of the development tract or a single-family
detached dwelling.
(3) In all other respects, the applicable provisions of Article XXII of this
chapter shall apply.
M. Additional development regulations. The following additional
regulation(s) shall be applicable to an open space residential
community, in recognition of the unique type of development which it
represents.
(1) Belgian block curb may be installed on private interior roads, in
lieu of the concrete curbing required in Chapter 154 of the
Township Code, Subdivision and Land Development, subject to
specifications approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 182-63.30 WATER § 182-63.30
176:697
§ 182-63.31. General landscaping requirements.
Landscaping throughout the community shall be planned in accordance
with the following guidelines:
(2) Secured or "gated" road entrances to the development may be
permitted.
(3) Private culs-de-sac or courtyards may be permitted which exceed
the maximum permitted length as stipulated in Chapter 154 of this
Code as long as emergency access, as may be required by the
Township, is provided.
(4) Sidewalks, as normally installed in conformance with the
requirements of Chapter 154 of the Township Code, may be
eliminated in portions of the community when they are replaced
with a pedestrian walkway system, based upon approval by the
Township.
A. Shade trees shall be installed along all public and private streets, in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development, of the Code of the Township, § 154-36C. However, if
it is more appropriate, based upon the site design proposed, some or all
of these trees may be redistributed elsewhere throughout the
community, with the approval of the Township.
B. Based upon review of the submitted landscape plan, the Township may
require landscaping in addition to those minimal requirements herein
where unusual field conditions exist or if circumstances arise which
were not contemplated by this article.
C. General buffering requirements. General buffer requirements shall be
followed, as stipulated in this section; specifications for the various
buffer types listed herein shall be as stipulated in Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development, § 154-36D(5). In those instances in
which berms are not required, they may be used as a substitute for
some of the plant material in a specific buffer situation, if the Township
concurs in its review of the landscape plan that the beans equal or
exceed the buffering qualities necessary in that specific buffer
situation. Buffers shall be installed in those situations as prescribed
herein unless berms are permitted by the Township as substitutions.
(1) Buffers for dwelling units:
(a) Between a dwelling unit and an existing frontage roadway:
Buffer Type 3 required.
(b) Between a dwelling unit and an abutting, off-site residential
use or district: Buffer Type 2 required.
(c) Between a dwelling unit and an abutting, off-site
nonresidential use or district: Buffer Type 3 required.
§ 182-63.30 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.31
176:698
(d) Between a dwelling unit and parking areas for residential
units: Buffer Type 1 required.
(e) Between a dwelling unit and parking area serving a
nonresidential use: Buffer Type 2A required.
(f) Between a dwelling unit and any other permitted building
within the age-restricted development: Buffer Type 2 required.
(g) Between a dwelling unit and an outdoor recreational facility
associated with the development, but not housed in a building:
Buffer Type I required.
(h) Between two dwelling unit groupings of single-family attached
units within the OSR-2 residential community: Buffer Type I
required.
(i) Between a grouping of single-family attached and single-family
detached dwelling lots within the OSR-2 residential
community: Buffer Type 2 required.
§ 182-63.31 WATER § 182-63.31
176:699

ARTICLE VIIE
Mixed Residential Community Option
[Added 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 528]
§ 182-63.32. Legislative intent.
In accordance with recommendations contained in the Upper Providence
Township Comprehensive Plan Update of 2010, Land Use Plan, it is hereby
intended that provisions be made to allow a variety of housing types,
including multifamily and small lot single-family detached dwellings, in
appropriate areas of the Township to:
§ 182-63.33. Use regulations.
A mixed residential community (MRC) may be permitted in the R-1
Residential District as a conditional use, provided that the tract proposed
for such development meets the criteria specified in § 182-63.34 of this
article and that the procedural requirements for conditional uses, set forth
in § 182-204 of this chapter, are followed. A tentative sketch plan
application meeting the requirements of Chapter 154 of this Code shall
be required for any proposed mixed residential community development
and shall be submitted as part of the conditional use application. Uses
specifically permitted in a mixed residential community shall be the
following:
A. Encourage alternative housing types to provide for the varied housing
needs of the community.
B. Provide for road improvements that are desirable to handle the traffic
demands of arterial roads, such as at intersections near Route 422.
C. Locate new residential development in close proximity to existing
developed areas thus preserving more open space in the less-developed
areas of the Township, and reducing pass through traffic in residential
areas by facilitating convenient access to Route 422.
D. Provide housing alternatives that will be environmentally sustainable
and compatible with varied surrounding land uses.
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Two-family detached dwellings and semidetached houses.
C. Single-family attached dwellings.
D. Common open space.
E. Accessory uses on the same lot or premises with and incidental to the
other uses permitted in this article. In addition to accessory uses
customarily incidental to a dwelling unit, appropriate accessory uses
may be developed in conjunction with any of the uses in Subsections A
through E herein, included but not limited to indoor or outdoor
§ 182-63.32 WATER § 182-63.33
176:701
§ 182-63.34. Prerequisites for mixed residential community
development.
The following prerequisites shall be met for each application for approval of
a mixed residential community development:
§ 182-63.35. Development regulations.
recreational facilities, community centers and other similar uses;
provided, however, that none is intended as an independent
freestanding use.
F. No-impact home-based businesses in accordance with the standards set
forth in § 182-21.3 herein.
A. Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership
or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of the
entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract shall be developed
under single direction in accordance with an approved plan.
B. Sewer and water facilities. The tract of land shall be served by public
water and sewer facilities deemed acceptable by the Board of
Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer.
C. Any tract of ground or contiguous group of tracts that are the subject of
an application as a mixed residential community development pursuant
to this article shall contain a minimum of 12 developable acres.
D. Any tract of ground, or contiguous group of tracts which are the subject
of an application for development pursuant to this article shall have a
minimum of 900 feet of frontage, measured along the ultimate rights-ofway
of the lot or lots on roads with an arterial or collector road
classification identified pursuant to the Township's adopted Ultimate
Rights-of-Way Map; and a portion of the tract shall be within 4,000 feet
from the center line of an interchange of Route 422.
A. Density and housing mix. The following shall apply to a mixed
residential community:
(1) Housing density will be based on the following:
(a) For a development under the mixed residential community
option, on a parcel with at least 900 feet of frontage on an
arterial and collector road, and less than 30 developable acres,
density shall be no more than four units per developable acre.
(b) For a development under the mixed residential community
option, on a parcel with at least 1,000 feet of frontage on an
arterial and collector road, and 30 developable acres or more,
but less than 45 developable acres, density shall be no more
than three units per developable acre.
§ 182-63.33 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.35
176:702
(c) For a development under the mixed residential community
option, on a parcel with at least 1,000 feet of frontage on a
collector road, with 45 developable acres or more, overall
density shall be no more than two units per developable acre.
(d) Density bonus. For a development under the mixed residential
option with more than 60 developable acres, a minimum of
1,000 feet of frontage on both an arterial and collector road,
density may be increased to three units per developable acre.
Application of this density bonus will require an additional 10%
of open space set aside, as required by Subsection J herein.
(2) Housing type and mix will be based on the following:
(a) For a development under the mixed residential community
option, on a parcel with frontage on an arterial and collector
road, and less than 20 developable acres, will be exclusively
one type of dwelling unit; no mixture of those housing types
outlined herein will be permitted.
(b) For a development under the mixed residential community
option, on a parcel with frontage on an arterial road, and less
than 30 developable acres, but more than 20 developable
acres, 25% or more of the dwelling units must be single-family
detached.
(c) For a development under the mixed residential community
option, on a parcel with frontage on an arterial and/or collector
road, and greater than 30 developable acres, 40% or more of
the dwelling units must be single-family detached.
(d) Any single-family attached and two-family detached units must
be within 1,500 feet of the ultimate right-of-way for the arterial
road, as shown on the Township's Ultimate Right-of-Way Map,
and have a clear roadway connection to that arterial road.
B. Perimeter tract setback from property lines and streets.
(1) Buildings shall have a minimum setback of 75 feet from the
ultimate right-of-way line of an arterial or collector road, as defined
in the Township's Ultimate Right-of-Way Map.
(2) Buildings that are single-family detached dwellings shall have a
minimum setback of 50 feet from any other tract perimeter
property line that does not abut another tract eligible for
development as a mixed residential community under this article.
(3) Buildings that are not single-family detached dwellings shall have a
minimum setback of 100 feet from any other tract perimeter
property line that does not abut another tract eligible for
development as a mixed residential community under this article.
§ 182-63.35 WATER § 182-63.35
176:703
(4) Buildings shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet from any tract
perimeter property line that abuts another tract eligible for
development as a mixed residential community under this article.
C. Lot size, width and yard regulations.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(a) Minimum lot size: 12,500 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 90 feet.
(c) Yard regulations shall be as follows:
[1] Minimum front yard: 30 feet.
[2] Minimum side yard, each: 10 feet, aggregate of 30 feet.
[3] Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(2) Two-family detached dwellings and single-family attached
dwellings.
(a) The minimum distance between a building containing singlefamily
attached dwellings or two-family detached dwellings
and a single-family detached dwelling lot line shall be 35 feet.
(b) The minimum distance between buildings containing twofamily
detached dwellings or single-family attached dwellings
shall be 25 feet.
(c) Two-family dwellings and single-family attached dwellings
shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet from public road rightof-
way within a mixed residential community and a minimum
setback of 10 feet from internal private roads, driveways,
common driveways, or alleys for the front, rear and sides of
buildings containing such dwellings.
(d) Buildings containing two-family detached dwellings or singlefamily
attached dwellings shall have a minimum setback of 15
feet from the edge of pavement for parking spaces that are
either perpendicular or parallel to such buildings, excluding
driveway spaces in front of garages, which shall have no
setback. No parking shall be located closer than 30 feet to a
tract boundary line or 50 feet to an external road right-of-way.
D. Height regulations. The maximum height of buildings shall be 35 feet.
Accessory structures shall not exceed a height of 15 feet, except a
community center, which shall not exceed a height of 35 feet.
E. Building coverage.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings. Any individual residential lot
shall have a building coverage of not greater than 30%.
§ 182-63.35 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.35
176:704
(2) Overall building coverage for the entire tract shall not exceed 25%.
F. Building length. The maximum length of a building containing dwellings
shall not exceed 150 feet.
G. Parking regulations. Parking shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) For single-family detached dwellings, two-family detached
dwellings, single-family attached dwellings: See § 182-179A.
H. Signs. Signs shall be permitted subject to the requirements of Article
XIX of this chapter.
I. Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress
to and from public streets and highways serving a Mixed Use
Community without causing undue confusion or interference with the
normal traffic flow. The Board of Supervisors shall satisfy itself
concerning the adequacy of the adjacent thoroughfares to carry the
additional traffic generated by the development as well as to the street
frontage of the proposed development. Applicable PennDOT approvals
and permits will be required for final plan approval as part of any
subsequent land development reviews. Substantial completion of
required access and frontage improvements prior to issuance of any
certificates of occupancy is required. All development within the MRC
shall interconnect with other MRC development through a mutually
agreed street plan submitted at the time of conditional use application.
J. Recreation and open space. The developer shall provide open space
areas suitable for the number of dwellings proposed, which may include
passive areas or active recreational areas like playgrounds, tot-lots, and
walking paths necessary for the convenience of the prospective
residents. In this regard, a minimum of 20% of the developable acreage
of the tract proposed for development pursuant to this article shall be
set aside as open space. Where a community center or clubhouse is
provided to serve the needs of the prospective residents as part of the
open space area, the minimum open space required may be reduced to
60% of the required open space set aside as required herein. Such open
space shall be governed by the provisions of Article IVA, Open Space
and Recreational Facilities, of Chapter 154 of this Code, Subdivision
and Land Development, except that the requirement to first offer the
open space for dedication to the Township for public use set forth in
§ 154-40.5 shall not apply in a mixed residential community
development.
(1) For all MRC developments, area defined as open space may not
include areas less than 45 feet in width or land area within 10 feet
of any building, community facility, or other accessory use.
K. Buffers.
§ 182-63.35 WATER § 182-63.35
176:705
(1) Tract buffer area requirements may be included within the
required tract or yard setbacks. Along external street rights-of-way
(the abutting collector and arterial roads), the required buffer shall
meet the standards set forth in Chapter 154 of this Code,
Subdivision and Land Development, for a Buffer Type 2. At the
Township Board of Supervisors' discretion, berming as required in
the Buffer Type 2A may be required if berms are required to create
a more opaque screen.
(2) Along all other tract perimeter property lines not abutting another
tract eligible for development as a mixed residential community
under this article, the required buffer shall meet the standards set
forth in Chapter 154 of this Code for a Buffer Type 3.
L. Landscape planting. Landscaping shall be considered an integral part
of any mixed residential community development, and shall follow the
requirements of Chapter 154 of this Code, Subdivision and Land
Development, §§ 154-36 and 154-36.1.
M. Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as needed and
arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and neighboring
properties from unreasonable direct glare or hazardous interference of
any kind. Lighting facilities shall be required for the safety and welfare
of the residents of the development, shall be installed by the applicant
at its expense and shall be designed in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter 154 of this Code, Subdivision and Land Development,
§ 154-40.
N. Common areas and facilities.
(1) The shared provision of certain facilities serving the entire MRC
development, such as parking lots, interior pedestrianways,
driveways, lighting facilities, landscape planting areas, buffers,
open space and recreation facilities is encouraged. These may be
located either on individual lots or in common areas. In all cases,
provisions satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors must be made
for their perpetual maintenance and care. The use of these facilities
may be restricted to the residents of the MRC development, and
shall be maintained by the owner of the MRC Community, a
homeowners' association or similar entity.
(2) Specifically, in regards to recreation facilities, if shared facilities
are not provided, each individual development within the MRC
options must provide recreational facilities such as a community
center, exercise facility, playground or tot-lot, or pool. Other
recreational facilities may be proposed and installed on approval
from the Board of Supervisors.
(3) Those tracts with frontage on arterial roads, as defined herein,
shall at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors set aside area for
a future bus stop for mass transit, if there is not existing bus
service to the tract.
§ 182-63.35 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.35
176:706
O. Design standards. The following design standards shall apply to all
MRCs. The Board may agree to vary these standards as part of the land
development process if the applicant provides designs judged to be of
equal or higher quality.
(1) All residences shall have consistent exterior wall treatments on all
sides.
(2) Residences shall utilize facade ornamentation, varying building
setbacks, differing windows, variations in rooflines, entry
treatments, dormers, offsets, recesses and other similar devices to
break or minimize the scale of residential buildings.
(3) The exterior of each residence shall be composed of dominant
facing material, comprising 60% or more of the exterior elevation
of that building. Dominant exterior materials may include any of
the following: wood; brick; stone or stone veneer (cultured stone or
equivalent); concrete masonry unit (CMU), but only as split face
block or block molded with a textured surface; glass; stucco and
synthetic stucco; and faux or synthetic finishes, elements or
materials realistically simulating any of the foregoing.
(4) Dominant exterior building materials may not include any of the
following: aluminum siding; vinyl siding (unless it qualifies under
the preceding subsection); smooth-faced CMU; tilt-up concrete
panels: and highly reflective or mirrored glass.
(5) All roofs shall have dimensional, architectural shingles with
varying roof accents, including, where desired, standing seam
metal roof accents.
(6) All residence doors facing the front of the residence shall be wood,
wood-stained or faux wood finish.
(7) Each single-family attached or two-family detached dwelling shall
have a variation of at least four feet in depth at least every three
units or each 90 lineal feet, whichever is less.
(8) Sidewalks and walkways within the development shall utilize only
the following options: concrete, with smooth trowel edging and
broom finish; stamped or patterned concrete; unit/brick pavers;
bluestone, flagstone or cobblestone; and/or asphalt (but only for
fitness trails or trails located in open space areas. Designated
crosswalks will be provided where sidewalks cross driveways and
parking areas.
P. Trash stations. All trash containers serving multiple-dwelling units shall
be screened by six-foot-high three-sided masonry enclosures, plus a sixfoot-
high solid metal operating gate to shield the trash container.
Q. Property maintenance area. A suitable outdoor area shall be provided
on site for the storage of landscaping, snow removal, and other
§ 182-63.35 WATER § 182-63.35
176:707
property-maintenance-related materials if it is determined that such
areas are necessary for the operation of the use. Such area shall not
occupy any required parking spaces, and shall be located at locations
screened from view from public roads and surrounding properties to
the extent feasible.
R. Plan modifications. The Board of Supervisors may grant modifications
from the specific requirements herein, and those of Chapter 154 of this
Code, Subdivision and Land Development, provided that the spirit and
intent of this article and the statement of community development
objectives contained in § 182-2 are observed and that the overall
densities specified herein are maintained.
§ 182-63.35 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-63.35
176:708
ARTICLE VIII
VP Village Preservation District
§ 182-64. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives
contained in § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent
of this article with respect to VP Village Preservation Districts to encourage
the preservation of the existing character and residential life-styles of the
Mont Clare portions of Upper Providence Township which exhibit a mixture
of single-family detached and two-family dwellings on smaller lot sizes
than those found throughout the Township. Furthermore, it is the intent
of this district to guide the future development or redevelopment of these
neighborhoods in the Township by providing strict control of conversions
to multiple-family dwellings, home occupations and the introduction of
incompatible uses or activities within the designated Village Preservation
Districts in order to preserve and enhance their present character and,
thus, avoid rapid deterioration or transition to the detriment of the local
residents and the general welfare of Upper Providence Township.
§ 182-65. Permitted uses.
In a VP District, a building may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for any of the following uses and no other:
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Two-family dwellings (twins and duplexes).
C. The following uses when authorized as a special exception:
(1) Home occupations, except that a clinic, barbershop, beauty parlor,
tearoom, tourist home, animal hospital or any similar use shall not
be deemed to be a home occupation and that no goods shall be
publicly displayed on the premises.
(2) Conversions of residential structures. The conversion of a singlefamily
dwelling or other building into a dwelling for two or more
families, subject to the following requirements:
(a) Each dwelling unit shall not have less than 600 square feet of
floor area, plus an additional 100 square feet of floor area for
each additional bedroom in excess of one.
(b) The lot area per family may not be reduced to an amount less
than 33% of that required by this article.
(c) No more than three families shall be permitted to occupy such
buildings.
(d) The off-street parking requirements of this chapter shall be
met.
§ 182-64 WATER § 182-65
176:709
§ 182-66. Development regulations.
The following regulations shall apply in the VP District:
(e) The conversion shall be authorized only for a large dwelling
with relatively little economic usefulness as a conforming use.
(f) The Zoning Hearing Board may prescribe such further
conditions and restrictions as they may consider appropriate to
preserve the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
D. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any
permitted use.
E. As a special exception only, communications antennas, in accordance
with the provisions of § 182-21.1, mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, existing building or other existing structure, and
communications equipment buildings only upon a showing, in addition
to any other that may be required under this chapter that denial of such
a special exception would have the effect of prohibiting the provision of
personal wireless service. Communications towers are not permitted.
[Added 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 372]
F. No-impact home based businesses in accordance with the standards set
forth in § 182-21.3 herein. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
G. Home occupations, provided that all of the requirements of § 182-21.4
herein shall be met. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
A. Area, width, yard and coverage regulations. The following area, width,
coverage and yard regulations shall apply in the VP District: [Amended
12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
Dwelling Type
Development
Requirements
Single-Family
Detached
Dwelling
Two-
Family
Dwellings
Twin Duplex
Minimum lot area (square
feet)1
6,000 3,000 3,000
Minimum lot width (feet)2 40 20 40
Minimum front yard
(feet)3
20 20 20
Minimum side yard (feet)4 15 8 (1 side
only)
15
Minimum rear yard
(feet)5
40 40 40
§ 182-65 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-66
176:710
Dwelling Type
Development
Requirements
Single-Family
Detached
Dwelling
Two-
Family
Dwellings
Twin Duplex
Maximum building
coverage (percentage)6
30 40 30
NOTES:
1Per dwelling unit.
2Per dwelling unit measured along the building line.
3Measured from the ultimate right-of-way line.
4Measured from the property line, except that the distance from a
street line shall be at least 10 feet.
5Except that an accessory use may be erected within the rear yard not
closer than 10 feet to the rear property line.
6Calculated as a percentage of lot area.
B. Sewer and water facilities. Each lot shall be served by public sewer and
centralized water facilities deemed acceptable by the Board of
Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer.
C. Height. No building hereafter erected in the VP District shall exceed a
height of 30 feet.
D. Parking and signs. All parking spaces and all signs erected in the VP
District shall be in accordance with the requirements of Articles XIX
and XXII of this chapter. [Amended 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
§ 182-66 WATER § 182-66
176:711

ARTICLE IX
CL Cluster Development District
§ 182-67. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives
contained in § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of
this article with respect to CL Cluster Development Districts to encourage a
creative approach to the use of land, the creation of usable open space areas
throughout the Township and more efficient development patterns in terms
of roads and utilities, where applied for as a conditional use to the Board of
Supervisors. Specifically, this article is intended to provide for a variation in
the normally required lot sizes for single-family detached dwellings in the
R-2 and R-3 Residential Districts, so that the present permitted densities of
dwelling units contemplated by the minimum lot sizes prescribed therefor
are maintained on an overall basis, and desirable open space, tree cover,
historic sites, recreation areas, scenic vistas, stream valleys or other lands
for public purposes are preserved within these developments for the benefit
of the residents of the development and in furtherance of the general
welfare of Upper Providence Township.
§ 182-68. Prerequisites for cluster development.
The following necessary conditions must be satisfied by an applicant
seeking to develop in a clustered fashion before the Board of Supervisors
will grant a preliminary plan approval for a subdivision plan prepared in
accordance with the requirements of this article.
A. Tract size. The tract of land to be developed shall not be less than 25
acres in area.
B. Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership
or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of the
entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract will be developed
under single direction in accordance with an approved plan.
C. Natural and man-made amenities. At least 15% of the gross land area of
the tract to be subdivided must contain any one or combination of the
following natural and manmade amenities:
(1) A floodplain, as defined in Article III. [Amended 12-16-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
(2) Slopes of 15% or greater, as defined in Article XV.
(3) Mature permanent vegetation.
(4) Other natural features of irreplacable value.
(5) Historic sites, as identified by the Montgomery County Resource
Protection Plan, or other sites supported by appropriate
documentation or endorsement of local historic societies.
§ 182-67 WATER § 182-68
176:713
§ 182-69. Application of cluster development concept. [Amended
2-21-1978 by Ord. No. 197; 9-2-1982 by Ord. No. 231]
Following the review and recommendations of the Township Planning
Commission and according to the procedures outlined in § 182-204, the
Board of Supervisors may:
(6) Land suitable for active recreational use, located adjacent to and as
an integral part of the features of the site detailed in Subsection
C(1) through (5) above.
D. Sewer and water facilities. The cluster development shall be served by
centralized water facilities and public sewer facilities, which may
include capped sewers, deemed acceptable by the Board of
Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer.
E. Development plan. The application for development shall be
accompanied by a plan or plans in accordance with § 182-71 showing
the detailed use of the entire tract, which plan or plans shall also
comply with all requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development, and other applicable ordinances, unless these
requirements are relaxed in accordance with § 182-69H. The plan shall
clearly designate the proposed use of each area of the tract.
F. Development stages and permits. The development of a tract carried
out in either a single phase or in stages shall be executed in accordance
with a development agreement. The owner, developer and Township
shall enter into said agreement embodying all details regarding
compliance with this article to assure the binding nature thereof on the
overall tract and its development, which agreement shall be recorded
with the final development plan.
A. Authorize a reduction of not less than 10% and not more than 20% in
the required lot area per single-family detached dwelling in the R-2
Residential District when both capped sewers are installed by the
developer and public water facilities are available, a reduction of not
less than 20% and not more than 30% in the required lot area per
single-family detached dwelling in the R-2 Residential District when
both public sewer and water facilities are available and a reduction of
not less than 10% in the required lot area per single-family detached
dwelling in the R-3 Residential District when both public sewer and
water facilities are available. The totals, shall be 15% and 25%,
respectively, while the total average reduction for R-3 Residential
Districts shall be 15%.
B. The number of dwelling units permitted by utilizing the provisions of
this article shall be determined by the procedure set forth in § 182-71B
herein.
C. Permit modification of the yard and other area requirements of the R-2
and R-3 Residential Districts, provided that in no case shall a building
§ 182-68 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-69
176:714
be located less than 25 feet or 20 feet from the ultimate right-of-way
line in accordance with the respective required lot areas in the R-2
Residential District, and in no case shall a building be located less
than 20 feet from the ultimate right-of-way line in the R-3 Residential
District.
D. Permit modification of the required side yards as follows: Each building
shall have two side yards of not less than seven feet in the R-2 and R-3
Residential Districts, but the aggregate width of the side yards shall not
be less than 30 feet and 25 feet in accordance with the respective
required lot areas in the R-2 and R-3 Residential Districts.
E. No reduction in the required rear yard shall be allowed in either
district.
F. Permit modifications of the lot width requirements of not more than
30% and 25% in accordance with the respective lot sizes in the R-2
Residential District and not more than 25% in the R-3 Residential
District. Properties abutting a cul-de-sac or curvilinear street shall have
a width at the ultimate right-of-way line of not less than 50 feet in the
R-2 Residential District and not less than 40 feet in the R-3 Residential
District.
G. Permit an increase of the maximum building coverage in the R-2
Residential District to 20% and 25% in accordance with the respective
lot sizes in the R-2 Residential District and 30% in the R-3 Residential
District.
H. Permit modification of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development, and/or this chapter as follows: The uniqueness of each
proposal for cluster development may require that the specifications for
the width and surfacing of roads, alleys, ways for public utilities, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, stormwater drainage, water supply and
sewage collection shall be subject to modification from the
specifications established in other provisions of said chapters. The
Board of Supervisors may, therefore, waive or modify the specifications
otherwise applicable for a particular aspect of a cluster development,
where the Board finds that such specifications are not required in the
interest of the residents of the cluster development and that the
modification of such specifications will not be inconsistent with the
interest of the entire Township. Proposed specifications and standards
that are inconsistent with those required under prevailing Township
regulatory codes shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer.
I. A summary of the normal requirements of applicable sections of the R-2
and R-3 Residential Districts is included in the following table. A
summary of the clustering modifications which may be authorized by
this section is also included.146
146. Editor's Note: The table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 182-69 WATER § 182-69.1
176:715
§ 182-69.1. No-impact home-based businesses. [Added 3-15-2004 by
Ord. No. 436]
No-impact home-based businesses shall be permitted by right in a CL
District in accordance with the standards set forth in § 182-21.3 herein.
§ 182-69.2. Home occupations. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
Home occupations shall be permitted by right in a CL District, provided that
all of the requirements of § 182-21.4 herein shall be met.
§ 182-70. Open space requirements. [Amended 2-21-1978 by Ord.
No. 197; 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 342]
The requirements listed in Article IVA, Open Space and Recreational
Facilities, of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, shall govern
the required open space created by cluster development in R-2 and R-3
Districts.
§ 182-71. Plan submission requirements.
In addition to the information to be shown on plans submitted in accordance
with Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, applications for
cluster development proposals shall include the following:
A. The location and size of the site, with evidence supporting the general
adequacy for development.
B. The proposed residential density of the development, as determined by
the following procedures:
(1) To determine the number of dwelling units permitted in a proposed
cluster development, the procedures outlined in § 182-44G shall
apply. In applying the provisions of that section, the term "lotaveraging
alternative" shall be construed to mean "cluster
development district," and the term "R-1 Residential-Agricultural
District" shall be construed to mean "underlying zoning district."
[Amended 6-18-1990 by Ord. No. 299]
(2) For a cluster development, the required area for open space then
shall be determined by applying the total average lot area
reduction in the respective districts, multiplied by the number of
lots derived in Subsection B(1) above.
C. The location, size, accessibility and proposed use of the open space, the
manner of ownership and maintenance and a copy of the covenant to be
incorporated in the individual deeds.
D. The height and placement of buildings, with evidence of variation in
setbacks from rights-of-way and variation of lot sizes.
E. The feasibility of proposed utility and drainage systems.
§ 182-69.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-71
176:716
F. Plans and renderings indicating the design, unity and aesthetic
relationship of buildings and landscaping within the proposed
development, which may include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Landscaping.
(a) Streets.
(b) Open spaces and courts.
(c) Pedestrianway treatment.
(d) The use of existing landscape.
(e) Recreational areas.
(2) Siting.
(a) Visual focal points.
(b) The use of existing physical features (topography, vegetation,
floodplains and watercourses, etc.).
(c) View.
(d) Sun and wind orientation.
(e) The circulation pattern.
(f) The physical environment.
G. The text of covenants, easements and existing restrictions or those to
be imposed upon the land or structure, including provisions for public
utilities and trails for such activities as hiking or bicycling, if desired.
H. In the case of plans involving staged development over a period
exceeding two years, a schedule showing the time and manner of
completion of all phases of construction.
§ 182-71 WATER § 182-71
176:717

ARTICLE IXA
Transfer of Development Rights District
[Added 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 495]
§ 182-71.1. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the community development objectives contained in Article
I, § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared that the intent of this
article with respect to the TDR Transfer of Development Rights District to
establish reasonable standards and criteria to protect unique and valuable
environmental features and preserve areas identified through Township
plans as important open space. It shall be further the intent of this District:
§ 182-71.2. Statutory authority; conditional use requirement.
§ 182-71.3. Establishment of sending and receiving districts.
A. To preserve such lands entirely within the R-1 Residential Agricultural
District (R-1) and the R-2 Residential District (R-2), or other areas
consistent with the recommendations of the Township's Comprehensive
Plan and Open Space and Environmental Resource Protection Plan, and
to ensure that lands are preserved for such use for the future.
B. To reduce the negative impacts of suburbanization and sprawl within
the receiving districts.
C. To protect property rights by allowing landowners whose immediately
developable land, without the need for remediation, is intended for
preservation to transfer their rights to develop to other areas of the
Township deemed more appropriate for development based upon the
availability of community facilities and infrastructure.
A. This district is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Sections
603(c)(2.2) and 619.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, under the terms of which development rights are acknowledged
to be severable and separately conveyable from a sending area to a
receiving area.
B. A conditional use approval, pursuant to the regulations herein and the
procedural requirements of § 182-204 of this chapter, shall be
prerequisite to the use of the transfer of development rights option.
A. The R-1 and R-2 Districts shall be the sending district for the purposes
of the TDR program. Parcels shall be entirely within either one or both
of these districts.
B. Sending tract.
(1) A sending area tract shall comply with at least one of the following
requirements:
§ 182-71.1 WATER § 182-71.3
176:719
§ 182-71.4. Use regulations.
(a) The sending area tract shall be identified within the Township's
most recently amended Open Space and Environmental
Resource Protection Plan. Such parcels shall either be located
in designated preservation areas or be an individual parcel
recommended for preservation.
(b) The property has at least a portion of any boundary along the
banks of the Schuylkill River or Perkiomen Creek.
(c) More than 33% of the site shall contain wetlands, steep slopes,
floodplains, native woodlands worthy of protection, as
determined by the Township, or a combination of such
features. Such constraints shall be accurately delineated in the
required sending area yield plan based on documented source
material.
(d) An established agricultural operation shall be occurring on at
least 85% of the site; this specifically excludes those operations
which are considered commercial composting by industry
standards (i.e., 500 cubic yards throughput per annum);
composting which is accessory to an on-site agricultural
operation need not be excluded. If a site with a composting
operation meeting these standards is remediated to the
satisfaction of the Township Engineer or other appointed
Environmental Professional, the site can then be reevaluated
by the Township as a potential sending site.
(2) Determination as to the qualifications of any tract as a sending area
tract based on the criteria contained herein shall rest solely with
the Township.
C. The maximum number of transferable development rights available to
owners of eligible lots shall be determined by submission of a yield
plan, drawn pursuant to the requirements § 182-44G of this chapter,
and approved by the Township. Any fractional yield shall be rounded
down to the next whole number.
D. A development right shall be transferable (by sale or otherwise) only to
qualifying properties within the following receiving districts: R-1 and
R-2 Districts pursuant to the requirements of § 182-71.5A.
A. Land from which TDRs have been sold may be used only for the
following purpose:
(1) Permanent preservation of open space or agricultural land by
appropriate deed restriction or legal mechanism acceptable by the
Township. Prior to determining the ownership of the property to be
preserved (restricted), the applicant may offer it for dedication to
the Township. In deciding whether or not to accept any public open
space, the Board of Supervisors may obtain the recommendation of
§ 182-71.3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-71.4
176:720
the Parks and Recreation Board, Planning Commission, or
Township staff. Any preserved property, if not to be accepted for
dedication by the Township, shall be maintained in the same
manner as it was prior to the transfer of development rights or in a
manner acceptable to the Township. This land can be managed by a
homeowners' association, a recognized conservation organization,
the landowner severing his/her rights, or other group as approved
by the Township, once the mechanism for conservation is in place.
If the managing organization is a homeowners' association, the
organization and governing documents must adequately provide
for the preservation and conservation of the land to the satisfaction
of the Township.
B. Transfer of development rights.
(1) The transferor may transfer only up to the number of lots indicated
on the approved yield plan drawn pursuant to the requirement of
§ 182-71.3C herein to an appropriate R-1 or R-2 property as defined
in § 182-71.5A herein. If only a portion of the lots based on the yield
plan are transferred, the remaining land may be developed
pursuant to applicable zoning standards and subject to all other
applicable regulations of this chapter and of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development, or as open space, agricultural
land, in the same state as prior to the transfer of development
rights, or in a manner agreeable to the Township; provided,
however, that a minimum of 50% of the sending tract must be
restricted from future development as the result of utilizing
transfer of development rights.
(2) All parties involved in any transfer of development rights
conditional use application must submit with that application a
statement of ownership or equitable ownership of the receiving
parcel and a letter of agreement from the transferor to sell
development rights from the sending parcel.
(3) No TDRs created by this article shall be transferable beyond the
boundaries of Upper Providence Township.
(4) TDRs may only be transferred to a qualifying tract as defined in
§ 182-71.5A herein, unless the Township purchases or accepts
them in accordance with the provisions of Subsection B(5) herein.
(5) The Township may purchase development rights, may accept
ownership of development rights through transfer by gift, and may
resell or retire development rights. If they are resold, they must be
resold in accordance with all applicable provisions of this article.
(6) If a single-family home and/or farmstead remains on a sending tract
after the transfer of development rights transaction has been
completed, the owner will retain all rights for that singledevelopment
unit; this will include the ability to build farm related
buildings, including and similar to: storage buildings, barns, silos,
§ 182-71.4 WATER § 182-71.4
176:721
animal coops/pens, and other out-buildings typical to residential or
farm development, as long as all development complies with the
applicable zoning standards.
(7) Nothing within this article is meant to preclude the county,
commonwealth, or other conservation organization from
purchasing the development rights from any tract within the
Township and holding them in perpetuity.
C. Severance of transferable development rights.
(1) Transferable development rights which have been permanently
severed shall be conveyed by a deed of transferable development
rights duly recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in and
for Montgomery County. The deed of transferable development
rights shall specify the tract or tracts of land within eligible
receiving area(s) to which the rights shall be permanently attached
or that the rights shall be transferred to the Township, retained by
the transferor, in gross. Such deeds of transferable development
rights shall be suitable in form and in substance to the Township
Solicitor.
(2) The deed of transferable development rights which severs the
development rights from the sending area tract(s) shall be
accompanied by appropriate legal instrument, as provided in
§ 182-71.4A(1), in a form and substance acceptable to the Township
Solicitor and subsequently will be recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds in Montgomery County.
(3) All deeds of transferable development rights shall be accompanied
by a title report for the sending area tract(s). Such title report shall
be prepared within 10 days prior to submission of the deed of
transferable development rights and shall be suitable in form and
in substance to the Township Solicitor.
(4) If less than all of the development rights eligible for transfer
hereunder are to be transferred, the applicant and/or sending area
landowner shall indicate in the deed of transferable development
rights the disposition of any retained development rights.
D. Sending area conservation restrictions.
(1) Final plan approval for any plan utilizing transferred development
rights shall be conditioned upon the recording of the deed of
transferable development rights and the restrictive covenant(s) or
conservation easement in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in and
for Montgomery County.
(2) If the owner of the sending tract is not retaining the parcel, the
restrictive covenant(s), deed restriction, or conservation easement
shall designate the Township, a bona fide conservation organization
§ 182-71.4 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-71.4
176:722
§ 182-71.5. Development regulations.
acceptable to the Township or homeowners' association, at the
Township's sole discretion, as the beneficiary or grantee.
(3) The restrictive covenant(s), deed restriction, or conservation
easement shall apply to the sending area tract(s) from which
development rights are sold and shall specify the number of
development rights so severed as well as any to be retained. No
portion of the sending area tract(s) used to calculate the number of
development rights which shall be severed shall be used to satisfy
minimum yard setbacks, lot area or any other area and bulk
requirements for any development rights which are to be retained
for any other future development.
(4) All owners from the tract(s) from which development rights are
severed shall execute the deed of transferable development rights
and any restrictive covenant(s) or conservation easement. All lien
holders of the tract from which development rights are severed
shall execute a joinder and/or consent to the deed, restrictive
covenant(s) and/or conservation easement.
A. Standards for single-family detached residential development using
TDRs. TDRs may be utilized only for the development of single-family
detached dwellings. A single-family detached residential development
utilizing TDRs shall be known as a "subdivision with transferable
development rights."
(1) Development rights previously severed or land previously
restricted from development by covenant or deed restriction are
not eligible for severance and transfer and shall be subtracted from
any applicable TDR calculations.
(2) Tracts eligible for receiving TDRs must be at least seven acres in
area and shall be located entirely within one or both of the R-1 or
R-2 Districts.
(3) The receiving tract must have direct access to a feeder or higher
classification roadway as defined by the Township's adopted
Ultimate Right-Of-Way Ordinance and Map.
(4) At least some portion of the perimeter of the receiving tract shall be
adjacent to a commercial, office, or industrial district or be
adjacent to a R-3 or R-4 District or a residential development with
an average lot size of 30,000 square feet or less.
(5) The receiving area tract shall not be identified within the
Township's most recently amended Open Space and Environmental
Resource Protection Plan, as located in designated preservation
areas therein as interpreted by the Township, nor shall it be an
individual parcel recommended for preservation, or be a property
fronting the Schuylkill River or Perkiomen Creek.
§ 182-71.4 WATER § 182-71.5
176:723
(6) At least 85% of the receiving tract shall be free of environmental
constraints, including steep slopes, woodlands, floodplains, and
wetlands or other features which would preclude more intensive
development than the traditional existing zoning without benefit of
TDR.
(7) If any side of the TDR subdivision is adjacent to a residential
district or use with lots of 30,000 square feet or greater and/or a
vacant, developable parcel, a Buffer Type 2, as described in
§ 154-36D(5)(c) of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development, shall be required.
(8) Where the boundary of the tract proposed for development of a
TDR subdivision abuts a tract zoned and/or used for nonresidential
purposes, a Buffer Type 3 pursuant to § 154-36D(5)(e) of Chapter
154, Subdivision and Land Development, is required. However, a
fifteen-foot buffer with plants and proportional requirements
associated with a Buffer Type 2, pursuant to § 154-36D(5)(c) of
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, may be used
instead if the applicant chooses to provide a solid fence along the
portion of the common boundary line which is adjacent to the
above-mentioned districts and/or uses.
(9) Houses in a TDR subdivision that are not otherwise subject to
specified buffers within this section shall be set back a minimum of
30 feet from adjacent properties not part of a subdivision with
transferable development rights.
(10) All required buffer areas shall be maintained by a homeowners'
association or other group as approved by the Township.
(11) The maximum number of lots which may developed on a qualifying
receiving tract shall be the sum of the number of lots identified
through the yield plan for the receiving tract [reference:
§ 182-71.5A(13) herein], plus the number of lots to be transferred
to the receiving parcel, in addition to a number equal to no more
than 20% of lots to be transferred to the receiving tract.
(a) Should it not be possible to construct all of the lots to be
transferred from a sending tract to a single qualifying
receiving tract, said lots may be distributed among two or
more qualifying receiving tracts. Any fractional yield shall be
rounded down to the next whole number.
(b) Compliance with the standards in this article does not
guarantee that the maximum number of dwelling units will be
achievable in all cases. The applicant's ability to develop the
maximum number may be reduced as a result of the applicant's
choices of dwelling types, building and/or lot sizes, physical
constraints of the development site, or other factors.
§ 182-71.5 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-71.5
176:724
§ 182-71.6. Dimensional regulations.
(12) Tracts eligible for receiving TDRs must be serviced by public sewer
and public water.
(13) To determine the maximum number of lots which could be
permitted on a receiving tract prior to the addition of transferred
development rights, a yield plan of the tract must be submitted
using standard existing zoning requirements, drawn pursuant to
the requirements of § 182-44G of this chapter, and approved by the
Township.
B. All single-family detached dwellings proposed for construction in a
subdivision with transferable development rights shall follow the design
guidelines in § 154-36.4 of Chapter 54, Subdivision and Land
Development.
A. Lot area and dimensional criteria for a subdivision with transferable
development rights in the R-1 District. Lot area and dimensional
criteria applicable to the subdivision with transferable development
rights in the R-1 District shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum lot size: 15,000 square feet with an average of 17,500
square feet or greater.
(2) Minimum yard areas:
(a) Front yard: 30 feet.
(b) Side yard: 15 feet each.
(c) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(4) Maximum lot building coverage: 20%.
(5) Maximum lot impervious surface ratio: 35%.
(6) Maximum building height:
(a) Principal use: 35 feet.
(b) Accessory use: 15 feet.
B. Lot area and dimensional criteria for a subdivision with transferable
development rights in the R-2 District. Lot area and dimensional
criteria applicable to the subdivision with transferable development
rights in the R-2 District shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet with an average of 12,000
square feet or greater.
(2) Minimum yard areas:
§ 182-71.5 WATER § 182-71.6
176:725
§ 182-71.7. Township rights.
The Township reserves the right to amend this article in the future, and
the Township expressly reserves the right to change the manner in which
the number of development rights shall be calculated for a tract in the
sending area and the manner in which development rights can be conveyed.
The Township further expressly reserves the right to terminate its own
transferable development rights program at any time. No owner of the land
or owner of development rights shall have a claim against the Township for
damages resulting from a change in this article relating to the regulations
governing the calculation, transfer and use of development rights, or the
amendment thereof, or the abolition of the transferable development rights
program. If the transferable development rights program is abolished by
the Township, no developer may attach development rights to any tract in
the receiving area after the effective date of the ordinance abolishing the
transferable development rights program, unless a transfer of development
rights conditional use application in conformity with the provisions of this
article was filed prior to the effective date of such ordinance and thereafter
is continuously processed to approval, and, following such approval, a
complete subdivision and/or land development application applying such
rights is thereafter filed within two years from the date of such approval.
(a) Front yard: 25 feet.
(b) Side yards: 10 feet each.
(c) Rear yard: 25 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
(4) Maximum lot building coverage: 30%.
(5) Maximum lot impervious surface ratio: 40%.
(6) Maximum building height:
(a) Principal use: 35 feet.
(b) Accessory use: 15 feet.
§ 182-71.6 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-71.7
176:726
ARTICLE X
MH Mobile Home Development District
[Added 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 209]
§ 182-72. Legislative intent.
§ 182-73. Use regulations.
Mobile home developments are allowed only as a conditional use in the R-3
Residential District, provided that the tract to be used as a mobile home
development meets the criteria specified in § 182-74B of this article. The
uses which are permissible in a mobile home development are as follows:
A. In addition to the statement of community development objectives set
forth in § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the specific
intent of this article with respect to the MH Mobile Home Development
District to establish standards of performance and promote the
desirable benefits which planned mobile home developments may have
upon the community and the residents within them. It is further the
intent of this article to ensure the interdependency and compatibility of
proposed mobile home developments with essential utilities and
surrounding land uses in the Township.
B. It shall further be the intent of this district to:
(1) Reflect the changes in the technology of home building and land
development so that resulting economies may inure to the benefit
of those who need homes.
(2) Further the general welfare by extending greater opportunities for
better and more affordable housing to all present and prospective
residents of Upper Providence Township.
(3) Provide for better quality and greater variety in type, design and
layout of mobile home developments than has been evident in many
mobile home parks in the past by enforcing uniform standards,
desirable design criteria and encouraging innovative site design
approaches.
(4) Provide for a diversity in housing types and prices.
(5) Encourage mobile home developments that are beneficial rather
than detrimental to property values and the general welfare of the
area in which they are proposed.
A. Residential uses. A mobile home development may include mobile
homes of single width or multiple width or both, single-family detached
modular homes, conventionally built single-family detached homes or
any combination thereof, but shall not include travel trailers or motor
homes. No more than 40% of the total number of dwelling units in a
mobile home development may be conventionally built or modular
single-family detached dwellings. No mobile or modular home may be
§ 182-72 WATER § 182-73
176:727
occupied before furnishing the Township a copy of the Structural
Engineering Bulletin(s) indicating approval by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development of the dwelling or the
components of the dwelling.
B. Areas for nonresidential uses.
(1) No part of any mobile home development shall be used for
nonresidential purposes, except such uses that are required for the
direct servicing, recreation and well-being of the residents and for
the management and maintenance of the development and are not
otherwise prohibited by any provisions of this article; provided,
however, that a convenience commercial center may be allowed by
the governing body if no similar use exists or is actively proposed
within one mile of the mobile home development by accessway
available for use by the general public, and the applicant
demonstrates to the governing body's satisfaction through a
market study that such use is justifiable and will be supported
primarily by the residents of the mobile home development; such
market study shall be conducted using the standards outlined in
§ 182-89A. No such commercial center shall be opened until at
least 50% of the dwelling units in the mobile home development are
occupied. Signs, parking requirements and similar factors shall be
controlled by the same regulations that apply to commercial uses
located in other zones in the Township. In addition, the maximum
number of residential dwelling units permitted on the tract shall be
reduced by one for each 8,000 square feet of land or a part thereof
devoted to the convenience commercial center.
(2) Nothing in this article shall be deemed as prohibiting the rental,
sale or resale of a mobile home located on a mobile home stand and
connected to the pertinent utilities. Similarly, a model or display
area is permissible on a temporary basis provided those models are
developed in accordance with all applicable regulations of this
article and other applicable ordinances and the use of the models
for sales or rental promotion ceases when the project is fully
developed.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to the
maintenance, servicing and well-being of mobile home
development residents shall be permitted only as part of an
approved development plan for the site.
(2) Accessory uses on individual mobile home lots, customarily
incidental to mobile homes or other dwellings, such as storage
sheds, shall be permitted on the individual mobile home lots,
provided that the provisions of §§ 182-76 and 182-77 and other
applicable ordinances are complied with.
§ 182-73 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-73
176:728
§ 182-74. Conditional uses.
(3) Added rooms specifically designed by the mobile home
manufacturers for the enlargement of mobile homes and other
additions architecturally compatible with the unit may be joined
onto a mobile home, provided that all requirements of § 182-77 and
other applicable ordinances are met.
D. No-impact home-based businesses shall be permitted by right in an MH
District in accordance with the standards set forth in § 182-21.3 herein.
[Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
A. Procedure.
(1) Conditional use application. Any conditional use application shall
be processed in conformance with Article XXIV, § 182-204A, of this
chapter.
(2) Public hearing. A public hearing shall be held in compliance with
Article XXIV, § 182-204B, of this chapter.
(3) Development plan. If conditional use approval is granted for the
use of a tract of land for a mobile home development, within three
years after the date of conditional use approval, the development
plan shall be submitted and then processed and acted upon by the
normal procedures established in Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development, for all other subdivision and/or land
development plans. If development plans are not submitted within
the specified time period, the conditional approval is voided.
B. Criteria. A mobile home development may be allowed by the governing
body as a conditional use in the R-3 Residential District only pursuant to
the procedure specified in § 182-74A and subject to the following
standards. The burden of proving compliance with these standards
shall be on the applicant.
(1) The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership or shall
be the subject of an application filed by the owners of the entire
tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract shall be developed under
single direction and in the manner approved.
(2) Any parcel to be used as a mobile home development must have a
minimum tract area of 15 contiguous acres of land.
(3) At least 50% of the site must be composed of developable land as
defined in this chapter.
(4) Any site proposed for a mobile home development shall not be
subject to adverse environmental influence such as swamps,
marshes, garbage or rubbish disposal areas or other potential
breeding places for insects or rodents.
§ 182-73 WATER § 182-74
176:729
(5) Any site proposed for a mobile home development shall not be
subject to any hazard or nuisance such as excessive noise,
vibration, smoke, toxic matter, radiation, heat, odor or glare, as
defined by the governing body and all appropriate ordinances.
(6) The location of all mobile home developments shall be protected by
screening or other appropriate means against any undesirable offsite
views or any adverse influence, such as heavy commercial or
industrial use, heavy traffic or brightly lighted activities, from
adjoining streets and areas.
(7) Mobile home developments shall not be located directly abutting
conventionally built single-family detached housing or significantly
different unit value and density than the proposed mobile homes,
except where extensive natural buffering exists and will be
retained or can be created so as to functionally and visually
separate the two sites or where compatible units of modular or
conventionally built homes will be located in the mobile home
development adjacent to the existing residences. The developer
shall provide any necessary transition between differing residential
structural types, unit values and densities within the mobile home
development tract.
(8) Any site proposed for a mobile home park shall, in the opinion of
the governing body, be easily accessible to essential community
facilities and services, such as employment centers, shopping
centers, schools and police and fire protection. [Amended
10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 329]
(9) Every area to be used as mobile home park must be served
exclusively by the municipal sanitary waste disposal system and a
centralized water supply system, if those facilities are available
within 2,500 feet of any point on the boundary of the mobile home
park tract, and if each system is found to contain the available
capacity to serve the proposed development, or, alternately, the
area to be used as a mobile home development must, if it cannot
connect to either or both the centralized water supply and
municipal sanitary sewer systems, be served by a common single
water supply system serving all dwelling units and other structures
in the development and/or a common single sanitary sewer system
doing likewise, either or both of which, as applicable, must have
the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. Furthermore, those on-site facilities must, when
constructed, meet the following criteria: [Amended 10-17-1994
by Ord. No. 329; 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490; 6-2-2008 by Ord.
No. 490]
(a) The satellite system shall be designed and constructed in a
manner that will permit adequate connection to the centralized
or public system in the future.
§ 182-74 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-74
176:730
(b) The administrative structure for the satellite system shall be
organized in a manner that will facilitate easy interconnection
of the two systems.
(c) The developer shall be required to show proof that the satellite
system intended to serve the proposed development will not
interfere with any existing sewage disposal system or any
existing water supplies, be they wells for nearby properties or
sources of water for other community systems.
(d) At such time as the centralized or public system is constructed
to be within 2,500 feet of any point on the boundary of the
mobile home park tract, connection to it shall be mandatory,
and the cost of the eventual interconnection shall be borne by
the developer or the organization that is set up to own and
operate the satellite system.
(e) If after development occurs, the satellite water system is
deemed to be the cause of interference with existing water
supplies or the satellite sewer system is deemed to be the
cause of any pollution, extension of the centralized or public
systems may be required at that time. The cost of the extension
and hookup shall be borne by the developer or organization
owning and operating the satellite system.
(10) Any tract intended for a mobile home development must have
direct access to a feeder road (or a road of a higher classification),
as defined by Article IV of Chapter 151, Streets and Sidewalks,
which the Township governing body deems capable of
accommodating the transport of mobile home units, upon
recommendation of the Township Engineer. Plans evidencing the
provision for safe and effective ingress and egress to and from the
public streets and highways servicing the Mobile Home
Development District, without causing undue confusion or
interference with the normal traffic flow, shall be submitted to the
Township governing body and must be approved by the Township
Engineer, who shall make the determination based on the adequacy
of the thoroughfare to carry the additional traffic generated by the
mobile home development.
(11) The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the municipal
governing body that he has complied with or will comply with all
requirements of Chapter 179 of Title 25, Part I, Subpart D, Article
II, of the Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and with all other pertinent regulations
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which are applicable to
mobile home parks. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
§ 182-74 WATER § 182-75
176:731
§ 182-75. Density.
The total number of lots in a mobile home development shall not exceed
a maximum density of five per developable acre. All area not contained
in developable acreage as defined in this chapter shall be excluded from
density calculations. If for any reasons this maximum density is not
attainable on a particular tract due to the need to conform to the
requirements of §§ 182-77K and 182-78, the maximum permissible density
shall be reduced accordingly.
§ 182-76. Site design for conventionally built and modular homes.
§ 182-77. Site design for mobile homes.
A. The lot size required under the R-3 Residential District may be reduced
a maximum of 20% for lots which will be used for modular homes or
conventionally built single-family detached homes located within the
mobile home development. In addition, lot widths and setbacks may be
reduced for these lots in conformance with the Cluster District's
requirements (Article IX) for the R-3 District; specifically, the permitted
standards are as follows:
(1) Maximum lot width reduction: 25%.
(2) Minimum lot width at right-of-way line: 40 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard: 20 feet.
(4) Side yards.
(a) Minimum one side: seven feet.
(b) Minimum total for two sides: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard (no reduction): 40 feet.
(6) Maximum building coverage: 30%. (For all other lots in the MH
District, the maximum building coverage shall be governed by
§ 182-77I herein.)
B. All other requirements applicable to mobile homes as specified in
§ 182-77 remain applicable to modular homes and conventionally built
single-family homes.
A. Setback from tract boundary. No mobile home or other primary building
may be located closer than 40 feet to any boundary of a mobile home
development, regardless of whether that boundary abuts a lot, water
body, road or other right-of-way. In the event that a mobile home
development abuts another such development, this may be reduced to
25 feet.
B. Setback from streets. In no case shall the long side of a mobile home, or
any side of another primary building or accessory use, be located closer
§ 182-75 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-77
176:732
than 25 feet to the ultimate right-of-way line of any public street or to
the edge of the cartway or the equivalent right-of-way line, if applicable,
of a private interior roadway or to the edge of any common pedestrian
walkway, within a mobile home development; provided, however, that
the short side of a mobile home may be located no closer to these
facilities than 15 feet. No more than six homes in a row shall have the
same setback; where varied setbacks are utilized, the difference shall
be at least four feet.
C. Setback from common parking facilities. No mobile home or accessory
use shall be located within 25 feet of any common parking area.
D. Lot size. Individual mobile home lots in a mobile home development,
regardless of tenure, shall have a minimum lot size of no less than 5,000
square feet when on-lot parking is provided, excluding the area of any
access leg to a rear lot, except that this may be reduced to no less than
4,500 square feet when common parking is provided.
E. Lot width. No individual mobile home lot shall be less than 55 feet in
width at the building setback line, although this may be reduced to 45
feet where roofed additions are prohibited or where the applicant can
demonstrate that roofed additions can be added without violating the
provisions of Subsections F and H herein. No individual mobile home lot
shall be less than 25 feet in width at the right-of-way line of a public
street or the equivalent right-of-way line or the edge of the pavement of
a private street, as applicable.
F. Side and rear setbacks. No mobile home or accessory building may be
located closer than four feet to any side or rear lot line of an individual
mobile home lot; provided, however, that all minimum requirements of
Subsection H must be met, and provided further that accessory
buildings may be located on the lot line if physically joined to each other
with a common wall located on the property line.
G. Unit location on individual lots. Mobile homes placed on individual lots
are encouraged to utilize the minimal setbacks specified in Subsection
F and to be placed off-center on the lots so as to provide a large usable
open yard space and outdoor living area in one section of the lot.
H. Distance between structures. Mobile homes and roofed structures or
areas attached thereto shall be separated from each other and from
other buildings and structures other than accessory structures at their
closest points by a minimum of 20 feet; provided, however, that
whenever two mobile homes have their longest sides parallel or
essentially parallel to each other for more than 25% of the length of
either, the minimum distance between the two mobile homes shall be 30
feet. The sides shall be considered essentially parallel if they form an
angle of less than 45° when extended to intersect.
I. Lot coverage. The maximum coverage of any individual mobile home lot
by all primary and accessory buildings and structures, including
covered patios or decks, shall be no greater than 25%.
§ 182-77 WATER § 182-77
176:733
§ 182-78. Common open space.
At least 20% of the site area of the mobile home development must be in
common open space as defined herein, no more than 1/3 of which may be
required buffer area. The configuration and location of the common open
space must be consistent with the requirements of § 154-50I of Chapter
154, Subdivision and Land Development.
J. Height. No structure built in a Mobile Home Development District shall
exceed a height of three stories or a maximum of 35 feet.
K. Preservation of natural features. No mobile home or other structure
shall be located within an area defined as floodplain by the Township
floodplain ordinances,147 nor shall any mobile home be placed on steep
slope land having a natural grade of 15% or greater (as defined by
Article XVIII of this chapter, the Steep Slope Conservation District), nor
shall said steep slope land be graded to a lesser-percentage slope for
the purpose of accommodating a mobile home.
L. Design alternative. In order to allow clustering of lots designed to
encourage flexibility in site design and the preservation of natural
features and to maximize creation of accessibility of recreation areas,
the distance between structures, minimum lot width and minimum lot
size may be reduced up to a maximum of 10% upon approval of the
governing body, provided that at least 50% of all lots so reduced shall
directly abut a part of the common open space for a distance of at least
20 feet. An area equal to that by which each lot is reduced shall be
added to the minimum common open space specified in § 182-78. All
other regulations remain as stated herein.
147. Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Flood Damage Prevention, and Art. III of this chapter.
§ 182-77 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-78
176:734
ARTICLE XI
IN Institutional District
[Amended 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 338; 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 372;
5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 382; 7-3-2000 by Ord. No. 391; 7-3-2000 by
Ord. No. 393; 7-3-2000 by Ord. No. 394; 1-16-2001 by Ord. No. 399;
3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 413; 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 415; 6-3-2002 by
Ord. No. 416; 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 425; 12-1-2003 by Ord. No.
432; 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 439; 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 450;
10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 451; 3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 485; 4-7-2008 by
Ord. No. 486; 1-19-2010 by Ord. No. 507; 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517;
8-19-2013 by Ord. No. 530]
§ 182-79. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the community development objectives contained in § 182-2
of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of this article with
respect to IN Institutional Districts, which shall overlay and supplement
the existing or hereafter created underlying districts, to encourage the
preservation and subsequent logical and timely development of land for
institutional purposes, to assure the suitable design of institutions in order
to protect the environment of the adjacent and nearby neighborhoods and
to ensure that institutional development will take place only when served
by adequate public utilities. The protective standards in this article are
intended to minimize any possible adverse effect of an institutional
development on nearby premises.
§ 182-79.1. Overlay concept.
The Institutional District shall be deemed to be an overlay on designated
properties in Upper Providence Township.
A. In those areas of Upper Providence Township where the Institutional
District applies, the requirements of the Institutional District shall
supersede the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s).
B. Should the Institutional District boundaries be revised as a result of
legislative or administrative actions or judicial decision, the zoning
requirements applicable to the area in question shall revert to the
requirements of the underlying zoning district(s) without consideration
of this article.
C. The Institutional District shall apply to the following parcels (as
designated by the Montgomery County Board of Assessment Appeals),
including any successor parcels thereto. All successor parcels must be
approved by resolution by the Board of Supervisors. [Amended
12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 535; 1-20-2015 by Ord. No. 542;
12-4-2017 by Ord. No. 569]
§ 182-79 WATER § 182-79.1
176:735
Block/Unit Parcel Number
006-006 61-00-04447-00-1
007-001 610003169001
007-008 61-00-04456-001 (portion)
008-001 61-00-04459-007 (portion)
009-009
011-001 61-00-03928-00-7
011-002 61-00-03064-00-7
011-008 61-00-03061-00-1
011-018 61-00-03931-00-4
011-023 61-00-02923-00-4
011-027 61-00-02953-00-1
011-034 61-00-03934-00-1
011-035 61-00-02963-00-9
011-039 61-00-03027-00-8
012-040 61-00-01804-00-7
012-053 61-00-05272-00-4
016-022 61-00-04654-00-1
016D-034 61-00-04988-02-6
019-013 61-00-00193-00-7
019A-101 61-00-00197-80-4
020-064 61-00-05657-501
021-015* 61-00-01252-00-1
022-002 61-00-04675-00-7
022-003 Unknown
022-012 61-00-01210-00-7
022-016 61-00-01216-00-1
022-017 61-00-01216-50-5
022-018 61-00-01249-50-8
023-001 61-00-04476-00-8
023-002 61-00-04476-00-8
024-004 61-00-01138-00-7
024-012 61-00-00322-20-2
025-014 61-00-03316-00-7
025-032 61-00-03334-00-7
025-034 61-00-03343-00-7
025-035 61-00-03346-00-4
§ 182-79.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-79.1
176:736
Block/Unit Parcel Number
025-038 61-00-03349-00-1
025-040 61-00-03337-00-4
"Unknown" adj. to B025-U048 Unknown
025-055 61-00-03342-00-8
026-003** 61-00-00100-00-1
028-001 61-00-04750-00-4
029-006 61-00-00037-00-1
029-018 61-00-02679-50-9
61-00-00082-00-1
029-028 61-00-02746-00-1
029-029 61-00-02749-00-7
030-039 61-00-00631-00-1
031-029 61-00-00221-00-6
032-007 61-00-00205-00-4
032-008 61-00202-00-7
032-055 61-00-00203-6
032-056 61-00-00203-10-5
032-057 61-00-00203-20-4
032-082 61-00-00199-10-9
032-085 61-00-00199-05-5
042-003 61-00-00298-00-1
043-008? "Parcel V" 61-00-03698-00-3
043-010 61-00-01261-60-4
043-011 61-00-01545-90-5
045-010 61-00-02134-00-1
045-010 61-00-02137-00-7
046-016 61-00-02140-00-4
046-017 61-00-02143-00-1
046-025 61-00-02164-00-7
048-002 61-00-00340-00-4
056-006 61-00-05335-00-4
056-007 61-00-05332-00-7
057-010 61-00-01667-00-9
058-010 61-02473-00-4
059-011 61-00-05320-00-1
059-016 61-00-05329-00-1
§ 182-79.1 WATER § 182-79.1
176:737
§ 182-80. Permitted uses.
The following uses, and no others, shall be permitted in this district: the
construction, alteration or use of structures and/or land for:
Block/Unit Parcel Number
059-020 61-00-05330-00-9
060-017 61-00-04303-00-1
061-001 61-00-00817-00-4
061-024 61-00-00820-00-1
061-025 61-00-00823-00-7
062-006 61-00-03310-00-4
063-008 61-00-04261-00-7
066-010 61-00-03310-00-4
066-011 61-00-03232-00-1
067-006 61-00-01576-00-1
073-003 61-00-02140-00-4
079-033 61-00-02761-00-4
NOTES:
* Portion south of Rt. 113 removed
** In addition to the main property, a small triangular parcel of land
along west boundary of Block 26 Unit 1; assumed to belong to St.
Michael's and included in Institutional District.
1. Some areas include road, Schuylkill Canal and PECO rights-of-way.
2. Areas have been taken from information on tax maps and County
Board of Assessment records; where not available, areas have
been computed. Areas have also been computed where those
listed on maps have proven erroneous.
A. Churches, chapels or other places of worship and their adjunct
residential dwellings.
B. Convents and monasteries.
C. Institutional headquarters for educational, fraternal, professional,
religious and other nonprofit organizations of a similar nature.
D. Schools and other educational facilities less than 10,000 square feet of
floor area: private or public, day-care center, elementary, junior high
and high (including nonboarding or boarding), trade schools.
E. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses,
including but not limited to agriculture, offices, residences of
institutional employees and recreational facilities.
§ 182-79.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-80
176:738
§ 182-80.1. Conditional uses.
F. Communications antennas, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 182-21.1, mounted on an existing public utility transmission tower,
existing building or other existing structure, and communications
equipment buildings. Communications towers are not permitted.
A. The following conditional uses are permitted, when authorized by the
Board of Supervisors, pursuant to the procedural requirements set
forth in Article XXIV, § 182-204, of this chapter, and additional criteria
set forth in Subsection C below:
(1) Schools and other educational facilities with greater than 10,000
square feet floor area: private or public, day-care center, nursery,
elementary, junior high and high (including nonboarding or
boarding), trade schools.
(2) Libraries.
(3) Licensed nursing, convalescent home, residential care facility for
senior citizens, personal care home, assisted living residence, or
adult day care if in the same building as the personal care home or
assisted living residence.
(4) Cemeteries.
(5) Clinics.
(6) Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses,
including but not limited to agriculture, offices, residences of
institutional employees and recreational facilities. Accessory uses
to a residential care facility for senior citizens may include those
service facilities associated with a residential care facility,
including community facilities, congregate dining facilities,
personal care and health-care services.
B. The following conditional uses are permitted, when authorized by the
Board of Supervisors, pursuant to the procedural requirements set
forth in Article XXIV, § 182-204, of this chapter, and additional criteria
set forth in Subsection C below, and shall be on tracts with a minimum
size of 10 acres:
(1) Colleges, universities and theological schools and adjunct
dormitories and other uses customarily incidental to a school.
(2) Medical and surgical hospitals or sanitaria and philanthropic
institutions.
(3) Municipal buildings, offices, garages and other municipal uses.
(4) Camps, recreational facilities and open space preservation areas.
§ 182-80 WATER § 182-80.1
176:739
§ 182-81. Development regulations.
For all authorized buildings and uses, the following regulations shall apply:
(5) Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses,
including but not limited to agriculture, offices, residences of
institutional employees and recreational facilities.
C. Standards for consideration of conditional uses. The Board of
Supervisors shall determine that the following standards are met prior
to granting approval of a conditional use application:
(1) Access and frontage. The proposed use shall have direct access to a
feeder or higher classification road according to the Township's
adopted Ultimate Right-Of-Way Ordinance, Art. IV and Map. A
minimum of 300 feet of continuous frontage on at least one such
road shall be required. In the case of a unified development and
master plan approval as noted in § 182-81I, the 300 feet may be
part of an entire development, not just the institutional use.
(2) Density for the development types listed within Subsection A(3)
shall be as follows:
(a) Residential care facility for senior citizens: 12 dwelling units
per developable acre.
(b) Personal care home or assisted living residence: 15 dwelling
units per developable acre. In computing density for this use
type, every two beds shall constitute one dwelling unit.
(3) The maximum impervious coverage shall be 50% of the lot area of
the proposed development.
(4) All setbacks prescribed in § 182-81E shall be increased by 10 feet.
All buffers prescribed in said section shall also be increased by 10
feet. An additional 10 feet in setback on any property line abutting
an existing residential use shall be required, unless the proposed
use is a cemetery.
(5) Cemeteries have a minimum gross tract area of 10 acres.
(6) All other requirements contained in § 182-81 shall be met. In the
event of conflict between any requirements in said section with the
requirements contained in this section, the more restrictive shall
apply.
A. Area and width. No Institutional District lot shall be less than five acres,
and no Institutional District lot shall have a width of less than 100 feet
measured along the building line.
B. Lot coverage. The total area covered by buildings, parking lots and
vehicular accessways shall not exceed 50% of the total lot area. The
remaining 50% shall not include buildings, parking lots or vehicular
§ 182-80.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-81
176:740
accessways and shall be landscaped open space, woodlands,
appropriate recreational area, or similar nonintensive use; of that 50%
of open space, 30% of it must all be in one area, contiguous,
uninterrupted, not bisected by an accessway; it may be irregular in
shape, but the longest boundary shall be at least equal to 1/2 of the
frontage abutting the highest classification of road as identified in the
SALDO, and one other boundary shall be at least half as long as the
longest boundary. Of the remaining 20% of the open space area (50%
total open space less 30% contiguous and uninterrupted), 10% of that
20% may be impervious to accommodate walkways, utility pads, sport
courts, or similar uses. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 562]
C. Height. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 562]
(1) Buildings. The maximum height of any building shall be 70 feet;
however, for each foot over 40, one additional foot of setback must
be provided. Chimneys and steeples are included as a part of the
building height. Purely architectural elements (nonstructural) may
extend an additional 10 feet in height.
(2) Freestanding structures. Water towers, silos, radio antennas and
other similar freestanding structures may not include habitable
space and must provide one foot of setback for each foot of height.
D. Sewer and water facilities. The proposed institutional use shall be
served by a public sewer system and a public water supply system.
E. Building and parking setbacks. The following building and parking
setback requirements shall apply to all development in the IN
Institutional District:
Setback Requirement
Distance
(in feet)
Minimum Building Setbacks
From a feeder or higher
classification road, Buffer Type
1A required following
specifications in § 154-36D(5)
of Chapter 154, Subdivision
and Land Development
50
From a residential or village
road, Buffer Type 2A required
following specifications in
§ 154-36D(5) of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land
Development
50
§ 182-81 WATER § 182-81
176:741
Setback Requirement
Distance
(in feet)
From a residentially or
institutionally zoned or
developed property, Buffer
Type 3 required following
specifications in § 154-36D(5)
of Chapter 154, Subdivision
and Land Development
451
From any other property line,
Buffer Type 2 required
following specifications in
§ 154-36D(5) of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land
Development, except in the
case of a unified development
and master plan approval, in
which case there is no setback
to internal property lines
50
From interior drives or parking
lots, except in areas required
for loading or passenger dropoff,
and except in the case of a
unified development and
master plan approval, in which
there is no required setback to
internal property lines
15
From adjacent buildings (All
structures connected by
common rooflines or covered
walkways shall be considered 1
building.)
Distance equal to height of
taller building
Minimum parking setbacks
From a feeder or higher
classification road, Buffer Type
1A required following
specifications in § 154-36D(5)
of Chapter 154, Subdivision
and Land Development
25
From a residential or village
road, Buffer Type 2A required
following specifications in
§ 154-36D(5) of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land
Development
35
§ 182-81 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-81
176:742
Setback Requirement
Distance
(in feet)
From a residentially or
institutionally zoned or
developed property, Buffer
Type 3 required following
specifications in § 154-36D(5)
of Chapter 154, Subdivision
and Land Development
25
From any other property line,
Buffer Type 2 required
following specifications in
§ 154-36D(5) of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land
Development, except in the
case of a unified development
and master plan approval, in
which there is no required
setback to internal property
lines.
25
From another parking area,
except in the case of a unified
development and master plan
approval, in which there is no
required setback to internal
property lines.
20
NOTES:
1 Minimum required setback shall be increased one foot for each foot
or portion thereof of building height in excess of 35 feet.
F. General landscape requirements. In addition to the buffers required
pursuant to Subsection E herein, all other areas not devoted to
buildings or parking shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, ornamental
plants and grass or other appropriate ground cover or developed as
recreational space as described within § 182-81B herein.
G. Parking lot landscaping. For parking areas of more than 20 cars, a
minimum of 10% of the parking lot shall be devoted to interior parking
lot landscaping, exclusive of any other landscaping or buffering
requirements of this article. The minimum dimension of a planting
island shall be nine feet by 18 feet.
H. Landscape plan. A landscape plan shall be submitted for any
development in the IN District to document all proposed buffering,
general tract landscaping, and parking lot landscaping. Said landscape
plan shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of
§ 182-120.10 of this chapter.
§ 182-81 WATER § 182-81
176:743
I. Master plan. A master plan shall be required for all developments
proposed in this district with more than five developable net acres or
any parcel that is proposed to be subdivided from a larger parcel with
IN Overlay District designation. The master plan shall be prepared in
accordance with the following requirements: [Added 12-16-2013 by
Ord. No. 535]
(1) The master plan must be drawn, at a minimum, to the requirements
outlined for a tentative sketch plan, as detailed in § 154-11 of
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development.
(2) Master plan submissions must also show the following:
(a) Potential development of the entire tract, including potential
future subdivisions;
(b) Relationship between new and proposed lots and uses and how
those new and existing function as an integrated development;
(c) Relationship between existing and proposed buildings;
(d) Relationship between existing and proposed parking, both
internally and to the entire tract;
(e) Tabulation of the ratio of open space provided on the
development tract;
(f) Generalized stormwater areas;
(g) Generalized pedestrian amenities, including potential trail
locations and other outdoor areas for use by residents/
students;
(h) Existing and proposed vehicular circulation;
(i) Existing and proposed landscaping and buffer areas; and
(j) The demonstration of natural feature preservation as outlined
in the following:
[1] Floodplain and wetland delineation and preservation
within Article III herein and § 154-12.C.(5).(d) of Chapter
154, Subdivision and Land Development.
[2] Steep slope conservation within Article XVIII herein.
[3] Disturbance of woodlands and other vegetation as detailed
in § 154-35B of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development.
[4] Topsoil shall be protected in accordance with § 154-35C of
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development.
(k) Existing and proposed zoning tabulation.
§ 182-81 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-81
176:744
(3) Any change to proposed lots, buildings, circulation, parking,
landscaping or natural features which is substantive in the opinion
of the Board of Supervisors will necessitate a revised master plan
to be submitted, approved and recorded to replace any master plan
recorded prior to the proposed change. No subdivision or land
development for any development on the subject tract shall be
approved without a current recorded master plan.
(4) A revised master plan must be recorded simultaneously with the
recording of each subsequently approved subdivision and/or land
development, with the open space tabulation current through the
most recently approved subdivision or land development.
(5) As part of the master plan, internal setback within the IN Overlay
District and any other zoning district that are part of the master
plan can be freely disposed of in a unified plan. In such case, the
overall development shall be considered a single tract for purposed
of driveway access and parking. Reciprocal cross easements that
allow for common parking, internal vehicular access, stormwater
management, pedestrian interconnections, etc., between the lots
shall be provided.
(6) A declaration of restrictive covenants shall be required to
accompany any master plan submission. That declaration shall
provide all of the restrictions necessary to assure that a proposed
development will operate as depicted on the master plan. The
minimum requirements for the declaration of restrictive covenants
shall meet the minimum criteria outlined within § 182-120.8 within
this chapter.
J. Building articulation. For buildings with any individual facade 100 feet
or greater, building articulation shall be provided on each such facade.
For each 100 feet of facade, there shall be at least one recessed or
protruding building segment. Such segment shall be a minimum of four
feet in depth and 15 feet in width. At its discretion, upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors
may permit use of alternate building treatment to break up facades
longer than 100 feet. In order to evaluate proposed building treatment,
architectural drawings and elevations shall be submitted.
K. Property maintenance area. A suitable outdoor area shall be provided
on site for the storage of landscaping, snow removal, and other
property-maintenance-related materials, if it is determined that such
areas are necessary for the operation of the use. Such area shall not
occupy any required parking spaces, and shall be located at locations
screened from view from public roads and surrounding properties to
the extent feasible.
L. Pedestrian amenities, such as but not limited to benches and other
outdoor seating areas, paved walkways, plazas, or water features
compliant with ADA requirements shall be provided when
§ 182-81 WATER § 182-81
176:745
§ 182-82. Nuisance controls.
Institutional use(s) shall make provisions for control of each of the
following:
complementary to the proposed use. Design of pedestrian amenities
must be consistent with the overall concept for the proposed
development.
M. Limited subdivision of any tract proposed for development in
accordance with this article may be permitted subject to the
requirements of this section and also subject to the requirements for a
master plan and declaration of restrictive covenants as outlined within
§ 182-81I herein. Any subdivided lots may only be for uses outlined
within § 182-80.1A and B; those uses must meet all conditions outlined
within § 182-80.1C. Any lots proposed for subdivision shall meet the
following minimum requirements: [Added 12-16-2013 by Ord. No.
535]
Subdivision Requirements Dimensions
Minimum lot size 10 acres
Minimum lot width 250 feet
Maximum building coverage 10%
Maximum impervious coverage 35%
Average lot size 20 acres
A. Access. A planned system of efficient access, egress and internal
circulation of traffic which shall interfere minimally with nearby traffic
shall be required. Loading and unloading areas shall be provided where
deemed necessary and shall be located to the rear of the proposed use
and effectively screened from abutting residential districts, as set forth
in Article XXII herein. If the rear of the proposed use abuts existing
residential development, the Board of Supervisors may approve an
alternate location.
B. Lighting. Lighting shall be arranged in a manner which will protect
adjacent highways and neighboring properties from unreasonable
direct glare and shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the
Township, § 154-40.
C. Solid waste disposal. A plan for the weekly disposal of solid waste
material shall be required. All solid waste shall be stored in covered
containers either within a building or outside. Any trash disposal area
outside a building shall be surrounded with either a masonry wall or
opaque fence; in either case, a gate shall be provided for access to the
trash container(s). The wall or fence shall be designed to shield the
trash area from direct view of any adjacent property and must be at
§ 182-81 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-82
176:746
§ 182-83. Plan submission requirements.
§ 182-84. Signs; off-street parking and loading.
All signs and off-street parking and loading facilities shall comply with the
requirements of Articles XIX and XXII of this chapter.
least six feet high. No solid waste shall be stored closer than 50 feet to
any property line.
A. All proposals for development within the district shall comply with
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development.
B. All proposals for application of the IN Overlay District, and/or
development within the district, shall include a community impact
statement prepared in accordance with § 182-55 of this chapter; said
analysis shall be evaluated based upon the criteria in § 182-56 of this
chapter. All proposals shall also be accompanied by a traffic impact
statement prepared in accordance with § 182-120E of this chapter.
§ 182-82 WATER § 182-84
176:747

ARTICLE XII
NC Neighborhood-Convenience Commercial District
[Amended 2-21-1978 by Ord. No. 197; 9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 231;
9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 301; 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307; 6-1-1998 by
Ord. No. 372; 2-1-1999 by Ord. No. 380; 6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 416;
3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436; 10-15-2005 by Ord. No. 451; 12-3-2007
by Ord. No. 480]
§ 182-85. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives
contained in § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent
of this article with respect to NC Neighborhood-Convenience Commercial
Districts to provide for the orderly and planned establishment of retailcommercial
and professional office uses needed to meet the convenience
shopping and personal service needs of the neighborhoods of the Township
and to assure that the type and magnitude of commercial development is
compatible with the needs of the Township's growing population and the
commercial facilities in adjacent municipalities and to:
§ 182-86. Permitted uses.
In an NC Neighborhood-Convenience Commercial District, a building or
group of buildings may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used or
occupied for any of the following uses and no other:
A. Provide attractive and well-designed retail-commercial, professional
office and highway-business uses in planned districts, incorporating
unified design controls.
B. Minimize conflicts between said uses and adjacent residential
development.
C. Provide for sufficient and well-related parking facilities, loading areas,
signing, illumination, planting areas and buffers to enhance the
function and design of Neighborhood-Convenience Commercial
Districts in furtherance of the general welfare of the residents of Upper
Providence Township.
A. One of the following uses are permitted on parcels with a minimum lot
area of 1/2 acre (21,780 square feet):
(1) Personal service shops such as barbers, hairdressers, dry cleaners/
laundries, and self-service/coin-operated laundry operations.
Machine laundry and dry-cleaning plants shall not be permitted
within this district; dry-cleaning/laundry establishments are limited
to pickup stations only.
(2) Doctor, dentist, orthodontist or other similar professional office,
limited to a sole practitioner, with ancillary staff.
(3) Business office, limited to a sole practitioner, with ancillary staff.
§ 182-85 WATER § 182-86
176:749
(4) Communication antennas.
(5) An accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted uses.
(6) Conditional uses permitted on parcels with a minimum lot area of
1/2 an acre (21,780 square feet) and subject to the standards
outlined within § 182-86G, herein:
(a) Any use of the same general character, but not specifically
named, as those uses set forth in Subsection A(1) through (5),
herein.
B. Uses permitted on parcels with a minimum lot area of one acre (43,560
square feet):
(1) Any use or any combination of two of the uses listed within
Subsection A of this section. The combination of uses must be
within a single building; or
(2) Any one of the following uses:
(a) Retail sale of goods in an individual store, including variety and
general merchandise, including clothing, food, prescription
drugs, household supplies or furnishings, repair or sale of
jewelry, watches and clocks, optical goods, repair or sale of
household electronics, or the sale and repair of musical,
professional or scientific instruments.
(b) A business or professional office, studio, bank or other
financial institution, or public utility office. As regulated by
§ 182-90.1, uses within rehabilitated buildings will earn a
bonus of 10% additional building coverage and 5% additional
impervious coverage.
(c) Doctor, dentist, orthodontist or other similar professional office
with four or fewer practitioners, with ancillary staff.
(d) Restaurant, cafe or similar establishment.
[1] Restaurant shall not contain drive-in facilities.
[2] Curbside pickup facilities are permitted, and any parking
spaces associated with or labeled as "curbside" shall not
be included as part of the required number of parking
spaces under Article XXII.
[3] Any parking spaces for curbside pickup facilities must be
installed a minimum of 65 feet from the main entry to the
restaurant and be contiguous to the building.
(3) An accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted uses.
§ 182-86 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-86
176:750
(4) Conditional uses permitted on parcels with a minimum lot area of
one acre (43,560 square feet) and subject to the standards outlined
within § 182-86G, herein:
(a) Any use of the same general character, but not specifically
named, as those uses set forth in Subsection B(1) through (3)
herein.
(5) Conditional uses, per the requirements in § 182-86G, permitted on
parcels with a minimum lot area of one acre and with a minimum
two-hundred-foot frontage on a road classified as collector or
higher by the Upper Providence Township Rights-of-Way Map.148
(a) Drive-in/fast-food restaurants.
[1] Drive-in/fast-food restaurant hours will be limited to
between 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on any day during
the week.
[2] The drive-in portion of any drive-in/fast-food restaurant
shall not be permitted within 100 feet of any lot that is
residentially used or zoned.
[3] Drive-in/fast-food restaurant uses do not include portable
food carts, temporary food stands, temporary barbeque
stands, outdoor sales of food or any other temporary food
vending operation, all of which are prohibited.
(b) Outdoor eating facilities (i.e., sidewalk cafes). Applicants for
this conditional use shall show that the outdoor eating space
will not impede pedestrian flow, parking or other traffic.
(c) Any combination of the uses contained within Subsection B
herein.
[1] The design and overall appearance of buildings must be
harmonious and fit within the context of the surrounding
neighborhood and comply with the requirements of the
design guidelines in § 154-36.3 of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(d) Banks or other financial institutions, with drive-through
facilities.
(e) Office buildings or office campus complexes with no more than
two buildings.
(f) Gas stations or other automotive repair facilities, but not
including any use which includes vehicle painting and/or
vehicular body repair. Except for incidental emergency repair
work, vehicle repairs and service are to be conducted indoors.
148. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 182-86 WATER § 182-86
176:751
(g) An accessory use on the same lot with and customarily
incidental to any of the above uses.
C. Uses permitted on parcels with a minimum commercial lot area of three acres
(130,680 square feet):
(1) Any combination of the uses listed within Subsection A or B herein.
(a) The uses may be in separate buildings; however, the design
and overall appearance of buildings must be harmonious and
fit within the context of the surrounding neighborhood and
comply with the requirements of the design guidelines in
§ 154-36.3 of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development.
(b) If existing buildings are retained and rehabilitated for the uses
contained herein, the same coverage bonuses regulated by
§ 182-90.1 shall apply; or
(2) Any of the following uses:
(a) Funeral parlor.
(b) Motel or motor court.
(c) An auction establishment, flea market or outdoor sale of a
similar nature.
(d) Post office.
(e) Day-care facility.
(3) An accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted uses.
(4) Conditional uses permitted on parcels with a minimum lot area of
three acres (130,680 square feet) and subject to the standards
outlined within § 182-86G herein:
(a) Any use of the same general character, but not specifically
named, as those uses set forth in Subsection C(1) through (4)
herein.
(b) Vehicular sales facilities, which may include vehicle repair, but
not vehicular body work, and must meet the following
conditions:
[1] The tract must have at least 200 feet of frontage on a
street designated as a collector.
[2] The tract must be within 1,500 feet of an arterial street.
[3] Vehicular sales facilities may not be located on any parcel
that abuts a tract with residential zoning or use.
§ 182-86 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-86
176:752
[4] Vehicle delivery shall be conducted on site, or through offsite
contract arrangements, but not on public streets or
rights-of-way.
[5] Customer and employee parking areas are clearly
identified and not used for vehicle display purposes.
[6] Except for incidental emergency repair work, vehicle
repairs and service are to be conducted indoors.
[7] Display vehicles shall not be displayed on elevated stands
or located within five feet of any property line.
[8] Accessory uses such as repair facilities or other uses
incidental to the primary use of vehicular sales, may not
occupy more than 50% of the premises and must be
conducted in direct relationship to the principal use.
[9] Vehicle display space may be reduced to eight feet by 16
feet, and vehicles may be stacked three cars deep without
side aisleways. In the first row of a front yard display,
vehicles adjacent to the public right-of-way may not be
parked or displayed any tighter than achieved with tenfoot
wide parking spaces.
(c) Wholesale sales which may have an associated storage facility
or self-service storage facility.
[1] Deliveries and general servicing cannot typically require
tractor-trailer trucks of WB-40 classification or larger.
[2] The facility does not require a loading dock, forklift, or
similar mechanical device for loading/unloading.
[3] All nonvehicular storage shall be contained within a
building or collection of buildings with a similar design
and appearance.
[4] Any building face seen from abutting public streets shall
have a generally retail appearance.
[5] Any storage or sales facilities that have residential uses or
zoning immediately adjacent must include a Type 3
buffer149 on the shared property line.
[6] Recreational vehicle and automobile storage is permitted
outside on no more than 5% of the net lot area; provided,
however, that all vehicles stored on site have a current
registration with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
149. Editor's Note: See § 154-36D(5).
§ 182-86 WATER § 182-86
176:753
[7] The area set aside for outdoor storage of recreational
vehicles or automobiles shall be at least 100 feet from any
residentially zoned or used property and shall not be
visible from any roadway.
[8] Maximum building coverage may be increased by 5% if
there is no outside storage of recreational vehicles or
automobiles, and an additional 5% if maximum impervious
coverage is reduced to 65% or less. [Added 7-20-2015 by
Ord. No. 548]
D. As a secondary use to those listed above, residential units are permitted
only above street level on a commercial establishment, with the
following restrictions:
(1) Sufficient parking for all uses is provided in accordance with the
requirements of this district and with Article XXII, Off-Street
Parking and Loading.
(2) In parcels less than one acre (43,560 square feet), two residential
units are permitted.
(3) In parcels larger than one acre (43,560 square feet), no more than
three residential units are permitted.
(4) An accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted uses is permitted as a conditional use.
E. Bed-and-breakfast establishments are permitted on any size lot,
provided that:
(1) It is conducted out of an existing single-family building;
(2) All guest stays are limited to one week or less;
(3) All parking is provided on the side or in the rear of the building,
with none located further forward than the front of the building;
(4) Two parking spaces shall be provided for the resident innkeeper,
one additional space shall be provided for each guest room, and
one additional space for each employee during the highest staffing
period.
(5) No more than one sign identifying the facility may be provided,
which shall conform to the requirements of § 182-145C if it is
freestanding, or be a maximum of 20 square feet if attached to the
building. Any sign may be illuminated only through indirect
lighting.
F. Outdoor storage. The use of outdoor areas for any type of storage is
prohibited. The use of semitrailers, metal storage or shipping
containers or temporary storage buildings for temporary storage or
§ 182-86 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-86
176:754
§ 182-87. District regulations.
The following regulations shall apply in the NC Neighborhood-Convenience
Commercial District:
during a loading or unloading procedure is permitted only in designated
loading areas.
G. Standards for consideration of conditional uses. The Board of
Supervisors shall determine that the following standards are met prior
to granting approval of a conditional use application:
(1) The use will not generate a significantly greater amount of traffic
volume than those uses permitted within the NC Neighborhood-
Convenience Commercial Zoning District herein in the judgment of
the Township Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of the
Township Engineer and Traffic Consultant, based upon the
submission of a traffic impact study, as per the requirements of
§ 182-89B herein.
(2) The use shall not generate noise, noxious odors, air pollution or
glare nor result in pedestrian-vehicular conflict or other safety
hazards.
(3) Any necessary loading and unloading operations shall be carried on
within or contiguous to the facade of any conditional use structure.
A. General regulations. The following general regulations shall apply for
any development proposal within the NC Neighborhood-Convenience
Commercial District:
(1) The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership or shall
be the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of the
entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract will be developed
under single direction in accordance with an approved plan. The
tract of ground proposed for development shall not be divided by a
public or private road or other major physical feature which
prevents unity of the development. The transfer of ownership prior
to the commencement of construction shall render the
development agreement required in Subsection A(4) herein void.
Said agreement shall then be renegotiable between the new
owners and the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Sewer and water facilities. The tract of land shall be served by
public water facilities and public sewer facilities deemed
acceptable by the Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of
the Township Engineer.
(3) Development plan. The application for development shall be
accompanied by a plan or plans showing the detailed use of the
entire tract, which plan or plans shall also comply with all
requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development,
§ 182-86 WATER § 182-87
176:755
and other applicable ordinances. The plan shall clearly designate
the proposed use(s) of each area of the tract.
(4) Development stages and permits. The development of a tract,
carried out in either a single phase or in stages, shall be executed
in accordance with a development agreement. The owner,
developer and Township shall enter into said agreement embodying
all details regarding compliance with this article to assure the
binding nature thereof on the overall tract and its development,
which agreement shall be recorded with the final development
plan.
(5) Market area study and neighborhood impact analysis. Any request
for a rezoning to this district shall be accompanied by a market
area study and neighborhood impact analysis (See § 182-89
herein.) prepared by a qualified professional(s). The purposes of
these studies are to:
(a) Ensure that the proposed development will be supported by
the existing and expected population growth in the
neighborhood in question.
(b) Ensure that the proposed development will not be in conflict
with existing and planned commercial facilities in the
immediate neighborhood, the Township and in adjacent
municipalities, if applicable.
(c) Ensure that the proposed development will be compatible with
the existing and planned character of the neighborhood in
question.
(6) Any application for development in the NC Commercial District or
for any request for rezoning to this district shall be accompanied by
a traffic impact study prepared by a qualified professional traffic
engineer or transportation planner and shall be prepared in
accordance with the requirements outlined in § 182-120E of this
chapter; provided, however, that for uses which are proposed to
contain less than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area and which
are projected to generate less than 100 peak-hour trips in either
the morning or afternoon peak hour, the Township may permit the
applicant to limit its traffic impact study to an analysis of the
proposed driveway(s), which shall consider, at a minimum, the
location, configuration and traffic expected to use the driveway(s)
at the time of highest peak-hour demand. Additional information
may be required at the discretion of the Township.
B. Site development requirements. The development of sites for the
permitted uses in this district in § 182-86 shall comply with the
development requirements set forth below:
(1) Building setback requirements.
§ 182-87 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-87
176:756
(a) On parcels with a minimum lot area of 1/2 acre (21,780 square
feet):
[1] Front yard: 25 feet.
[2] Side yard: a minimum of 10 feet per side, with a combined
total of 20 feet. Any side yard abutting a residentially
zoned tract shall be, at a minimum, 15 feet, with the
aggregate increased to 30 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 25 feet. Any rear yard abutting a residentially
zoned tract shall be, at a minimum, 40 feet.
(b) On parcels with a minimum lot area of one acre (43,560 square
feet):
[1] Front yard: 35 feet.
[2] Side yard: a minimum of 10 feet per side, with a combined
total of 20 feet. Any side yard abutting a residentially
zoned tract shall be, at a minimum, 20 feet, with the
aggregate increased to 40 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 35 feet. Any rear yard abutting a residentially
zoned tract shall be, at a minimum, 40 feet.
(c) On parcels with a minimum commercial lot area of three acres (130,680
square feet):
[1] Front yard: 75 feet.
[2] Side yard: a minimum of 25 feet per side, with a combined
total of 50 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 60 feet.
(2) Parking area setbacks.
(a) On parcels with a minimum lot area of 1/2 acre (21,780 square
feet):
[1] Front: 15 feet
[2] Side: five feet per side. Parking will not be permitted in
any side yard abutting a residentially zoned tract.
[3] Rear: five feet.
(b) On parcels with a minimum lot area of one acre (43,560 square
feet):
[1] Front: 20 feet.
[2] Side: 10 feet per side. Parking will not be permitted in any
side yard abutting a residentially zoned tract.
§ 182-87 WATER § 182-87
176:757
[3] Rear: 10 feet.
(c) On parcels with a minimum commercial lot area of three acres (130,680
square feet):
[1] Front: 25 feet. Setback may be lowered to 20 feet,
provided a knee wall separating the parking spaces from
the street is installed.
[a] Installation of a knee wall shall include the installation
of plantings along the street side of the wall to buffer
and soften the wall appearance.
[b] On the parking lot side of the knee wall, bumper stops
shall be installed.
[c] Knee walls shall follow the design guidelines outlined
within § 154-36.3 of the Upper Providence Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
[2] Side: 15 feet per side. Buffer Type 1 regulations shall
apply. [Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 551]
[3] Rear: 20 feet. On any lot abutting a residentially zoned
tract, the minimum rear parking setback shall be 35 feet,
unless the applicant installs an opaque fence or wall six
feet in height.
[a] Any fence installed shall follow the design guidelines
outlined within § 154-36.3 of the Upper Providence
Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance and the requirements of Article XX, Fences,
within this chapter.
[b] Installation of a fence shall include the installation of
plantings facing the residential property to buffer and
soften the fence's appearance; the developer/land
owner must ensure that access to the landscaping for
maintenance purposes is provided, and it shall be the
responsibility of the landowner of the development
within the NC District's to maintain the buffer.
[c] Buffer Type 3 regulations shall apply, with the
exception of the width requirement and the
requirement for berms. [See § 154-36D(5), Chapter
154, Subdivision and Land Development, for specific
planting requirements.]
(3) Minimum frontage.
(a) On parcels with a minimum lot area of 1/2 acre (21,780 square
feet): 100 feet.
§ 182-87 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-87
176:758
(b) On parcels with a minimum lot area of one acre (43,560 square
feet): 150 feet.
(c) On parcels with a minimum commercial lot area of three acres (130,680
square feet): 200 feet.
(4) Maximum building coverage.
(a) On parcels with a minimum lot area of 1/2 acre (21,780 square
feet): 25%.
(b) On parcels with a minimum lot area of one acre (43,560 square
feet): 25%.
(c) On parcels with a minimum commercial lot area of three acres (130,680
square feet): 20%.
(5) Maximum impervious coverage.
(a) On parcels with a minimum lot area of 1/2 acre (21,780 square
feet): Maximum impervious coverage of 85%.
(b) On parcels with a minimum lot area of one acre (43,560 square
feet): Maximum impervious coverage of 75%.
(c) On parcels with a minimum lot area of three acres (130,680
square feet): Maximum impervious coverage of 70%.
(6) Maximum building height (any parcel size): 35 feet.
(7) When multiple buildings are proposed, building spacing shall be no
less than 25 feet at the closest points.
C. Other development regulations. The following development regulations
shall be followed for all proposed development within the NC District:
(1) Utilities. All utility lines (electrical, telephone, etc.) shall be placed
underground.
(2) Signs. All signs in the NC District shall be subject to the
requirements of Article XIX of this chapter.
(3) Access. Provisions shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and
egress to and from public streets and highways serving the NC
district development without causing undue confusion or
interference with the normal traffic flow. The Planning Commission
shall satisfy itself concerning the adequacy of the thoroughfares
and access points intended to accommodate the traffic generated
by the proposed NC District development, as well as the street
frontage of the proposed development.
(4) Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as needed
and arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and
neighboring properties from unreasonable glare or hazardous
§ 182-87 WATER § 182-87
176:759
interference of any kind and shall be installed in accordance with
the provisions of § 154-40 of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development, of the Code of the Township.
(a) Light fixtures within 250 feet of any residentially zoned or used
property may not exceed 16 feet in height.
(5) Landscaped planting. Shade trees in accordance with § 154-36C of
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, and other
plantings shall be provided along any street frontage occupied by
an NC District development.
(a) Buffer requirements.
[1] When abutting a residentially zoned property, a Buffer
Type 3 is required. [See § 154-36D(5), Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development, for specific planting
requirements
[2] In any side yard or rear yard, when not abutting a
residentially zoned property, a Buffer Type 1 is required.
[3] If the development is proposing shared parking, as
detailed in Subsection C(9), herein, any intervening
islands or green areas are not required to have the Buffer
Type 1; however, the shade tree requirement and other
parking lot landscaping detailed in § 154-36E of Chapter
154, Subdivision and Land Development, are still required.
(6) Trash and refuse areas. The design of buildings in the NC District
shall include either a provision for the storage of trash, refuse and
garbage inside the building(s) or within a masonry-walled area
outside the building(s). The walls of such a trash and refuse area
must shield the trash and refuse from the direct view of any
adjacent property and must be at least six feet high.
(7) Amenity areas. The developer shall be encouraged to provide
amenity areas for community or client use, such as tot lots,
playgrounds, benches, sitting areas and other services necessary
for the comfort and convenience of the prospective users of the NC
District development.
(8) Off-street parking and loading facilities. All off-street parking and
loading facilities shall comply with the requirements of Article XXII
of this chapter except as stated in this section. For any
development in this zoning district with more than three acres of
net tract area, parking may be provided at a ratio of 4.5 spaces per
1,000 square feet of gross floor area; provided, however, the
Township reserves the right to require additional parking if certain
uses known to generate higher parking needs are proposed in the
center. In no case shall the parking required exceed the aggregate
number of spaces which would otherwise be required by applying
§ 182-87 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-87
176:760
§ 182-88. Plan submission requirements.
All proposals for development within the NC District shall comply with the
pertinent requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development,
concerning nonresidential developments. In addition to those requirements,
architectural renderings or elevations of all facades must be submitted with
the land development application for any applications for development in
the NC District,.
§ 182-89. Contents of market area study and neighborhood impact
analysis.
The following minimum information shall be contained in a market area
study and neighborhood impact analysis:
the individual standards in Article XXII to each of the uses in the
center. [Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 551]
(9) Shared parking. To lessen impervious coverage and improve traffic
flow, shared parking is encouraged in all NC developments.
(a) Applications for use of shared parking are encouraged in the
NC District. In those instances wherein shared parking is
proposed, the requirements of § 182-181 of this chapter shall
apply; provided, however, that a special exception need not be
secured. Adequate documentation to substantiate a reduction
in the parking shall be submitted with an applicant's
subdivision and/or land development application for review
and approval by the Township based upon the recommendation
of the Township Engineer and Traffic Consultant. In addition,
proper cross easement agreements and liability
indemnification shall be provided to the satisfaction of the
Township Solicitor.
(b) For those applications for shared parking, the individual lots
may increase their impervious coverage an additional 5%
above the maximum permitted in § 182-87B(5), herein. In
addition, adjoining lots may aggregate the impervious
coverage as though there were no lot lines. Impervious
coverage may be exceeded for an individual lot as long as the
maximum allowable is not exceeded for the aggregated lots.
(10) Any building or groups of buildings shall reflect the existing
character of the residential nature of this area and shall follow the
design guidelines in § 154-36.3 of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development.
(11) Parcels which provide lot area and construct an internal accessway,
independent of parking, for public use within the parcel may
increase impervious coverage by 5% above that which is permitted
herein. [Added 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 551]
§ 182-87 WATER § 182-89
176:761
A. Market area study:
(1) A description of the commercial establishment(s) proposed, the
approximate number of employees anticipated for each
establishment and the sales volumes anticipated for each
establishment.
(2) A delineation of the proposed neighborhood market area.
(3) An estimate of the population and number of households existing
now and anticipated in the future within the defined neighborhood
market area.
(4) Per capita or household estimates of the demand for the goods and
services proposed for the development and estimates of the total
existing and anticipated demand within the defined neighborhood
market area for each proposed good and service.
(5) The location and size of commercial establishments within or near
the defined neighborhood market area that could compete with the
proposed development.
(6) Estimates of net customer buying power or net demand for each
commercial establishment in the proposed development.
(7) The market impact shall include a fiscal impact component which
must detail the immediate postconstruction financial benefit or loss
to the Township, school district and county that can be expected
from the proposed development.
(a) At the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, it may be
required that the fiscal impact provide a five-year detail of
financial benefit or loss to the Township, school district and
county.
B. Neighborhood impact analysis:
(1) The conformance of the proposed development with the
Comprehensive Plan of Upper Providence Township and its
compatibility with existing and proposed land uses adjacent to the
site.
(2) The impact on any existing floodplains, heavily wooded areas, rock
outcroppings, steep slopes and other sensitive natural features, if
any.
(3) The impact on the Township and regional transportation system
and the ability of adjacent streets and intersections to efficiently
and safely handle the traffic generated by the proposed
development.
§ 182-89 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-89
176:762
§ 182-90. Evaluation of market area study and neighborhood impact
analysis.
The market area study and neighborhood impact analysis required in
§ 182-87A(5) shall be evaluated to determine the appropriateness of the
site in question to accommodate the magnitude of commercial development
proposed, as well as the impact of the proposed development on the
community facilities and services of Upper Providence Township. The
following alternative findings shall result from the evaluation process:
§ 182-90.1. Preservation of existing buildings.
The retention of existing residential buildings in the NC District for reuse
in accordance with the provisions of the district is encouraged. In instances
where this is done, the applicable building coverage requirement in
§ 182-87B may be increased up to 10% and the applicable impervious
coverage in that section may be increased up to 5%; provided, however, that
the following requirements are met:
(4) The impact on public utilities, including but not limited to sewage
disposal, garbage and rubbish disposal, water supply, storm
drainage and electrical utilities.
(5) The impact on the provision of police and fire protection for the
proposed development.
(6) The impact upon the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
The applicant must show that the proposed development will not
adversely affect the neighborhood by reason of noise, odors,
smoke, glare or vibration.
A. Evaluations which lead to an overall negative assessment for a
proposed development shall lead to a denial by the Board.
B. Evaluations which lead to an overall negative assessment for a
proposed development may lead to a conditional approval by the Board,
either when the developer agrees to undertake activities or
improvements which will compensate or correct deficiencies or
negative impacts caused by the implementation of the proposed
development or when the developer agrees to implement the proposed
development at a reduced square footage of gross leasable area, as
specified by the Board.
C. Evaluations which lead to an overall positive or neutral assessment for
a proposed development shall lead to an approval by the Board.
A. At least 80% of the building must be retained to qualify for the
increased coverage offered by this section.
B. Any building which faces a public street(s) shall not be expanded
toward that street(s), except for the addition of a front porch consistent
§ 182-89 WATER § 182-90.1
176:763
§ 182-90.2. Special regulations for split properties.
Lots located in the NC District which are split by a district boundary line
with an abutting residential district shall be permitted to transfer certain
development rights, when authorized as a conditional use by the Board of
Supervisors, from the other zoning district into the NC District on the same
lot, provided that the following criteria are met:
§ 182-90.3. Change of use.
Whenever there is a change of use in the NC District which requires
additional parking to be provided, a land development plan shall be
submitted to the Township for approval in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development
in architectural style to the existing building. All applicable setback
requirements for the porch shall be met.
C. Expansion may be permitted to the side or rear of the building,
provided that any expansion to the side begins a minimum of 10 feet
back from the front of the building, and further provided that all
applicable setback requirements shall be met.
D. The design of any building expansion and the proposed roofline shall be
architecturally compatible with the existing building.
A. For each acre or portion thereof which is deed restricted for open
space, an area equal to 20% building coverage and 50% impervious
coverage of the area deed restricted may be transferred and added to
the NC District portion; provided, however, that in no event shall the
resulting building coverage exceed 30%, nor shall the impervious
coverage exceed 90% on the portion of the lot zoned NC.
B. All other setback and development requirements shall be adhered to.
§ 182-90.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-90.3
176:764
ARTICLE XIII
CRSC Community and Regional Shopping Center District
§ 182-91. Legislative intent.
A. In expansion of the statement of community development objectives
contained in § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the
intent of this article with respect to CRSC Community and Regional
Shopping Center Districts to provide for the logical and timely
development of planned community-level retail commercial centers,
incorporating office, entertainment and highway-business uses to serve
the shopping and service needs of the Township's population growth
and planned regional-level retail commercial centers as a conditional
use to serve the expanding regional market of the Lower Perkiomen
Valley area in accordance with the policies set forth in the Upper
Providence Township Comprehensive Plan. Furthermore, it is the intent
of this district to require the preparation of a market area study and
community impact analysis by prospective applicants for community
and regional shopping center development in order to:
(1) Minimize conflicts between the proposed development and the
adjacent neighborhoods.
(2) Ensure that proposed shopping centers can be supported by the
expected market area they are designed to serve.
(3) Avoid detrimental competition with existing commercial facilities
and shopping centers within both the Township and in adjacent
municipalities.
(4) Avoid congestion and hazardous traffic conditions as a result of the
development of proposed shopping centers.
B. Finally, it is the intent of this district to ensure that proposed shopping
centers are developed in accordance with a unified, overall site
development plan, including reserve areas for possible future
expansion, coordinated internal and external vehicular and pedestrian
circulation systems, well-related, convenient and efficient parking and
loading areas, agreeable surroundings that provide comfort, safety and
convenience for prospective customers and high-quality design in terms
of building relationship, facade treatment, signing, lighting and
landscaped and planted buffers and screens, as well as other natural
and constructed amenities in furtherance of the general welfare of
prospective shopping center customers and of the residents of Upper
Providence Township.
§ 182-91 WATER § 182-92
176:765
§ 182-92. Permitted uses. [Amended 2-19-1985 by Ord. No. 246;
9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 301]
In the CRSC Community and Regional Shopping Center District, a building
or group of buildings may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used
or occupied for any of the following uses and no other:
A. A community shopping center incorporating the following uses:
(1) A retail store, food market, garden shop or personal service shop,
excluding an automobile sales outlet.
(2) A financial institution, studio and office for professional use or
general business activity, which shall be subject to and controlled
by §§ 182-100 through 182-104, contained in the PBO Professional
and Business Office District regulations, except that all other
requirements of this district which are not specifically addressed in
the above-referenced sections shall also apply.
(3) A medical and dental clinic for the treatment of humans.
(4) A restaurant (including live entertainment) and catering service,
but excluding the sale of prepared food for consumption in
automobiles.
(5) A bakery, confectionery or custom shop for the production of
articles to be sold at retail, only on the premises, and not employing
more than 10 persons at any one time.
(6) A church, library, post office, educational facility, community center
for cultural or recreational activities, theater for motion picture or
stage productions (excluding an outdoor motion-picture
establishment) or assembly hall.
(7) Day-care center. [Amended 10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 451]
(8) A passenger station for public transportation.
(9) Structured parking for the use of employees and patrons of the
proposed shopping center.
(10) An accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted uses, including activities other than
sales and services and accommodations for watchmen or
caretakers.
(11) Communications antennas, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 182-21.1, mounted on an existing public utility transmission
tower, existing building or other existing structure, and
communications equipment buildings. [Added 6-1-1998 by Ord.
No. 372]
(12) Helistop, subject to the provisions of § 182-21 of this chapter.
[Added 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 405]
§ 182-92 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-92
176:766
§ 182-93. District regulations.
The following regulations shall apply in the CRSC District:
(13) Indoor fitness, recreation, or entertainment use, provided the gross
floor area devoted to said use does not exceed 30,000 square feet.
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 468]
B. The following uses, in conjunction with a shopping center development,
when authorized as a conditional use by the Board of Supervisors,
subject to the specific standards set forth in this article and in
§ 182-204.
(1) A regional shopping center in accordance with the requirements of
§ 182-93B and incorporating the uses set forth in this district.
(2) A hotel or motel, provided that every room shall include a bathroom
and each room and bath shall have a total minimum usable floor
area of not less than 200 square feet.
(3) A gasoline service station.
(4) A fast-food restaurant.
(5) A car wash, provided that no portion of the lot used for washing
shall be closer than 100 feet to an abutting residential or
institutional district boundary line and all washing operations shall
be conducted within an enclosed building or structure.
(6) Any use of the same general character as those uses set forth in
Subsection B(1) through (5) herein.
(7) Indoor fitness, recreation, or entertainment use in excess of thirty
thousand (30,000) square feet of gross floor area, provided that
parking for said use is directly accessible from a major internal
access drive without the need for vehicles to traverse intermediate
parking fields, and further provided that additional parking to
serve the proposed use may be required by the Board of
Supervisors based upon projected patron usage to be provided by
the applicant at the time of conditional use application. [Added
11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 468]
C. As a special exception only, communications antennas mounted on a
communications tower and communications equipment buildings, only
upon a showing, in addition to any other that may be required under
this chapter, that denial of such a special exception would have the
effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless service and that
it is not feasible to mount the communications antenna on an existing
public utility transmission tower, existing building or other existing
structure. Communications antennas shall conform to the requirements
of § 182-21.1, and communications towers shall conform to the
requirements of § 182-21.2. [Added 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 372]
§ 182-92 WATER § 182-93
176:767
A. General regulations. The following general regulations shall apply for
any development proposal within the CRSC District:
(1) Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one
ownership or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by
the owners of the entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract
will be developed under single direction in accordance with an
approved plan. The transfer of ownership, except by mortgage,
prior to the commencement of construction shall render the
development agreement required in Subsection A(4) herein void.
Said agreement shall then be renegotiable between the new
owners and the Board of Supervisors. [Amended 2-21-1978 by
Ord. No. 197; 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
(2) Sewer and water facilities. The tract of land shall be served by
public water facilities and public sewer facilities deemed
acceptable by the Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of
the Township Engineer.
(3) Development plan. The application for development shall be
accompanied by a plan or plans showing the detailed use of the
entire tract, which plan or plans shall comply with all requirements
of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, and other
applicable ordinances. The plan shall clearly designate the
proposed use(s) of each area of the tract.
(4) Development stages and permits. The development of a tract
carried out in either a single phase or in stages shall be executed in
accordance with a development agreement. The owner, developer
and Township shall enter into said agreement embodying all details
regarding compliance with this article to assure the binding nature
thereof on the overall tract and its development, which agreement
shall be recorded with the final development plan.
(5) Market area study and community impact analysis. Any application
for development in the CRSC District or for any request for a
rezoning to this district shall be accompanied by a market area
study and community impact analysis (see § 182-95 herein)
prepared by qualified professional(s). The purposes of these studies
are to: [Amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
(a) Ensure that the proposed development will be supported by
the existing and expected population growth in the Township
and in the Lower Perkiomen Valley area.
(b) Ensure that the proposed development will be compatible with
the existing and planned character of the immediate
neighborhood and the Township.
(c) Ensure that the proposed development will not be in conflict
with existing and planned commercial facilities in the
§ 182-93 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-93
176:768
immediate neighborhood, the Township and in adjacent
municipalities.
(6) A request for a CRSC zoning classification of a property shall be
accompanied by a development proposal and plan and by a market
area study and a community impact analysis as above required and
in the event that the proposal involves a regional shopping center,
by a request for a conditional use approval. The Board of
Supervisors shall hear and shall act upon all of the submissions
concurrently.
B. Site development requirements. The development of sites for either a
community or regional shopping center shall comply with the
development requirements set forth on the accompanying chart.
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 468; 12-4-2006 by Ord. No. 470]
Site Development Requirements in the CRSC
Community and Regional Shopping Center District
Site Development
Requirements
Community
Shopping
Center
Regional
Shopping
Center
Minimum tract sizea (acres) 10 75
Minimum gross leasable area
(square feet)
100,000 600,000
Minimum frontageb (feet) 450 600
Minimum building setbacksc (feet) 1001 2501
752 2002
503 1003
1004
Minimum parking setbacksd (feet) 251 501
502 752
253 503
04 04
Maximum building coverage 25% 25%
Maximum impervious coveragee 80% 80%
Maximum height (feet) 45 65
NOTES:
a Excluding the rights-of-way of existing public roads.
b Measured along the ultimate right-of-way line.
§ 182-93 WATER § 182-93
176:769
c Measured from:
1 The ultimate right-of-way line.
2 An abutting residential or institutional district boundary line.
3 An abutting commercial or industrial district boundary line.
4 The ultimate right-of-way line of a limited access highway
(Route 422 Expressway)
d Measured from:
1 The ultimate right-of-way line.
2 An abutting residential or institutional district boundary line.
3 An abutting commercial or industrial district boundary line.
4 With shared parking and loading facilities.
e The total paved and built-up area of a tract.
C. Other development regulations. The following development regulations
shall be complied with for any proposed development within the CRSC
District:
(1) Utilities. All utility lines (electrical, telephone, etc.) shall be placed
underground.
(2) Signs. All signs in the CRSC District shall be subject to the
requirements of Article XIX, Signs, of this chapter.
(3) Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and
egress to and from public streets and highways serving the CRSC
development without causing undue confusion or interference with
the normal traffic flow. The Planning Commission, with the advice
of the Township Engineer, shall satisfy itself concerning the
adequacy of the thoroughfares and access points intended to
accommodate the traffic generated by the proposed CRSC
development, as well as to the street frontage of the proposed
development.
(4) Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as needed
and arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and
neighboring properties from unreasonable glare or hazardous
interference of any kind and shall be installed in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development,
of the Code of the Township, § 154-40. [Amended 6-3-2002 by
Ord. No. 416]
(5) Landscaped planting and buffer areas. Along a side or rear
property line which is adjacent to a residential or institutional
district, the owner shall place and maintain a Buffer Type 3 as
§ 182-93 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-93
176:770
§ 182-94. Plan submission requirements.
All proposals for development within the CRSC District shall comply with
the pertinent requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development, concerning nonresidential developments.
§ 182-95. Contents of market area study and community impact
analysis.
The following minimum information shall be contained in a market area
study and a community impact analysis:
described in § 154-36D(5) of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development. [Amended 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
(6) Trash and refuse areas. The design of buildings in the CRSC
District shall include either a provision for the storage of trash,
refuse and garbage inside the building(s) or within a walled area
outside the building(s). The walls of such a trash and refuse area
must shield the trash and refuse from direct view of any adjacent
property and must be at least six feet in height.
(7) Amenity areas. The developer shall be encouraged to provide
amenity areas for community or customer use, such as tot-lots,
playgrounds, benches, sitting areas and other services necessary
for the comfort and convenience of the prospective users of the
CRSC development.
(8) Off-street parking and loading facilities. A CRSC development shall
provide a minimum of 5.5 parking spaces for each 1,000 square
feet of gross leasable area (GLA) or fraction thereof. Those uses
permitted as conditional uses in § 182-92B herein shall provide
parking spaces in accordance with the pertinent requirements of
Article XXII, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this chapter. A
CRSC development composed of 300,000 square feet of GLA or
over, shall provide five parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of
GLA, including the GLA attributable to those uses permitted by
conditional use pursuant to § 182-92B, or fraction thereof.
Furthermore, all off-street loading facilities shall comply with §
182-184 of Article XXII, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
[Amended 2-7-2005 by Ord. No. 448]
(9) Minimum distance between buildings or building groups. The
minimum distance between a building or group of buildings shall
be 25 feet, except that all structures connected by common roof
lines or covered walkways shall be considered as one building.
A. Market area study.
(1) A description of the commercial establishment(s) proposed, the
approximate number of employees anticipated for each
§ 182-93 WATER § 182-95
176:771
§ 182-96. Evaluation of market area study and community impact
analysis.
The market area study and community impact analysis required in
§ 182-93A(5) shall be evaluated to determine the appropriateness of the
establishment and the sales volumes anticipated for each
establishment.
(2) A delineation of the proposed community or regional market area.
(3) An estimate of the population and number of households existing
now and anticipated in the next 10 years within the defined
community or regional market area.
(4) Per capita or household estimates of the demand for the goods and
services proposed for the development and estimates of the total
existing and anticipated demand within the defined community or
regional market area for each proposed good and service.
(5) The location and size of commercial establishments within or near
the defined community or regional market area.
(6) Estimates of net customer buying power or net demand for each
commercial establishment in the proposed development.
B. Community impact analysis.
(1) The conformance of the proposed development with the
Comprehensive Plan of Upper Providence Township and its
compatibility with existing and proposed land uses adjacent to the
site.
(2) The impact on any existing floodplains, heavily wooded areas, rock
outcroppings, steep slopes and other sensitive natural features, if
any.
(3) The impact on the Township and regional transportation system
and the ability of adjacent streets and intersections to efficiently
and safely handle the traffic generated by the proposed
development.
(4) The impact on public utilities, including but not limited to sewage
disposal, garbage and rubbish disposal, water supply, storm
drainage and electric utilities.
(5) The impact on the provision of police and fire protection for the
proposed development.
(6) The impact upon the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
The applicant must show that the proposed development will not
adversely affect the neighborhood by reason of noise, odors, smoke
or vibration.
§ 182-95 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-96
176:772
site in question to accommodate the magnitude of commercial development
proposed, as well as the impact of the proposed development on the
community facilities and services of Upper Providence Township. The
following alternative findings shall result from the evaluation process:
A. Evaluations which lead to an overall negative assessment for a
proposed development shall lead to a denial by the Board.
B. Evaluations which lead to an overall negative assessment for a
proposed development may lead to a conditional approval by the Board
either when the developer agrees to undertake activities or
improvements which will compensate or correct deficiencies or
negative impacts caused by the implementation of the proposed
development or when the developer agrees to implement the proposed
development at a reduced square footage of gross leasable area, as
specified by the Board.
C. Evaluations which lead to an overall positive or neutral assessment for
a proposed development shall lead to an approval by the Board.
§ 182-96 WATER § 182-96
176:773

ARTICLE XIIIA
VCO Village Commercial and Office District
[Added 9-16-2013 by Ord. No. 529]
§ 182-96.1. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives
contained in § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent
of this article with respect to the Village Commercial and Office District
to encourage the development or redevelopment of limited commercial and
office uses while preserving the neighborhood character and residential
nature to areas of Upper Providence Township. The permitted uses will
meet personal service needs of the village areas within the Township and
will reflect the magnitude of development needed to support the
surrounding residential village areas.
§ 182-96.2. Permitted uses.
A. Any one of the following uses is permitted on a lot within the Village
Commercial and Office Zoning District:
(1) Antique store without outside storage or display.
(2) Bed-and-breakfast.
(a) Must be conducted out of an existing single-family detached
dwelling.
(b) Two parking spaces shall be provided for the resident
innkeeper, one additional space shall be provided for each
guest room, and one additional space for each employee during
the highest staffing period.
(c) Guest stays are limited to one continuous seven-day period.
(3) Business or professional office, sole practitioner with ancillary
staff.
(4) Music, dance, art, or martial arts studio, or studio of similar use.
(5) Live/work units for artisans, professionals, and personal service
providers.
(6) Personal service shops such as barbers, hairdressers, dry cleaners/
laundries (limited to pickup only; no on-site facilities), and selfservice/
coin-operated laundry operations (without a dry-cleaning
component).
(7) Restaurant, cafe or similar establishment without curbside pickup,
drive-in/-through facilities or outdoor eating space.
§ 182-96.1 WATER § 182-96.2
176:775
(8) Repair shop for jewelry, watches and clocks, optical goods,
household electronics, and musical, professional, or scientific
instruments.
(a) Retail sales are permitted at these establishments, but limited
to that good which is repaired on site.
(9) Single-family detached homes within existing structures.
(10) An accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above uses.
(11) Residential uses, as a secondary use to the above uses, with the
following provisions:
(a) All residential uses shall be above street level on a commercial
establishment.
(b) Parking shall be the cumulative of all parking requirements
outlined in Article XXII, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
(c) No more than two residential units shall be permitted per
structure.
(12) As a conditional use and subject to the standards outlined in
§ 182-204 and as listed below, any use of the same general
character, but not specifically named, as those uses set forth in
Subsection A(1) through (10), herein:
(a) In the judgment of the Township Board of Supervisors, the
proposed use will not generate a significantly greater amount
of traffic volume than those uses specifically named, based
upon recommendation of Township staff or professionals.
(b) The use will not generate noise, noxious odors, air pollution or
glare, nor result in pedestrian-vehicular conflict or create any
other conditions hazardous to the health, safety and welfare of
the village area.
(c) Any necessary loading and unloading operations shall be
carried on within or contiguous to the facade of any conditional
use structure.
(13) No-impact home-based business in accordance with the standards
set forth in § 182-21.3 herein.
B. On any lot greater than 1/2 acre (greater than 21,780 square feet), any
one of the following uses is permitted on a lot within the Village
Commercial and Office Zoning District:
(1) Business or professional office, studio, or public utility office.
(2) Doctor, dentist, orthodontist or other similar professional medical
office with four or fewer practitioners, with ancillary staff.
§ 182-96.2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-96.2
176:776
(3) Restaurant, cafe, or similar establishment with outdoor eating
facilities and/or curbside pickup and without drive-in/-through
facilities.
(a) Outdoor eating space shall show that the eating space will not
impede pedestrian flow, parking, or other traffic.
(b) A restaurant use may have either curbside pickup or a walk-up
window, but not both facilities.
(c) Walk-up windows must be at least 15 feet from the end of
pavement for any parking space or drive aisle.
(d) Curbside pickup facilities shall be labeled "curbside pickup"
and shall not be included as part of the required number of
parking spaces under Article XXII, Off-Street Parking and
Loading.
(4) Retail sale of goods in an individual store with less than 10,000
square feet of gross floor area. Retail sales cannot include
prescription drug stores, household supplies and furnishings, or
general merchandise stores.
(5) An accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above uses.
(6) Residential uses, as a secondary use to the above uses, with
provisions as outlined in Subsection A.
(7) As a conditional use any combination of two uses listed within
Subsection A, herein, and subject to the requirements of § 182-204
and the following:
(a) All uses must be contained within a single structure.
(b) Parking facilities between the two uses shall be shared to the
greatest extent possible.
(c) Both uses shall have individual entrances, and if feasible those
entrances shall be on the front (street side) of the building.
(8) As a conditional use any use of the same general character, but not
specifically named, as those uses set forth in Subsection B(1)
through (6), and subject to the requirements listed within
Subsection A(10) and § 182-204.
C. On any lot greater than one acre (greater than 43,560 square feet), any
one of the following uses is permitted on a lot within the Village
Commercial and Office Zoning District:
(1) Automotive garage, with all repairs or other work completed
indoors. Sales of gasoline are strictly prohibited.
§ 182-96.2 WATER § 182-96.2
176:777
(2) Banks or other financial institutions without drive-through
facilities.
(3) Business or professional office, in a single building, with no more
than four individual tenants.
(4) Club, fraternal organization or lodge.
(5) Retail sale of goods in an individual store with a maximum of
10,000 square feet gross floor area. Retail sales can include
prescription drug stores without drive-through facilities, household
supplies and furnishings, and general merchandise.
(6) An accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above uses.
(7) Residential uses, as a secondary use to the above uses, with
provisions as outlined in Subsection A.
(8) As a conditional use any combination of uses listed within
Subsections A, B, and C herein, and subject to the requirements of
§ 182-204 and the following:
(a) All uses must be contained within a single structure.
(b) Parking requirements shall be cumulative for all uses and
shared to the greatest extent possible.
(c) All uses shall have individual entrances, and if feasible those
entrances shall be on the front (street side) of the building.
(9) As a conditional use any use of the same general character, but not
specifically named, as those uses set forth in Subsection C(1)
through (8), and subject to the requirements listed within
Subsection A(10) and § 182-204.
D. On any lot greater than three acres (greater than 130,860 square feet),
any of the following uses are permitted on a lot within the Village
Commercial and Office Zoning District:
(1) Day-care facility.
(2) A retail store, food market, or garden shop.
(a) Outdoor eating space may be provided in conjunction with a
food market as a conditional use subject to the requirements of
§ 182-204, and compliance with the following:
[1] Pedestrian flow, parking, or other traffic is not impeded.
[2] Is not within 150 feet of a residential zoning district.
[3] No outdoor speakers are permitted.
§ 182-96.2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-96.2
176:778
[4] Is not larger than 20% of the gross floor area of the food
market.
(3) Indoor fitness, recreation, or entertainment use, provided the gross
floor area devoted to said use does not exceed 20,000 square feet.
(4) Theater for the performing arts, excluding a movie theater.
(5) Any combination of those uses outlined within Subsections A, B, C,
and D herein, and subject to the following requirements:
(a) The uses may be in separate buildings; however, the design
and overall appearance of buildings must be harmonious and
fit within the context of the surrounding neighborhood and
comply with the design requirements contained within
§ 182-96.3C(7), herein, and the design guidelines, § 154-36.3,
of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development.
(6) As a conditional use a bank or other financial institution with drivethrough
facilities, subject to the requirements of § 182-204 and the
following:
(a) Banks or other financial institutions must abut one of the
following:
[1] Two collector or higher classification streets as shown on
the Township's Ultimate Right-of-Way Map on file in the
Township offices.
[2] A collector or higher classification street (as shown on the
Ultimate Right-of-Way Map) and a public or private road
with average annual daily trips in excess of 6,500. [The
applicant shall show average annual daily trips as part of
the required traffic study; reference § 182-96.3A(5).]
(b) Drive-through facilities must have direct access to a private
road or collector or higher road as classified by the Upper
Providence Township Ultimate Right-of-Way Map on file at the
Township offices.
(c) Drive-through facilities are limited to one lane with a drive-up
window, one additional lane served by a teller, and one
freestanding ATM lane.
(d) Drive-through facilities are limited to the hours of operation
between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.; ATM hours are not
restricted.
(7) As a conditional use a restaurant, cafe, or similar establishment
may include drive-through facilities subject to the requirements of
§ 182-204 and the following:
§ 182-96.2 WATER § 182-96.2
176:779
§ 182-96.3. District regulations.
(a) The proposed restaurant or similar establishment must abut
one of the following:
[1] Two collector or higher classification streets as shown on
the Township's Ultimate Right-of-Way Map on file in the
Township offices.
[2] Two collector or higher classification streets (as shown on
the Ultimate Right-of-Way Map) or the combination of two
public or private roads with average annual daily trips in
excess of 7,500, individually. [The applicant shall show
average annual daily trips as part of the required traffic
study; reference § 182-96.3A(5).]
(b) Drive-through facilities must have direct access to a private
road or collector or higher road as classified by the Upper
Providence Township Ultimate Right-of-Way Map on file at the
Township offices.
(c) Drive-through facilities should be screened from adjacent uses
through the use of landscaping material or other acceptable
material at the discretion of the Township Board of Supervisors
as recommended by the Township professionals.
(d) Drive-through facilities shall not be in any front yard areas.
(e) The Board of Supervisors may limit the hours of operation for
drive-through facilities at its discretion.
E. Prohibited uses; seasonal displays.
(1) The following uses are strictly prohibited on any parcel within the
Village Commercial and Office Zoning District:
(a) Automotive sales.
(b) Outdoor storage. The use of outdoor areas, parking areas, or
areas abutting a residential zone or use for any type of storage
is prohibited. The use of semitrailers, metal storage or
shipping containers or temporary storage buildings for
temporary storage or during a loading or unloading procedure
is permitted only in designated loading areas.
(2) Retail uses may use front yard areas for the purpose of seasonal
displays. Seasonal displays are considered those displays that are
in place for less than 60 days.
A. General requirements.
(1) The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership or shall
be the subject of an application filed jointly by each of the owners of
§ 182-96.2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-96.3
176:780
the property for which the application is submitted. The tract
shall be developed under single direction in accordance with the
approved plan.
(2) Sewer and water facilities. The tract of land shall be served by
public water facilities and public sewer facilities deemed
acceptable by the Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation
of the Township Engineer.
(3) Development plan. The application for development shall be
accompanied by a plan or plans showing the detailed use of the
entire tract, which plan or plans shall also comply with all
requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development,
and other applicable ordinances. The plan shall clearly designate
the proposed use(s) of each area of the tract.
(4) Neighborhood impact analysis. Any proposed development of
greater than three acres shall be accompanied by a neighborhood
impact analysis prepared by qualified professional(s), to the
standards outlined within § 182-89, in addition to the following:
(a) A review of the impact(s) that the proposed development will
have on the existing character of the village or neighborhood.
(b) An action plan and timeline to ensure that any impact on
residential properties adjacent to the proposed development
will be addressed prior to project completion. This shall also
include a discussion of potential impact on those residential
properties during the construction process.
(5) Traffic impact analysis. Any proposed development of greater than
three acres shall be accompanied by a traffic impact analysis
prepared by a qualified professional traffic engineer or
transportation planner. The analysis will be done in accordance
with the requirements of § 182-120E of this chapter, and shall
include a specific analysis of weekend average daily trips. In
addition, for developments that are proposed to contain less than
10,000 square feet of gross floor area and that generate less than
100 peark hour trips in either the morning or afternoon peak hour,
the Township may permit the applicant to limit the traffic impact
study to an analysis of the proposed driveway(s), which shall
consider, at a minimum, the location, configuration and traffic
expected to use the driveway(s) at the time of highest peak-hour
demand. Additional information may be required at the discretion
of the Township Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of
the Township Engineer or Traffic Consultant.
B. Site development requirements.
(1) Building setback requirements.
(a) For parcels with less than one acre of net tract area.
§ 182-96.3 WATER § 182-96.3
176:781
[1] Front yard: 20 feet.
[2] Side yard: minimum of 10 feet per side, with a combined
total of 20 feet. Any side yard abutting a residential zone
shall be, at a minimum, 15 feet, with the aggregate
increased to 25 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 25 feet. Any rear yard abutting a residentially
zoned tract shall be 40 feet.
(b) For parcels with more than one acre, but less than three acres
of net tract area.
[1] Front yard: 20 feet.
[2] Side yard: minimum of 15 feet per side, with a combined
total of 30 feet. Any side yard abutting a residential zone
shall be, at a minimum, 20 feet, with the aggregate
increased to 35 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 30 feet. Any rear yard abutting a residentially
zoned tract shall be 40 feet.
(c) Parcels with more than three acres of net tract area.
[1] Front yard: 75 feet.
[2] Side yard: minimum of 25 feet per side, with a combined
total of 50 feet. Any side yard abutting a residential zone
shall be, at a minimum, 50 feet, with the aggregate
increased to 75 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 60 feet.
(2) Parking area setbacks.
(a) For parcels with less than one acre of net tract area.
[1] Front: 15 feet.
[2] Side: minimum of five feet per side. Parking shall not be
permitted in any side yard abutting a residential zone.
[3] Rear: 25 feet.
(b) For parcels with more than one acre, but less than three acres
of net tract area.
[1] Front: 20 feet.
[2] Side yard: minimum of 10 feet per side. Parking shall not
be permitted in any side yard abutting a residential zone.
[3] Rear: 25 feet.
(c) For parcels with more than three acres of net tract area.
§ 182-96.3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-96.3
176:782
[1] Front: 25 feet. Setback may be lowered to 20 feet,
provided a knee wall separating the parking spaces from
the street is installed.
[a] Installation of a knee wall shall include the installation
of plantings along both the street and development
side to buffer and soften the wall. Plantings shall meet
the standards outlined for a Buffer Type 4, as detailed
in § 154-36D(1)(f) of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development.
[b] On the parking lot side of the wall, bumper stops shall
be installed.
[c] Knee walls shall follow the design guidelines outlined
within § 154-36.3 of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development.
[2] Side: 25 feet; when abutting a residential zone, 50 feet.
[3] Rear: 25 feet. When abutting a residential zone, the
minimum rear parking setback shall be 50 feet. The rear
parking setback abutting a residential zone may be
reduced to 35 feet with the installation of an opaque wall
or fence six feet in height.
[a] Any fence installed shall follow the design guidelines
outlined within § 154-36.3 of Chapter 154, Subdivision
and Land Development and the requirements of
Article XX, Fences, within this chapter. If there is
conflict between requirements within those sections,
the most stringent requirements shall apply.
[b] Installation of a fence shall include the installation
plantings similar to a Buffer Type 4, as detailed in
§ 154-36D(1)(f) of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development. Plantings shall be facing the residential
property and shall soften the appearance of the wall.
The developer/landowner must ensure that access to
the landscaping for maintenance purposes is
provided, and it shall be the responsibility of the
landowner of the VCO-zoned property to maintain the
buffer.
(3) Minimum frontage.
(a) For parcels with less than one acre of net tract area: 100 feet.
(b) For parcels with more than one acre, but less than three acres
of net tract area: 150 feet.
(c) For parcels with more than three acres of net tract area: 200
feet.
§ 182-96.3 WATER § 182-96.3
176:783
(4) Maximum building coverage.
(a) For parcels with less than one acre of net tract area: 25%.
(b) For parcels with more than one acre, but less than three acres
of net tract area: 25%.
(c) For parcels with more than three acres of net tract area: 20%.
(5) Maximum impervious coverage.
(a) For parcels with less than one acre of net tract area: 75%.
(b) For parcels with more than one acre, but less than three acres
of net tract area: 65%.
(c) For parcels with more than three acres of net tract area: 60%.
(6) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(7) When multiple buildings are proposed, building spacing shall be no
less than 25 feet at the closest points.
(8) Access driveways.
(a) Access driveways may not be located within 100 feet of any
residential zoning district.
(b) The Board of Supervisors may require that access driveways
be taken from a private road if one borders the proposed site;
all easements and other required documentation shall be filed
with the Township.
C. Other development regulations.
(1) Utilities. All utility lines shall be placed underground.
(2) Signs. All signs in the VCO District shall be subject to the
requirements of Article XIX of this chapter and the following:
(a) Any sign with internal illumination may not be within 50 feet of
a residential zone. Any sign with external lighting, within 50
feet of a residential zoning district, shall have direct spot
lighting. At the Board of Supervisors' discretion, lighting of the
sign may be limited to certain hours.
(b) Signs with scrolling marquees, neon or other similar lighting
shall not be visible from a residential zoning district.
(3) Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as needed
and arranged in a manner which will protect the neighboring
properties from unreasonable glare or hazardous interference of
any kind and shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of
§ 154-40 of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, of the Code of the Township.
§ 182-96.3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-96.3
176:784
(a) Light fixtures within 250 feet of any residentially used or zoned
property shall not exceed 16 feet in height.
(4) Landscape planting. Shade trees in accordance with § 154-36C of
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, and other
plantings shall be provided along any street frontage occupied by a
VCO development.
(a) Buffer requirements.
[1] For any side or rear yard abutting a residentially zoned
property or use, and proposing less than 10,000 square
feet of gross floor area, a Buffer Type 2 shall be required.
At the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, upon the
recommendation of the Township Engineer or Planning
Consultant, a Buffer Type 2A may be required.
[2] For any side or rear yard abutting a residentially zoned
property or use, and proposing greater than 10,000 square
feet of gross floor area, a Buffer Type 3 shall be required.
[3] For any side yard, when not abutting a residentially zoned
property, a Buffer Type 2 is required.
[4] Any shared parking between one acre and smaller tracts
shall not be required to install a Buffer Type 1 in the side
yard with the shared parking; however, the shade tree
requirement and other parking lot landscaping as required
by § 154-36E, of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development, are still required.
[5] When the front yard of a tract is on a street frontage
opposite a residential zone, front yard parking shall be
prohibited and a Buffer Type 3 shall be installed.
(5) Trash and refuse areas. The design of buildings in the VCO District
shall include either a provision for the storage of trash, refuse, and
garbage inside the building(s) or within a masonry-walled area
outside the building(s). The wall of such a trash and refuse area
must shield the trash and refuse from the direct view of any
adjacent property, must be at least six feet high, and at no time be
located within 100 feet of a residentially zoned or used property.
(6) Off-street parking and loading facilities. All off-street parking and
loading facilities shall comply with the requirements of Article XXII
of this chapter.
(a) For any development with more than three acres of net tract
area, parking shall be provided at a minimum ratio of 5.5
spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area; provided,
however, at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, upon
recommendation by Township professionals, and if certain
§ 182-96.3 WATER § 182-96.3
176:785
proposed uses are known to generate higher parking needs, a
greater ratio can be imposed.
(b) Shared parking. For individual developments with one acre or
less of net tract area, shared parking is encouraged. In
addition to the requirements of § 182-181 the following shall
apply:
[1] Adequate documentation to substantiate a reduction in
parking requirements shall be submitted with an
applicant's subdivision and/or land development
application. At the discretion of the Board of Supervisors
and based upon the recommendation of the Township
professionals, a reduction in required parking may be
granted.
[2] For proposed shared parking in the VCO District, a special
exception need not be secured, as is stipulated in
§ 182-181.
[3] Proper cross easements and liability indemnification shall
be provided to the satisfaction of the Township Solicitor.
[4] For those successful applications for shared parking, the
individual lots may increase their impervious coverage an
additional 5% above the maximum permitted in
§ 182-96.3B(5), herein. In addition, adjoining lots may
aggregate the impervious coverage as though there were
no lot lines. Impervious coverage may be exceeded for an
individual lot as long as the maximum allowable is not
exceeded for the aggregated lots.
(c) Front yard parking. No more than 25% of the parking spaces
required within Article XXII are permitted in the front yard of
any VCO development in a parcel with less than three acres of
net tract area. If an existing building prevents a land
development from meeting the parking requirements in the
side and rear yards, the Board of Supervisors may grant a
conditional use to allow 50% of the parking spaces to be
located within the front yard area, if the following
requirements are met:
[1] Adequate evidence is presented that no other parking
configuration is feasible on the individual lot.
[2] Adequate evidence is presented that shared parking is not
feasible with the adjacent lots.
[3] A Buffer Type 4 must be installed between the front yard
parking area and the ultimate right-of-way.
§ 182-96.3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-96.3
176:786
§ 182-96.4. Preservation of existing buildings.
The retention of existing residential buildings in the VCO District for reuse
in accordance with the provisions of the district is encouraged. In instances
where this is done, the applicable building coverage requirement in
§ 182-96.3B(4) may be increased up to 10% and the applicable impervious
(d) Parking reduction. The Board of Supervisors may reduce the
total amount of parking required, provided that the applicant
demonstrates that the number of required spaces exceeds the
demands of the actual development. The amount of reduction
permitted by the Board of Supervisors shall be based upon a
recommendation by the Township Engineer or Traffic
Consultant from information provided to the Township by the
applicant. Information should, at a minimum, include
appropriate information from the latest edition of "Parking
Generation" published by the Institute of Transportation
Engineers and other material prepared by a qualified
professional.
(7) Design guidelines. In addition to Design guidelines for select
commercial developments, § 154-36.3, of Chapter 154, Subdivision
and Land Development, any proposed development within the VCO
District must meet the following:
(a) Facades.
[1] Multistory buildings shall articulate the line between the
ground and upper levels with a cornice, canopy, balcony,
arcade, or other visual device.
[2] Blank walls are not permitted along the main roadway and
if visible from a right-of-way or accessway shall be
articulated by details in masonry courses, window
openings, recessed or projecting window display cases, or
other visual device.
[3] The facade treatment of walls facing residential use
districts shall be similar to the primary front facade.
(b) For buildings with a footprint greater than 15,000 square feet,
the building must be designed to appear as multiple buildings.
(c) Existing buildings built before 1940 can be restored to their
original conditions or surfaced with brick or stone with wood
trim and details.
(8) Amenities. The developer shall be required to provide public
amenity areas for community or client use, such as sidewalk
benches, sitting areas, monument areas with seating, and other
services necessary for the comfort and convenience of the
prospective users of the VCO District.
§ 182-96.3 WATER § 182-96.4
176:787
coverage in § 182-96.3B(5) may be increased up to an additional 5%;
provided that the following conditions are met:
A. A minimum of 80% of the building exterior structure is retained; any
facade paralleling a public right-of-way shall be included in the
percentage of the building that is retained.
B. Any building which faces a public street shall not be expanded toward
that street, except for the addition of a front porch consistent with the
architectural style of the original building. All applicable setbacks for
the porch shall be met.
C. Expansion may be permitted to the side or rear of the building, if it does
not parallel a public road right-of-way and provided that any expansion
to the side begins a minimum of 10 feet back from the front of the
building and further provided that all applicable setback requirements
shall be met.
D. The design of any building expansion and the proposed roofline shall be
architecturally compatible with the existing building.
§ 182-96.4 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-96.4
176:788
ARTICLE XIV
PBO Professional and Business Office District
[Added 10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 224]
§ 182-97. Legislative intent.
The Professional and Business Office District is to provide appropriate
locations primarily for office and related uses. The regulations which apply
within the district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance
of a quiet, compatible and uncongested environment for business and
professional offices intermingled harmoniously with residences and certain
limited service uses. Specifically, it is the intent of the district to:
§ 182-98. Permitted uses. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 301]
In the PBO Professional and Business Office District, a building or group of
buildings may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used or occupied
for any of the following uses and no other:
A. Discourage any encroachment by unrestricted commercial or industrial
establishments or other uses which might adversely affect the
specialized office, service and residential character of the district.
B. Encourage the conversion of existing dwellings to office use in order to
encourage the preservation of sound residential structures, which
maintains the visual character and architectural scale of existing
development.
C. Attract professional office and service uses which do not generate large
volumes of traffic and continuous customer turnover.
D. Encourage the orderly, well-planned development of professional and
business offices and limited service establishments within the district
when a proliferation of unrestricted commercial usage would be
undesirable.
A. Professional offices for doctors, dentists, chiropractors or any other
licensed practitioner of the healing arts for humans and lawyers,
engineers, architects, urban planners, accountants, economic
consultants and business and management consultants.
B. Business offices providing credit services, security and commodity
brokerage, real estate sale, employment counseling, insurance sales,
advertising and mailing and stenographic services.
C. Single-family and two-family dwellings, in accordance with the
requirements of the R-3 Residence District with respect to area and
height regulations as set forth in § 182-52E.
D. Mixed-use structures containing any combination of permitted uses as
set forth in Subsections A through C, provided that in a mixed-use
§ 182-97 WATER § 182-98
176:789
§ 182-99. Conditional uses.
structure used in part for residential purposes, a maximum of three
dwelling units shall be permitted.
E. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of
the above-permitted uses.
F. No-impact home-based businesses in accordance with the standards set
forth in § 182-21.3 herein. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
A. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be permitted
when authorized by the Board of Supervisors, pursuant to the
procedural requirements set forth in Article XXII, § 182-204, of this
chapter and additional criteria set forth in Subsection B below:
[Amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
(1) Service establishments which directly serve the needs of the
permitted uses in § 182-98A and B herein, including but not limited
to such uses as a pharmacy, optometrist, dental equipment
laboratory and any other use of a similar nature; provided,
however, that any such use shall not be visible from any abutting
public right-of-way or parking area and no external signs
advertising said use(s) shall be permitted.
(2) Professional or business offices similar to those permitted in
§ 182-98A and B upon a showing that their function and usage are
substantially the same as those uses specifically enumerated in
§ 182-98A and B.
(3) Any use(s) listed in § 182-98A and B herein and in Subsection A(2)
of this section may be allowed as a conditional use on an existing
lot which does not meet the lot area and width requirements of
§ 182-100A herein. Modifications to the dimensional standards of
§ 182-100B herein may be allowed as part of a conditional use
under this subsection, provided that any adjacent residential or
institutional use is properly buffered with the following: a minimum
fifteen-foot buffer between a new building and an existing property
line; a minimum ten-foot buffer between a new parking lot and an
existing property line; and a minimum five-foot buffer between a
new driveway/accessway and an existing property line. A
combination of fencing and/or landscaping to the satisfaction of the
Township shall be placed in said buffer areas. The requirements of
§ 182-104 shall be applicable for all buffers; provided, however,
that where there is a discrepancy in buffer width, the width shall be
as prescribed in this subsection. [Added 8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
407]
B. Standards for consideration of conditional uses. The Board of
Supervisors shall determine that the following standards are met, prior
to granting approval of a conditional use application:
§ 182-98 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-99
176:790
§ 182-99.1. Special exception uses. [Added 6-1-1998 by Ord. No.
372]
The following special exception uses shall be permitted:
§ 182-100. Development regulations.
The following regulations shall apply in the Professional and Business Office
District:
(1) The use will not generate a significantly greater amount of traffic
volume than those uses permitted in § 182-98 herein in the
judgment of the Township Board of Supervisors, upon
recommendation of the Township Engineer. [Amended
12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
(2) The use shall not generate noise, noxious odors, air pollution or
glare nor result in pedestrian-vehicular conflict or other safety
hazards.
(3) Any necessary loading and unloading operations shall be carried on
within or contiguous to the facade of any conditional use structure.
A. As a special exception only, communications antennas, in accordance
with the provisions of § 182-21.1, mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, existing building or other existing structure, and
communications equipment buildings only upon a showing, in addition
to any other that may be required under this chapter, that denial of such
a special exception would have the effect of prohibiting the provision of
personal wireless service. Communications towers are not permitted.
A. Lot area. A minimum of 40,000 square feet shall be provided for every
principal building erected or used for any use permitted in this district.
In addition, a lot width of not less than 150 feet at the right-of-way shall
be provided. Conversion of an existing structure to any use permitted
according to § 182-98 on a lot smaller than 40,000 square feet may be
permitted as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, provided
that all required parking can be properly located on the same lot or on
an adjacent lot to which access is legally guaranteed, that all additions
to principal buildings be located at least 20 feet from all property lines
and that all parking be located at least 15 feet from all property lines.
The structural appearance of any building to be converted, in terms of
roofing, siding, entryways and porches, windows and other exterior
features visible from the public way, shall not be altered other than to
repair or replace the original material or style of the building. The
Zoning Hearing Board may, to encourage conversion of an existing
viable building, permit a bonus of not more than 10% impervious
coverage above that permitted in Subsection B herein. In allowing any
conversion, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach any reasonable
standards it deems appropriate to ensure that said use(s) are developed
§ 182-99 WATER § 182-100
176:791
§ 182-101. New construction or restoration.
In the event of new construction on a vacant lot or where a dwelling has
been removed, the design of the structure shall be consistent with the
predominant character of buildings within the district.
§ 182-102. Parking requirements.
The number of parking spaces shall be in accordance with Article XXII of
this chapter.
in a manner consistent with other uses in the district and are
compatible with said uses.
B. Building coverage. Not more than 25% of the area may be covered by
buildings, and total impervious coverage shall not exceed 70%.
C. Yard requirements.
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each lot which shall be
not less than 50 feet in depth from the street line.
(2) Side yards. On each interior lot there shall be two side yards having
an aggregate width of not less than 60 feet, neither side yard
having a width of less than 20 feet.
(3) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot, the depth of
which shall not be less than 40 feet, except that an accessory-use
structure may be erected within the rear yard not closer to any
property line than 15 feet.
D. Height. The maximum height of buildings or structures hereinafter
erected or enlarged in a Professional and Business Office District shall
be 35 feet, not to exceed three stories, exclusive of basements. For any
building or structure accessory to a building used for office and/or
residential purposes, the maximum height shall be 15 feet.
E. Maximum building dimension. The greatest dimension of a structure
measured parallel to exterior building walls shall be 125 feet. For
circular or partially circular buildings, the diameter or assumed
diameter shall not exceed 150 feet.
A. For double-parking bays, 15% of the area of each parking space may be
maintained in grass, provided that the grass is separated from the
paved area by a suitable wheel stop or bumper.
B. For parking areas of more than 20 cars, a minimum of 10% of the
parking area shall be devoted to interior parking lot landscaping,
exclusive of any other landscaping or buffering requirements and
exclusive of the grass area permitted under Subsection A herein. The
landscaping required individual landscaped area shall contain less than
200 square feet; the minimum horizontal dimension of any such area
shall be 10 feet.
§ 182-100 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-102
176:792
§ 182-103. Access to lots.
The following regulations shall pertain to access for all lots to be developed
in the PBO District and shall also govern on lots to be redeveloped in this
district to the maximum extent feasible:
C. The owners of two or more adjacent lots may elect to share common
parking facilities according to the following requirements:
(1) An application to do so shall be filed jointly by all affected lot
owners with the Zoning Officer, accompanied by a plan showing the
location of all proposed parking, parking reserve areas and
accessways as well as all buildings which shall use the common
parking area.
(2) The aggregate number of parking spaces required for all uses
which will share the common parking area may be reduced up to a
maximum of 25% if the applicant can demonstrate to the Zoning
Officer's satisfaction that a greater efficiency is effected by joint
use of a common parking area or that other circumstances warrant
such reduction (i.e., complementary operating hours of the uses
which will be sharing the parking area). Regardless of the number
of spaces actually developed, a parking area to accommodate the
aggregate number of parking spaces normally required shall be
fully designed, and the area which is proposed to be eliminated
shall be shown as "Parking Reserve Area." Such area shall be
required to be developed as designed, if and when the Zoning
Officer determines the need. All reserve areas not utilized for
parking shall be landscaped according to an approved plan.
(3) For purposes of determining the number and location of
accessways pursuant to § 182-103 below, the entire area devoted to
common parking shall be considered as one parking lot.
(4) Some portion of the common parking area shall be within 200 feet
of an entrance, regularly used by patrons, into each use served by
the common parking area.
(5) An application to permit shared common parking shall be
contingent upon each lot owner obtaining any necessary access
easements and rights-of-way.
A. Accessways leading onto a public street shall be built to the
dimensional requirements specified in § 154-19 of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development.
B. The spacing of access drives should be 200 feet apart on center, but if
lesser spacing is necessary and adequate justification is made for more
than one access point, then compliance with § 154-19A(8) of Chapter
154, Subdivision and Land Development, should be demonstrated.
§ 182-102 WATER § 182-104
176:793
§ 182-104. Landscaped planting and buffer areas. [Amended
8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
Along a side or rear property line which is adjacent to a residential or
institutional district, the owner shall place and maintain a Buffer Type
2 as described in § 154-36D(5) of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development.
§ 182-104 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-104
176:794
ARTICLE XV
M-1 Office and Limited Industrial District
§ 182-105. Legislative intent. [Amended 11-17-1986 by Ord. No.
262]
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives
contained in § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent
of this article with respect to M-1 Office and Limited Industrial Districts to
provide for the orderly and planned establishments of employment-oriented
office, research and development and laboratory uses and a variety of
nonpolluting industrial uses in both planned centers and on individual sites,
that are needed to meet both local and regional employment needs and
market demands and that will take advantage of the superior locations
and highway accessibility offered by the interchanges of the Pottstown
Expressway and the Phoenixville Spur that are proposed to be located
within the Township. Furthermore, it is the intent of this article to provide
performance standards, setbacks and buffering requirements to ensure that
the type and magnitude of office and industrial development will cause
minimal negative impact on the surrounding residential neighborhoods and
on the sensibilities of local residents. Finally, it is the intent of this article
to preserve valuable natural features and other amenities and to reflect the
varied site needs of the prospective tenants in furtherance of the general
welfare of the residents of Upper Providence Township.
§ 182-106. Permitted uses. [Amended 6-26-1978 by Ord. No. 204]
In an M-1 Office and Limited Industrial District, a building or group of
buildings may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used or occupied
for any of the following uses and no other:
A. A scientific or industrial research, engineering, testing or experimental
laboratory or similar establishment for research, training or product
development, provided that there is no commercial production of any
commodity or substance.
B. Offices, corporate headquarters and administrative buildings or
centers.
C. Printing, publishing, lithographic and similar processes.
D. Those manufacturing uses complying with the performance standards
set forth in § 182-109 herein.
E. Helistops, subject to the specific requirements set forth in § 182-21 of
this chapter. [Amended 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 405]
F. Animal hospitals and kennels. [Added 4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 240]
G. Truck repair or auto body/paint shops, vehicle storage or public
garages. [Added 4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 240]
§ 182-105 WATER § 182-106
176:795
H. The wholesaling, storage and sale of lumber and other building
materials. [Added 4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 240]
I. Machine laundry and dry-cleaning plants. [Added 4-2-1984 by Ord.
No. 240]
J. Creameries or butter- or cheese-making or milk-bottling and
distribution stations. [Added 4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 240]
K. Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to any of the
above permitted uses, which may include:
(1) Storage within a completely enclosed building in conjunction with a
permitted use.
(2) A repair shop or maintenance facility normally required for the
conduct of industrial operations.
(3) A cafeteria, recreation facility or other service located within a
permitted use and operated for the exclusive use of the occupants
of the building.
(4) Living quarters for watchmen, caretakers or similar employees.
L. Any use permitted in the CRSC Community and Regional Shopping
Center District, provided that the provisions of § 182-93, District
regulations, are met, and specifically the site development
requirements established for the category "Regional Shopping Center"
within said section are utilized. [Added 3-16-1992 by Ord. No. 309]
(1) Any Community and Regional Shopping Center must be a portion of
a total site containing at least 100 acres in single and separate
ownership, or shall be the subject on an application filed jointly by
the owners of the entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract
shall be developed under single direction in accordance with an
approved master plan. Seventy-five percent of the site area shall be
located within a one-mile radius of an interchange of a limitedaccess
highway. Such one-mile radius shall be measured from the
point at which the center of the limited-access highway intersects
with the center of a public road connected to the limited-access
highway.
(2) Any property having Community and Regional Shopping Center
uses must first file a master plan for the entire property in the form
provided in § 182-120.7, and specifically following the
requirements in said section, with the exception of those in
Subsections C and E, of this chapter as a prerequisite for approval.
In addition, the master plan shall specifically allocate commercial
and industrial development areas and delineate separations
between uses, as well as required parking associated with each use
area, and provide a general landscape and buffer plan and a
circulation plan that would segregate automobile and truck traffic
§ 182-106 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-106
176:796
§ 182-107. Special exception uses. [Added 4-2-1984 by Ord. No.
240]
from each other as well as commercial access from access to
the industrial development areas. Any required buffer areas shall
conform to the greater requirement of the CRSC or M-1 District.
(3) All CRSC uses shall be contiguous and uninterrupted by M-1 uses.
(4) The following uses shall not be permitted on any portion of a
property which is submitted for CRSC uses within the M-1 District:
(a) Manufacturing uses.
(b) Helistops and heliports.
(c) Animal hospitals and kennels.
(d) Truck repair or auto body/paint shops.
(e) Dry cleaning plants.
(f) Special exception uses under § 182-107A.
(5) Upon approval of a final development plan for CRSC use pursuant
to this section, all CRSC uses must be contiguous and shall not
exceed 80% of the gross buildable area identified in the master
plan, unless the balance of M-1 uses shall terminate within two
years from the date which the development attained 80%
occupancy by CRSC uses.
(6) In the case of a property used for CRSC development pursuant to
this section, whenever any M-1 use(s) is subject to the performance
standards contained in § 182-109 of this chapter, in any instance
where reference is made to "the property line" of the development
site or "the district boundary line" of the M-1 District, those lines
shall be construed to also include the line separating the CRSC
uses from the M-1 uses. This line shall be that line separating said
uses, as designated on the master plan required pursuant to
Subsection L(2) of this section, and as said master plan may be
subsequently amended. This line shall be subject to the approval of
the Board of Supervisors.
M. Communications antennas, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 182-21.1, mounted on an existing public utility transmission tower,
existing building or other existing structure, and communications
equipment buildings. [Added 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 372]
A. Adult bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters and adult
entertainment cabarets.
(1) Adult uses shall be permitted only as special exceptions in the M-1
District.
§ 182-106 WATER § 182-107
176:797
§ 182-108. Conditional uses. [Added 6-26-1978 by Ord. No. 204]
Certain uses may be authorized as conditional uses in the M-1 Office and
Limited Industrial District, according to the provisions of this section and
§ 182-204.
(a) No such adult use shall be allowed within 1,000 feet of another
existing adult use.
(b) No such adult use shall be located within 1,000 feet of any
zoning district which is zoned for residential use.
(c) No such adult use shall be located within 1,000 feet of a
preexisting school or place of worship.
(d) No such adult use shall be located in any zoning district except
an M-1 zoned area by special exception.
(e) No such adult use shall be deemed to be a permissible change
of use as set forth in this chapter.
(2) Exterior display. No adult use shall be conducted in any manner
that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, from any public way or from any property not registered as
an adult use. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration,
sign, show window or other opening.
(3) No adult use shall be permitted which is obscene or contains uses
or sells obscene materials as defined by Section 5903 of the
Pennsylvania Crimes Code.150
B. As a special exception only, communications antennas mounted on a
communications tower and communications equipment buildings only
upon a showing, in addition to any other that may be required under
this chapter, that denial of such a special exception would have the
effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless service and that
it is not feasible to mount the communications antenna on an existing
public utility transmission tower, existing building, or other existing
structure. Communications antennas shall conform to the requirements
of § 182-21.1, and Communications Towers shall conform to the
requirements of § 182-21.2. [Added 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 372]
A. The following may be authorized as a conditional use when
incorporated in the M-1 Office and Limited Industrial District,
according to the provisions of this section and § 182-204: [Amended
12-2-1985 by Ord. No. 250; 11-21-1988 by Ord. No. 289]
(1) A financial institution, studio and office for professional use.
(2) A medical and dental clinic for the treatment of humans.
150. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903.
§ 182-107 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-108
176:798
(3) A restaurant.
(4) Day-care center. [Amended 10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 451]
(5) A passenger station for public transportation.
(6) A gasoline service station, provided that not less than 30,000
square feet of lot area shall be devoted to this use and provided
that an attendant is on duty during operating hours.
(7) A recreational facility.
(8) A conference center.
(9) A hotel, when located within a one-mile radius of an interchange of
a limited-access highway. Such one-mile radius shall be measured
from the point at which the center of the limited-access highway
intersects with the center of a public road connected to the limitedaccess
highway.
B. A wholesale, warehouse, storage or distribution center may be
authorized as a conditional use, provided that all of the following
criteria are met:
(1) A minimum lot area of 10 acres per use is provided.
(2) Each lot used for such purpose has at least 200 feet of frontage on a
road of collector or higher classification, as specified in Article IV of
Chapter 151, Streets and Sidewalks.
(3) At least 75% of each lot used for such purpose shall not contain
floodplains or slopes in excess of 8%.
(4) All loading and unloading operations shall be carried on within or
contiguous to the facade of any building(s) used for such purpose.
(5) Satisfactory provisions are made to prevent traffic congestion and
hazards resulting from projected truck traffic, as determined by the
evaluation of a traffic impact study to be prepared by a professional
traffic engineer and/or transportation planner. Minimum guidelines
for the preparation of a traffic impact study shall be as listed below,
with additional guidelines to be set forth as deemed necessary by
the Board of Supervisors:
(a) The traffic impact on all roadways, intersections and
interchanges within a half-mile radius from the edge of the site
shall be considered.
(b) The study shall include a description of the type of operation
proposed and the trucking characteristics associated with it.
(c) Traffic volumes for average daily traffic at peak highway
hour(s) and at peak development-generated hour(s) shall be
included for all roadways in the study area.
§ 182-108 WATER § 182-108
176:799
§ 182-109. Performance standards. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No.
490]
Notwithstanding the applicable laws and regulations of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, the following performance standards shall be
used by the Board of Supervisors, Township Planning Commission and
Township Engineer in reviewing the suitability and possible hazardous
impacts of a proposed use within the M-1 Office and Limited Industrial
District:
(d) Documentation of the source(s) of trip generation rates used
shall be included.
(e) An origin and destination analysis for the projected truck
traffic shall be included.
(f) Documentation of any on-site or off-site improvements
proposed by the applicant to mitigate any projected adverse
impacts shall be enumerated.
(6) Landscape planting and buffer areas shall be provided as follows:
[Amended 11-17-1986 by Ord. No. 262]
(a) Along any boundary of a tract used for such purpose which
abuts an area in Upper Providence Township or in an adjacent
municipality which is not zoned for industrial uses of any type,
the requirements in § 182-112F herein shall apply; provided,
further, that a minimum of 75% of the landscape material shall
consist of evergreen vegetation.
(b) Along any boundary of a tract used for such purpose which
abuts other land zoned M-1 (unless such land is already
occupied by another wholesale, warehouse, storage or
distribution center), the requirements of § 182-112F herein
shall apply; however, a minimum of 25% of the landscape
material shall consist of evergreen vegetation.
C. Heliports, subject to the specific requirements set forth in § 182-21 of
this chapter. [Added 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 405]
A. In determining whether a proposed use is or may become noxious,
hazardous or offensive, the following standards shall apply. The
proposed use may not:
(1) Constitute a nuisance or damage to health or any property by
reason of dissemination of noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes,
smoke, odor or dust in the immediately surrounding area or, in the
case of an M-1 Office and Limited Industrial District, beyond the
district boundary line.
§ 182-108 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-109
176:800
(2) Result in noise or vibration clearly exceeding the average intensity
of noise or vibration occurring from other causes at the property
line or, in the case of an M-1 Office and Limited Industrial District,
beyond the district boundary line.
(3) Endanger surrounding areas by reason of radiation, fire or
explosion.
(4) Produce objectionable heat or glare beyond the property line or, in
the case of an M-1 Office and Limited Industrial District, beyond
the district boundary line.
(5) Result in electrical disturbance in nearby residences or adversely
affect the operation of equipment other than on the property on
which the disturbance is located.
(6) Discharge any untreated sewage or industrial waste into any
stream or the Schuylkill River or otherwise contribute to the
pollution of surface or underground waters.
(7) Endanger the underground water level or supply for other
properties.
(8) Create an objectionable traffic condition on the highway or in an
adjacent area or generate a nuisance to surrounding property by
reason of truck traffic.
(9) Create any other objectionable condition in an adjoining area
which will endanger public health and safety or be detrimental to
the environmental quality of the surrounding area.
B. The applicant shall demonstrate to the Township Engineer that:
(1) The proposed use(s) will comply with the standards contained in
Subsection A herein. [Amended 11-17-1986 by Ord. No. 262]
(2) Adequate provisions will be made to reduce and minimize any
objectionable elements to the degree necessary to ensure that the
proposed use(s) will not be noxious, hazardous or offensive as
defined in Subsection A herein. [Amended 11-17-1986 by Ord.
No. 262]
(3) The Township Engineer may require, in order to determine that
adequate safeguards are provided, that:
(a) The applicant submit necessary information, impartial expert
judgment and written assurances.
(b) The applicant obtain the advice of appropriate local, state and
federal agencies and of private consultants.
(c) The applicant's proposed use(s) comply with such tests or
provide such safeguards as are deemed necessary by the Board
of Supervisors, upon the advice of the Township Engineer.
§ 182-109 WATER § 182-110
176:801
§ 182-110. District regulations.
The following regulations shall apply in the M-1 Office and Limited
Industrial District.
§ 182-111. Site development requirements. [Amended 9-20-1982 by
Ord. No. 231; 4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 242; 12-2-1985 by Ord. No. 252;
11-17-1986 by Ord. No. 262]
A. General regulations. The following general regulations shall apply for
any development proposal within the M-1 Office and Limited Industrial
District:
(1) Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one
ownership or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by
the owners of the entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract
will be developed under single direction in accordance with an
approved plan. The transfer of ownership to another applicant
prior to the commencement of construction shall render the
development agreement required in Subsection A(4) herein void.
Said agreement shall then be renegotiable between the new
owner(s) and the Board of Supervisors. [Amended 12-16-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
(2) Sewer and water facilities. The tract of land shall be served by
public sewer facilities and water facilities deemed acceptable by
the Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Township
Engineer.
(3) Development plan. The application for development shall be
accompanied by a plan or plans showing the detailed use of the
entire tract, which plan or plans also shall comply with all
requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development,
and other applicable ordinances. The plan shall clearly designate
the proposed use(s) of each area of the tract.
(4) Development stages and permits. The development of a tract
carried out in either a single phase or in stages shall be executed in
accordance with a development agreement. The owner, developer
and Township shall enter into said agreement embodying all details
regarding compliance with this article to assure the binding nature
thereof on the overall tract and its development, which agreement
shall be recorded with the final development plan.
A. [Amended 6-18-1990 by Ord. No. 299; 12-16-1991 by Ord. No.
307] The following site development requirements shall be
complied with for a development proposal in the M-1 Office and
Limited Industrial District:
§ 182-110 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-111
176:802
Site Development Requirements in the M-1 Office
and Limited Industrial District
Site Development Requirements Dimensions
Minimum tracta (acres) 4
Minimum widthb (feet) 200
Minimum building setbacksc (feet) 751
1002
503
04
Minimum parking and loading setbacksd
(feet)
NA1
502
253
04
Maximum impervious coverage (percent)e 65
Maximum building coverage (percent) 40
Maximum height (feet) 50
NOTES:
a Excluding rights-of-way of existing public roads.
b Measured along the building line.
c Measured from:
1 The ultimate right-of-way lines.
2 An abutting residential or institutional district boundary line.
3 An abutting commercial or industrial district boundary line.
4 With zero lot line development, a building may be constructed
so that one wall may be coincidental with one lot line, provided
that the requirements of Subsection B herein are met.
d Measured from:
1 The ultimate right-of-way lines.
2 An abutting residential or institutional district boundary line.
3 An abutting commercial or industrial district boundary line.
4 With shared parking and loading facilities.
§ 182-111 WATER § 182-111
176:803
§ 182-112. Other development regulations.
The following additional development regulations shall apply for any
development proposed in the M-1 Office and Limited Industrial District:
NOTES:
e The total paved and developed area of a tract.
B. Front yard parking shall be permitted in the M-1 District only under the
following circumstances:
(1) In the case of multiple buildings which are designed as a single
integrated development.
(2) In the case of single building development, front yard parking shall
be permitted for visitor and client use only, provided that this shall
represent no more than 25% of the required parking.
(3) For all uses where parking is installed in the front yard in
compliance with the requirements herein, landscaped buffering
shall be provided in the area between the parking and the property
boundary to the satisfaction of the Township Planning Commission.
In such buffer area, earthen berms at a slope no greater than three
to one (3:1) shall be required.
C. Zero lot line development regulations. Zero lot line development is
allowed on one side of a property line only. All other setbacks will be a
minimum of 50 feet unless a greater setback is prescribed in Subsection
A herein. when zero lot line development is utilized, the following
regulations shall apply:
(1) No building wall situated on a lot line shall contain windows, doors,
loading areas or other openings.
(2) The roof shall not be drained toward a wall situated on a lot line.
(3) No building wall shall be placed on a side lot line, unless access is
provided onto the abutting property to allow for the inspection,
maintenance and repair of the building wall and foundation.
Provision for access shall be guaranteed by irrevocable easement
or other legal mechanism, to the satisfaction of the Township
Solicitor.
(4) Structures on abutting lots may be built along their common lot
line, creating a party wall between the abutting uses.
A. Utilities. All utility lines (electrical, telephone, etc.) shall be placed
underground.
B. Signs. Advertising signs and billboards are permitted as special
exception uses in the M-1 Office and Limited Industrial District. All
signs in this district, including advertising signs and billboards, shall be
§ 182-111 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-112
176:804
§ 182-113. Plan submission requirements.
All proposals for developments within the M-1 Office and Limited Industrial
District shall comply with the pertinent requirements of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development, concerning nonresidential
developments.
subject to the requirements of Article XIX, Signs, of this chapter.
[Amended 12-2-1985 by Ord. No. 249]
C. Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress
to and from public streets and highways serving the M-1 Office and
Limited Industrial District development without causing undue
confusion or interference with the normal traffic flow. The Township
Planning Commission, with the advice of the Township Engineer, shall
satisfy itself as to the adequacy of the thoroughfares and access points
intended to accommodate the traffic generated by the proposed M-1
Office and Limited Industrial District development, as well as to the
street frontage of the proposed development.
D. Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as needed and
arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and neighboring
properties from unreasonable glare or hazardous interference of any
kind and shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
154, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township,
§ 154-40. [Amended 6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 416]
E. Trash and refuse areas. Provision shall be made for the storage of trash,
refuse and garbage either inside the building(s) or within a walled area
outside the building(s). The walls of such trash and refuse areas must
shield the trash and refuse from the direct view of any adjacent
property and must be at least six feet in height.
F. Landscaped planting and buffer areas. Along a side or rear property
line which is adjacent to a residential or institutional district, the owner
shall place and maintain a Buffer Type 2 as described in § 154-36D(5) of
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development. [Amended
8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
G. Off-street parking and loading facilities. All off-street parking facilities
serving a proposed M-1 Office and Limited Industrial District
development shall comply with the pertinent requirements of Article
XXII, Off-street Parking and Loading, hereof. All off-street loading
facilities shall comply with § 182-184.
H. Minimum distance between buildings. The minimum distance between
a building or group of buildings shall be 25 feet, except that all
structures connected by common roof lines or covered walkways shall
be considered as one building.
§ 182-112 WATER § 182-113
176:805

ARTICLE XVI
IO Interchange Office District
[Added 4-4-1988 by Ord. No. 278]
§ 182-114. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the community development objectives contained in Article
I, § 182-2, of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of this
article with respect to IO Interchange Office Districts to provide flexible
standards for corporate headquarters or multi-building office development
in a campus setting.
§ 182-115. Permitted uses.
In an IO Interchange Office District, a building or group of buildings may be
erected, altered or used and a lot may be used for any of the following uses
or a combination of the following uses:
§ 182-116. Conditional uses.
A. To encourage the development of employment centers at the
interchanges of State Route 422 (Pottstown Expressway).
B. To provide a visual gateway into the Township.
C. To preserve the rural character of the Township while encouraging the
development of large land areas under single direction.
D. To provide for ancillary uses to support corporate office development,
creating autonomous development that is efficient in design.
E. To achieve the goals of the adopted Comprehensive Plan by supporting
the recommendations of the interchange studies.
A. An office.
B. Corporate headquarters.
C. Administrative buildings or centers.
D. A laboratory.
E. Communications antennas, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 182-21.1, mounted on an existing public utility transmission tower,
existing building or other existing structure, and communications
equipment buildings. [Added 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 372]
F. Helistops, subject to the specific requirements set forth in § 182-21 of
this chapter. [Added 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 405]
A. Conditional uses permitted. The following conditional uses are
permitted, when authorized by the Board of Supervisors, pursuant to
§ 182-114 WATER § 182-116
176:807
the procedural requirements set forth in § 182-204 and pursuant to the
requirements set forth herein:
(1) Printing, publishing, lithographic and similar processes.
(2) Retail establishments directly serving the needs of the permitted
uses in § 182-115 herein, including but not limited to such uses as
pharmacies, coffee shops, restaurants, bars, newsstands and any
other uses of a similar nature.
(3) Service establishments directly serving the needs of the permitted
uses in § 182-115 herein, including but not limited to such uses as
automated bank machines, financial services, fitness centers, daycare
centers, travel consultants and other uses of a similar nature.
(4) (Reserved)151
(5) Lodging facilities for the express use of office park clients, visitors
and employees.
(6) Conference facilities for the express use of the office park clients,
visitors and employees.
B. Standards for consideration of conditional uses. The Board of
Supervisors shall determine that the following standards are met prior
to granting approval of the conditional use application:
(1) The use shall have hours of operation that coincide with the largest
shift of employees in the district, unless additional hours are
deemed reasonable by the Board of Supervisors based upon the
nature of the use.
(2) The use shall be oriented to the interior of the development and
visually screened from view of the abutting rights-of-way.
(3) External identification signs shall not be permitted except where
directories or kiosks list all uses within the development.
(4) Except in the case of transportation centers, heliports and
supplementary parking, the use shall not take up more than 10% of
the first floor area of the development, located at ground level
within the primary structure. Freestanding conditional uses shall
not be permitted.
(5) Additional parking may be required for a conditional use by the
Board of Supervisors where warranted.
C. As a special exception only, communications antennas mounted on a
communications tower and communications equipment buildings, only
upon a showing, in addition to any other that may be required under
this chapter, that denial of such a special exception would have the
151. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(4), Transportation centers, heliports and
supplementary parking, was repealed 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 405.
§ 182-116 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-116
176:808
§ 182-117. Landscaping and open space.
A landscaping and open space plan shall be submitted with the preliminary
plan in accordance with the criteria listed below. As an expression of
concern for a well-balanced development and its relationship to the rural
surroundings, the Township requires that a minimum of 65% of the total
tract be devoted to the creative development of passive and active
landscaped open spaces.
effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless service and that
it is not feasible to mount the communications antenna on an existing
public utility transmission tower, existing building, or other existing
structure. Communications antennas shall conform to the requirements
of § 182-21.1 and communications towers shall conform to the
requirements of § 182-21.2. [Added 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 372]
A. Landscaping and earth shaping (berming) shall be used to screen
surface parking and mechanical service areas.
(1) A ten-foot minimum strip shall be provided between interior drives
and parking areas. [Amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
(2) Landscaping shall not cause hazardous interior movements. Clear
sight triangles should be established on interior intersections.
(3) A five-foot minimum strip shall be provided between utility facilities
such as transformers, switch cabinets, meters, etc., and the rest of
the development.
B. Landscaping and earth shaping (berming) shall be used to buffer
buildings and parking areas and shall be installed in the setback areas
as prescribed in § 182-119; provided, however, that they may be
installed outside the setback areas if, in the opinion of the Township,
due to topography or other unique site conditions, they will create a
more effective buffer. Specifications for the various buffer types shall be
as stipulated in § 154-36D of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development. In addition to the required buffers, all interior drives
shall be landscaped. [Amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307;
8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 405]
C. Landscaping and earth shaping (berming) shall be used to buffer
pedestrian walkways from vehicular traffic and create an overall
pedestrian movement system.
(1) Within parking areas, pedestrian crosswalks shall be distinguished
from pavement by striping or a change in color or materials.
(2) Within open space areas, a totally separate pedestrian system shall
be required linking open space to pedestrian places and buildings
on the site.
D. Interior areas to be preserved in open space.
§ 182-116 WATER § 182-117
176:809
§ 182-118. District regulations.
The following regulations shall apply in the Interchange Office District:
(1) Floodplains, steep slopes, woodlands and other environmental
constraints should be preserved and integrated into the landscape
design.
(2) Views of open lands shall be preserved.
(3) Areas of retention and detention shall be integrated into the overall
open space design.
(4) Wherever possible, the owner shall make every effort to retain
existing natural screening such as vegetation and topography.
(5) Planting. All evergreen vegetation to be installed shall not be less
than five feet in height at the time of planting and shall be of such
species that the expected height at maturity shall not be less than
15 feet. All deciduous material to be installed shall not be less than
eight feet in height or two-inch caliper at chest height.
A. General regulations. The following general regulations shall apply for
any development proposal within the Interchange Office District:
(1) Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one
ownership or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by
the owners of the entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract
will be developed under single direction in accordance with an
approved plan. The transfer of ownership to another applicant
prior to the commencement of construction shall render the
development agreement required in Subsection A(4) below void.
Said agreement shall then be renegotiable between the new
owner(s) and the Board of Supervisors. [Amended 12-16-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
(2) Sewer and water facilities. The tract of land shall be served by
public sewer facilities and water facilities deemed acceptable by
the Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Municipal
Authority Engineer and review by the Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP), the Lower Perkiomen Valley
Sewer Authority and the Board of Supervisors. [Amended
6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
(3) Development plan. The application for development shall be
accompanied by a plan or plans showing the detailed use of the
entire tract, which plan or plans also shall comply with all
requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development,
and other applicable ordinances. The plan shall clearly designate
the proposed use(s) of each area of the tract The plan shall also be
subject to tentative, preliminary and final review in accordance
with Chapter 154.
§ 182-117 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-118
176:810
§ 182-119. Site development requirements. [Amended 12-16-1991
by Ord. No. 307]
The following site development requirements shall be complied with for a
development proposal in the Interchange Office District:
Site Development Requirements Dimensions
Minimum tract size (acres) 25
Minimum width along the ultimate right-of-way
line (feet)
500
Minimum building setbacks (feet)
From a limited access highway (Buffer Type 2
required)
50
From a controlled or semicontrolled access
highway (Buffer Type 2 required)
75
From a collector, feeder or road of any other
classification (Buffer Type 3 required)
100
From a residentially or institutionally zoned or
developed property (Buffer Type 3 required)
200
From any other district boundary line (Buffer
Type 2 required)
50
From interior drives (Buffer Type 1 required) 20
From parking areas (Buffer Type 4 required) 20
From adjacent buildings 20
Minimum parking setbacks (feet)
From a limited access highway (Buffer Type 2A
required) [Amended 6-15-1992 by Ord. No.
311]
30
From a controlled or semicontrolled access
highway (Buffer Type 2A required) [Amended
6-15-1992 by Ord. No. 311]
40
From a collector, feeder or road of any other
classification (Buffer Type 3 required)
100
From a residentially or institutionally zoned or
developed property (Buffer Type 3 required)
100
(4) Development stages and permits. The development of a tract
carried out in either a single phase or in stages shall be executed in
accordance with a development agreement. The owner, developer
and Township shall enter into said agreement embodying all details
regarding compliance with this article to assure the binding nature
thereof on the overall tract and its development, which agreement
shall be recorded with the final development plan.
§ 182-118 WATER § 182-119
176:811
Site Development Requirements Dimensions
From any other district boundary line (Buffer
Type 2A required)
50
From interior drives (Buffer Type 1A required) 20
From parking areas (Buffer Type 4 required) 20
From adjacent buildings (Buffer Type 4
required)
20
Maximum building coverage 10%
Maximum height (feet) 55, but with a limitation
of no more than 4
habitable or occupied
stories
§ 182-120. Other development regulations.
The following additional development regulations shall apply for any
development proposed in the Interchange Office District:
A. Utilities. All utility lines (electrical, telephone, etc.) shall be placed
underground.
B. Signs. All signs in the IO Interchange Office District must adhere to the
requirements of Article XIX, Signs, of this chapter.
C. Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress
to and from public streets and highways serving the IO District
development without causing undue confusion or interference with the
normal traffic flow. The Township Planning Commission, with the advice
of the Township Engineer, shall satisfy itself as to the adequacy of the
thoroughfares and access points intended to accommodate the traffic
generated by the proposed IO District development, as well as to the
street frontage of the proposed development. Access points shall be
limited to no more than two curb cuts per site from any street or
highway unless such site has more than 600 feet of frontage on said
street or highway. In no event shall more than three curb cuts be
provided.
D. Loading and unloading. All loading and unloading operations shall be
carried on within or contiguous to the facade of any building(s) used for
such purposes.
E. Traffic impact. Satisfactory provisions shall be made to prevent traffic
congestion and hazards resulting from projected traffic, as determined
by the evaluation of a traffic impact study to be prepared by a
professional traffic engineer and/or transportation planner. Said study
shall be submitted for any application for development in the IO
Interchange Office District or for any request for a rezoning to this
district. Minimum guidelines for the preparation of a traffic impact
study shall be as listed below, with additional guidelines to be set forth
§ 182-119 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120
176:812
as deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors: [Amended
12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
(1) The traffic on all roadways, intersections and interchanges within a
half-mile radius from the edge of the site shall be considered.
(2) The study shall include a description of the type of operation
proposed and the traffic characteristics associated with it.
(3) Traffic volumes for average daily traffic at peak highway hour(s)
and at peak development-generated hour(s) shall be included for all
roadways in the study area.
(4) Documentation of the source(s) of trip generation rates used shall
be included.
(5) An origin and destination analysis for the projected traffic shall be
included.
(6) Documentation of any on-site or off-site improvements proposed by
the applicant to mitigate any projected adverse impacts shall be
enumerated.
F. Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as needed and
arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and neighboring
properties from unreasonable glare or hazardous interference of any
kind and shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
154, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township,
§ 154-40. [Amended 6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 416]
G. Trash and refuse areas. Provision shall be made for the storage of trash,
refuse and garbage, whether inside the building(s) or within a walled
area outside the building(s). The walls of such trash and refuse areas
must shield the trash and refuse from the direct view of any adjacent
property and must be at least six feet in height.
H. Amenity areas. The developer shall be encouraged to provide amenity
areas for community or customer use, such as tot-lots, playgrounds,
benches, sitting areas and other services necessary for the comfort and
convenience of the prospective users of the IO District development.
I. Community impact analysis. Any application for development in the IO
Interchange Office District or for any request for a rezoning to this
district shall be required to submit a community impact analysis for
evaluation by the Township, covering the following subject areas:
[Amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
(1) The conformance of the proposed development with the
Comprehensive Plan of Upper Providence Township and its
compatibility with existing and proposed land uses adjacent to the
site.
§ 182-120 WATER § 182-120
176:813
(2) The impact on any existing floodplains, heavily wooded areas, rock
outcroppings, steep slopes and other sensitive natural features, if
any.
(3) The impact on the Township and regional transportation system
and the ability of adjacent streets and intersections to efficiently
and safely handle the traffic generated by the proposed
development.
(4) The impact on public utilities, including but not limited to sewage
disposal, garbage and rubbish disposal, water supply, storm
drainage and electric utilities.
(5) The impact on the provision of police and fire protection for the
proposed development.
(6) The impact upon the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
The applicant must show that the proposed development will not
adversely affect the neighborhood by reason of noise, odors, smoke
or vibration.
J. Parking. All parking in any development built pursuant to this article
shall utilize the applicable requirements contained in Article XXII, Off-
Street Parking and Loading, of this chapter. [Added 12-16-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
§ 182-120 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120
176:814
ARTICLE XVIA
IO-2 Interchange Office Support District
[Added 8-6-1990 by Ord. No. 300]
§ 182-120.1. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the community development objectives contained in Article
I, § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of this
article with respect to IO-2 Interchange Office Support Districts to provide
standards for office uses and developments which will provide
complementary services for nearby Interchange Office District
developments.
A. To encourage the development of office and related services in locations
at or near interchanges of State Route 422 (the Pottstown Expressway)
that are convenient to the larger-scale corporate headquarters and
office developments in IO Districts.
B. To provide such areas either immediately abutting or surrounded by
existing IO Districts.
C. To function as a service district to the IO District, IO-2 Districts should
only be applied to the Township Zoning Map subsequent to the
development of a sufficient amount of nearby development in an IO
District, or alternatively, upon final approval of a sufficient amount of
such development, so as to provide demonstrated need for such support
services as would be provided in the IO-2 Districts.
D. To provide ancillary commercial uses, as conditional uses, which
provide retail goods and/or services for the employees in this district.
E. To provide for a limited array of freestanding commercial uses, also as
conditional uses, which will provide certain essential services for
employees of the broader employment centers around the Route 422
interchanges, including developments in both IO and IO-2 Districts.
F. To be applied in locations so as to reduce conflicts and traffic
congestion on major arterial highways which traverse these areas, by
minimizing travel outside the interchange area.
G. To provide certain development flexibility afforded by permitting a
limited amount of land subdivision for tracts of land whose physical
characteristics discourage creation of a singular development site, and
to ensure that when such subdivision is permitted, it is done in strict
conformity with a recorded master plan and accompanying set of
restricted covenants, assuring continual adherence to an approved
development concept.
H. To provide development regulations which ensure the preservation of
the Township's rural character.
§ 182-120.1 WATER § 182-120.1
176:815
§ 182-120.2. Permitted uses.
In an IO-2 Interchange Office Support District, a building or group of
buildings may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used for any of
the following uses or a combination of the following uses and none others:
§ 182-120.3. Conditional uses.
I. To recognize the desirability of mixed-use communities to reduce
automobile trips on Township streets by allowing a limited amount of
residential development within an IO-2 Master Plan development. This
will provide housing choices for employees in the IO-2 development and
also enable greater use of walking and bicycling as a means of
commuting. [Added 12-3-2012 by Ord. No. 524]
A. Business or administrative office.
B. Professional office.
C. Communications antennas, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 182-21.1, mounted on an existing public utility transmission tower,
existing building or other existing structure, and communications
equipment buildings. [Added 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 372]
A. The following conditional uses are permitted, when authorized by the
Board of Supervisors, pursuant to the procedural requirements set
forth in Article XXIV, § 182-204, of this chapter and pursuant to the
requirements set forth herein:
(1) Retail establishments directly serving the needs of the employees
in the IO-2 District, including but not limited to pharmacies, coffee
shops, newsstands or any other use of a similar nature, in
accordance with the applicable standards contained in Subsection
B herein.
(2) Service establishments directly serving the needs of the permitted
uses in § 182-120.2 herein, including but not limited to such uses as
automated bank machines, fitness centers, travel consultants and
other uses of a similar nature, in accordance with the applicable
standards contained in Subsection B herein.
(3) Freestanding commercial uses in accordance with the applicable
standards contained in Subsection B herein, and limited to the
following:
(a) Full-service restaurant serving food on premises with table
service and using reusable (nondisposable) dishes and utensils.
(b) Child-care facility, registered with and approved by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in which children not more
than six years of age are supervised on weekdays by licensed
§ 182-120.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.3
176:816
child-care personnel, for daytime hours after 7:00 a.m. and
before 7:00 p.m.
(c) Hotel, which may contain customary accessory uses within the
same structure, including but not limited to dining, fitness
center, shop selling sundries, and conference facilities.
[Amended 10-6-2014 by Ord. No. 541]
(d) Bank or similar financial institution, which may include drive-in
facilities.
(4) Helistop, in accordance with the provisions of § 182-21 of this
chapter.
(5) Parking may be established as the sole use on the lot, if the lot is
slated for future development on the most recently approved
master plan and in accordance with the provisions of
§ 182-120.3B(3) of this chapter. [Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No.
513]
(6) The Residential Use Group-2 (RUG-2). [Added 12-3-2012 by Ord.
No. 524]
B. Standards for consideration of conditional uses. The Board of
Supervisors shall determine that the following standards are met prior
to granting approval of a conditional use application:
(1) For those conditional uses enumerated in Subsection A(1) and (2)
herein, compliance with the following standards shall be
demonstrated:
(a) Said uses shall be located within a permitted use structure; no
such use(s) shall be freestanding.
(b) The aggregate amount of total floor area within any
development approved pursuant to this article, which may be
devoted to all such uses, shall not exceed 5%.
(c) External identification signs shall not be permitted except
where directories or kiosks list all uses within the
development.
(d) Additional parking may be required for said conditional use(s)
by the Board of Supervisors.
(2) For those conditional uses enumerated in Subsection A(3) herein,
compliance with the following standards shall be demonstrated:
(a) At least 50% of the floor area of the permitted uses of the
overall development shall have been completed prior to
allowance of any conditional use; provided, however, that if, in
the opinion of the Board of Supervisors, such use shall serve
existing adjacent development in an IO Interchange Office
§ 182-120.3 WATER § 182-120.3
176:817
District, such conditional use may be permitted without
compliance with this standard.
(b) No more than one such conditional use shall be permitted for
every 25 acres of area to be developed pursuant to this article.
(c) A market study shall be prepared and shall demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors, the need for said
use(s). Said study shall include, but not be limited to, a full
description of the proposed use(s) and the anticipated number
of employees, the anticipated market area for the proposed
use(s), an estimate of the number of users, a description of
similar facilities within the market area, as well as any
additional factors which will adequately demonstrate the
market demand for the proposed use(s) both at the time of
initial occupancy and at time of full usage.
(d) Access for any such conditional use shall be solely from an
internal access road serving the development, unless alternate
access is approved by the Board of Supervisors, based on the
conclusions of the traffic impact study, required by reference in
§ 182-120.9 herein.
(e) Such uses shall be designed in such manner that the vehicular
circulation required to service them does not conflict with the
overall circulation system throughout the entire development.
Additionally, for any bank or similar financial institution which
is to include a drive-in facility, vehicular circulation for such
drive-in facility shall accommodate stacking areas for a
sufficient number of cars based on the opinions of the
Township's traffic consultant and Township Engineer, and in
general, the circulation and stacking areas for such drive-in
facilities shall be separated from the overall circulation and
parking so as not to cause undue congestion or traffic hazards.
(f) The vehicular circulation for such use(s) shall include logical
interconnections to other uses in the development. Adequate
pedestrian interconnections to other uses shall also be
provided.
(g) The aggregate amount of gross floor area to be devoted to any
such use(s) shall not exceed 20% of the total gross floor area of
any development approved pursuant to this article. [Amended
11-3-2008 by Ord. No. 494]
(h) Any building devoted to such use(s) shall be architecturally
compatible with the overall development for which it is
approved as a conditional use.
(i) Parking shall be required for such use(s) in compliance with
the applicable standards of Article XXII, Off-Street Parking and
Loading, herein. Said parking shall be in addition to that which
§ 182-120.3 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.3
176:818
§ 182-120.3.1. Special exception uses. [Added 6-1-1998 by Ord. No.
372]
The following special exception uses shall be permitted:
§ 182-120.4. District regulations.
The following general regulations shall apply in the IO-2 Interchange Office
Support District:
is provided for the permitted uses in the development and to
that parking which may be required pursuant to Subsection
B(1)(d) herein.
(3) Parking as a conditional use shall require compliance with the
following standards: [Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 513]
(a) Parking must serve a lot that is immediately adjacent to the lot
upon which the parking is located.
(b) The master plan depicts the future use of the subject lot with
adequate parking to serve that future use in addition to any
parking serving an adjacent lot.
A. As a special exception only, communications antennas mounted on a
communications tower and communications equipment buildings, only
upon a showing, in addition to any other that may be required under
this chapter, that denial of such a special exception would have the
effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless service and that
it is not feasible to mount the communications antenna on an existing
public utility transmission tower, existing building, or other existing
structure. Communications antennas shall conform to the requirements
of § 182-21.1 and communications towers shall conform to the
requirements of § 182-21.2.
A. Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership
or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of the
entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract shall be developed
under single direction in accordance with an approved master plan and
declaration of restrictive covenants, pursuant to §§ 182-120.7 and
182-120.8 herein, respectively, and in accordance with approved
subdivision and/or land development plans as shall be required. The
Master Plan, declaration of restrictive covenants and development
agreement required in Subsection D shall be binding upon all assignees
or purchasers of property in the district.
B. Sewer and water facilities. The tract of land shall be served by public
sewer facilities and public water facilities deemed acceptable by the
Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Municipal Authority
Engineer and review by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) and the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer
Authority. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
§ 182-120.3 WATER § 182-120.4
176:819
§ 182-120.5. Tract development requirements.
The requirements in this section are applicable to any tract of land to be
developed pursuant to this article. These requirements shall apply to the
tract as a whole, regardless of any subdivision which may be permitted
pursuant to § 182-120.6 herein. All building setback, parking setback,
building spacing and building height regulations contained herein shall
apply to any permitted use buildings or conditional use buildings which may
be permitted pursuant to § 182-120.3A(3) herein. All building and parking
setbacks from a roadway shall be from the ultimate right-of-way of that
roadway; in the case of setbacks from an internal road serving to access
buildings within a development, the setbacks shall be measured from the
assumed right-of-way for said roadway if that roadway is not public. All
buffers required pursuant to this section shall be installed in accordance
with the specifications contained in § 182-120.10C herein.
Tract Development Requirement Dimension
Minimum tract size (acres) 25
Minimum width measured along the ultimate
right-of-way line (feet) [Amended 12-16-1991
by Ord. No. 307]
500
Minimum building setbacks (feet)
From internal roads serving to access
buildings within a development (Buffer Type 1
required)
20
C. Development plans. In addition to the master plan required pursuant to
§ 182-120.7 herein, actual application for development of all or part of a
tract of land in this district shall be accompanied by subdivision and/or
land development plans which shall comply with the Township's
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.152 The plans shall be
subject to the tentative, preliminary and final plan stages, in
accordance with that ordinance.
D. Development agreement. In addition to the declaration of restrictive
covenants required pursuant to § 182-120.8 herein, approved
development of all or any portion(s) of a tract in this district shall be
executed in accordance with a development agreement in form and
substance satisfactory to the Township. The owner, developer and
Township shall enter into said agreement embodying all details
regarding compliance with this article to assure the binding nature
thereof on the overall tract and its development, which agreement shall
be recorded with the final development plan for the tract or portion(s)
thereof, as appropriate. Should any final plans be amended subsequent
to original recording, an approved amended final plan shall be
recorded, together with an amended development agreement, as
necessary.
152. Editor's Note: See Ch. 154, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 182-120.4 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.5
176:820
Tract Development Requirement Dimension
From a limited access highway (Buffer Type 2
required)
50
From an existing controlled or semicontrolled
access highway (Buffer Type 2 required)
75
From an existing collector, feeder or road of
any other classification (Buffer Type 3
required)
100
From a residential or institutional district
boundary line (Buffer Type 3 required)
200
From any other district boundary line (Buffer
Type 2 required)
50
From a parcel in single and separate
ownership and residentially used, not part of a
master planned tract (Buffer Type 2A
required)
75
Minimum parking setbacks (feet)
From internal roads serving to access
buildings within a development (Buffer Type
1A required)
20
From a limited access highway (Buffer Type
2A required)
30
From an existing controlled or semicontrolled
access highway (Buffer Type 2A required)
40
From an existing collector, feeder or road of
any other classification (Buffer Type 3
required)
50
From any building (not applicable to loading
areas required by reference in § 182-120.9
herein) (Buffer Type 4 required)
20
From a residential or institutional district
boundary line (Buffer Type 3 required)
100
From any other district boundary line (Buffer
Type 2A required)
50
From a parcel in single and separate
ownership and residentially used, not part of a
master planned tract (Buffer Type 2A
required)
75
§ 182-120.5 WATER § 182-120.5
176:821
Tract Development Requirement Dimension
Maximum building height (feet) 55, but with a limit of no
more than 4 habitable or
occupied stories; except
for a hotel pursuant to
§ 182-120.3A(3)(c),
which may have 5
habitable or occupied
stories within said 55
feet
Minimum building separation between any 2
buildings in a grouping
A distance equal to the
height of the tallest
building
Maximum building coverage (percent) 10
Maximum impervious coverage (percent) 35
§ 182-120.6. Subdivision allowance. [Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No.
513]
Limited subdivision of any tract proposed for development in accordance
with this article may be permitted subject to the requirements of this
section and also subject to the requirements for a master plan and
declaration of restrictive covenants required in §§ 182-120.7 and 182-120.8,
respectively, herein. As a result of the nature of any subdivision executed
under the restrictions of this article, the requirement for public road
frontage in § 182-11 of this chapter shall not be mandatory. To determine
the subdivision potential of any tract pursuant to this section, lots devoted
to either permitted uses per § 182-120.2 herein and/or to freestanding
conditional uses per § 182-120.3A(3) herein shall be considered. Regardless
of the use(s) to which the lot is put, no additional lots beyond which would
be permitted pursuant to this section will be permitted. A lot used solely
for a utility purpose shall be exempt from these regulations. The pertinent
requirements for subdivision pursuant to this article shall be as follows:
Subdivision Requirements Dimensions
Minimum lot size (acres) 4
Minimum lot width (feet) 250
Average lot size (acres) 8
Parking allotment Minimum of 50% of
parking shall be on
same lot as the building
it serves
§ 182-120.7. Master plan required.
In any development pursuant to this article in which subdivision in
accordance with § 182-120.6 herein is proposed, a master plan of the entire
§ 182-120.5 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.7
176:822
development tract shall be submitted for approval by the Board of
Supervisors. Once approved, said plan shall be recorded prior to or
simultaneously with the recording of the initial subdivision and/or land
development plan for any portion of the tract. The following are the
minimum requirements for said plan:
A. At a minimum, said plan shall be drawn to tentative sketch plan
requirements, pursuant to § 154-11 of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development. The master plan shall show relationships among the
various lots, buildings and parking areas and shall show how
development of the entire tract, once executed in accordance with this
plan, will function cohesively as an integrated development. The master
plan shall depict proposed lot lines, vehicular circulation, buildings,
parking and generalized landscaping scheme for the entire tract.
B. Preservation of natural features shall be assured; demonstration of this
shall be documented through the master plan and on subsequently
required subdivision and/or land development plans and landscape
plans. The following shall be addressed in terms of natural features
preservation:
(1) Floodplains and wetlands shall be protected in accordance with
Article III, Floodplain Conservation District, of this chapter, and
§ 154-12C(5)(d) of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development, respectively, as well as all applicable state and
federal regulations.
(2) Steep slopes shall be protected in accordance with Article XVIII,
Steep Slope Conservation District, of this chapter. When, in the
opinion of the Township Engineer, soils information does not
adequately depict steep slopes, topographic information shall be
used to supplement it.
(3) Disturbance of woodlands and other vegetation shall be minimized.
Section 154-35B of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development, regarding tree preservation, shall be enforced. When
more than 25% of the trees with a minimum of a six-inch caliper
must be removed, compensatory planting shall be provided at a
rate of one inch of new caliper for every four inches of caliper
removed. Every replacement tree shall have a minimum of two-andone-
half-inch caliper. Alternative types of compensatory planting
may be permitted, with the concurrence of the Township. No grade
changes, installation of impervious cover or equipment storage
shall be permitted within the drip line of any tree to be preserved;
fencing shall be placed at the drip line before any site work is
begun, including tree removal or grubbing.
(4) Topsoil shall be protected in accordance with § 154-35C of Chapter
154, Subdivision and Land Development, regarding topsoil
preservation.
§ 182-120.7 WATER § 182-120.7
176:823
§ 182-120.8. Declaration of restrictive covenants required.
Accompanying the master plan, a declaration of restrictive covenants must
be approved by the Township and recorded. Said declaration shall provide
all of the restrictions necessary to assure that a proposed development will
operate as depicted on the master plan. The following are the minimum
requirements for the declaration:
C. Pedestrian accommodations shall be included on the development tract
in locations logical to provide pedestrian movement between buildings,
between buildings and parking areas and between building and parking
areas and open spaces. Said pedestrian accommodations shall be
reflected on each subsequently approved land development plan. Actual
installation of pedestrian paths may be deferred for a maximum of six
months from the date the occupancy permit is issued for the final
building in said land development to provide sufficient time to observe
actual pedestrian movements.
D. Any change to proposed lots, buildings, circulation, parking,
landscaping or extent of natural features preservation which is
substantive in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors will necessitate a
revised master plan to be submitted, approved and recorded to replace
any prior master plan(s). No subdivision or land development for any
development on the subject development tract shall be approved
without a current recorded master plan.
E. The most current recorded master plan must contain a tabulation of the
ratio of open space provided on the development tract, current through
the most recently approved subdivision and/or land development. A
revised master plan must be recorded simultaneously with the
recording of each subsequently approved subdivision and/or land
development in order that the open space ratio is continually updated.
In addition, as each land development plan is approved on an individual
lot, a perpetual deed restriction shall be placed on that lot restricting
any further subdivision of that lot, and further restricting the amount of
impervious coverage, to that percentage which was approved as part of
the land development plan.
A. Provisions for the establishment of an association with mandatory
membership by the current owner of each lot represented in the master
plan.
B. Parties to the declaration of restrictive covenants shall be bound by all
restrictions contained therein, and shall include, at a minimum, the
aforementioned association, developer, mortgagees of any lot and/or
building on the tract, tenants and any other parties having any interest
in all or any part of the proposed development and the Township.
Provisions shall be included to permit Township enforcement of the
restrictions contained in the declaration in the event that the
association fails to do so.
§ 182-120.7 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.8
176:824
§ 182-120.9. Other development requirements. [Amended
12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
All requirements in § 182-120 of this chapter shall be applicable to any
development pursuant to this article; the traffic impact study and
community impact analysis requirements of §§ 182-120E and 182-120I,
respectively, shall be interpreted to apply to all permitted and conditional
uses, as well as to any request for a rezoning to this district. In addition to
all requirements of § 182-120 all parking in any development built pursuant
to this article shall utilize the applicable requirements contained in Article
XXII, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this chapter.
§ 182-120.10. Landscaping and buffers. [Amended 9-21-1998 by
Ord. No. 376]
Landscaping and buffers shall be in accordance with § 154-36, Planting,
in Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development. A landscape plan in
accordance with § 154-12G, complying with all landscaping requirements,
shall be submitted along with all preliminary land development plans.
C. Cross easements shall be included, which shall assure proper
circulation throughout the development and access to all parking areas.
D. Maintenance provisions shall be included for the circulation network,
parking areas, landscaping and all other common areas.
E. Provisions to ensure that all buildings within the development will be
architecturally compatible and that compatible building materials are
used throughout.
F. Provisions to ensure that development of any buildings, parking or
other similar improvements be prohibited on any lots to be utilized
solely for open space purposes, as indicated on the most currently
approved master plan.
G. Provisions to guarantee public right to use of the interior roads and
common open space areas; also provisions stipulating each lot owner/
occupant rights with respect to common open space areas.
H. Any additional restrictions which will be applied to the development
which are stricter than existing Township regulations.
I. Any change to cross easements, maintenance responsibilities,
architectural controls or other applicable restrictions, which is
substantive in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors, will necessitate a
revised declaration of restrictive covenants to be submitted, approved
and recorded to replace any prior such document. No subdivision or
land development for any development on the subject development
tract shall be approved without a current recorded declaration of
restrictive covenants.
§ 182-120.8 WATER § 182-120.10.1
176:825
§ 182-120.10.1. Residential Use Group-2 (RUG-2). [Added
12-3-2012 by Ord. No. 524]
A. Legislative intent, tract requirements.
(1) In expansion of the statement of community development
objectives contained in § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared
to be the intent of this section, with respect to an RUG-2, to
establish reasonable controls and standards of performance for
residential multifamily dwellings in those areas of Upper
Providence Township where the existing community presence or
planned extension of sewer and water facilities would most readily
accommodate the intensity of residential dwelling types permitted
in the Township, for the benefit of the residents of the development
and in furtherance of the general welfare of Upper Providence
Township.
(2) RUG-2 shall be applicable to parcels of land within an IO-2 Master
Planned community which meet all the following criteria:
(a) The entire tract is located within the IO-2 Zoning District;
(b) The parcel or lot has frontage of at least 500 feet on an arterial
or collector road;
(c) The tract under development for the RUG-2 is at least 15 acres
in size.
B. Permitted uses. In an RUG-2, by conditional use when authorized in
accordance with § 182-204, a building may be erected, altered, or used,
and a lot may be used or occupied, for any of the following uses and no
others:
(1) Residential buildings which contain any combination of attached
dwellings and multifamily dwellings. These dwellings may only be
open-market communities.
(2) A principal use permitted herein may be constructed on the same
lot with another permitted principal use(s).
(3) Additional uses on the same lot or premises with and incidental to
the other uses permitted in this article. In addition to accessory
uses customarily incidental to a residential use, appropriate
accessory uses may be developed in conjunction with any of the
uses; provided, however, that none is intended as an independent
freestanding commercial use, but which may include the following:
(a) Indoor or outdoor recreation facilities, community center, or
similar use.
(b) Common open space.
§ 182-120.10.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.10.1
176:826
(c) No-impact home-based businesses in accordance with the
standards set forth in § 182-21.3 herein.
C. Residential Use Group-2 regulations. The following regulations shall
apply in an RUG-2:
(1) General regulations.
(a) Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one
ownership or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly
by the owners of the entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the
tract will be developed under single direction in accordance
with an approved plan.
(b) Sewer and water facilities. The tract of land shall be served by
public water facilities and public sewer facilities deemed
acceptable by the Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation
of the Township Engineer.
(c) Development plan. The application for conditional use shall be
accompanied by a traffic impact analysis consistent with the
requirements of § 182-120E, a community impact analysis
consistent with the requirements of § 182-120I, and a sketch
plan complying with the sketch plan requirements of Chapter
154, Subdivision and Land Development. Within one year,
unless extended by the Board of Supervisors, following the
grant of conditional use approval, the applicant shall file a plan
or plans showing the detailed use of the entire tract, which
plan or plans also shall comply with all requirements of
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, and other
applicable ordinances, unless these ordinances are relaxed in
accordance with § 182-120.10.1D herein. The plan shall clearly
designate the proposed uses(s) of each area of tract.
(d) Development stages and permits. The development of a tract,
carried out in either a single phase or in stages, shall be
executed in accordance with a development agreement. The
owner, developer and Township shall enter into said agreement
embodying all details regarding compliance with this article to
assure the binding nature thereof on the overall tract and its
development, which agreement shall be recorded with the final
development plan.
(2) Development regulations. The following development regulations
shall be followed by all proposed developments in an RUG-2:
(a) Utilities. All utility lines (electrical, telephone, etc.) shall be
placed underground.
(b) Height regulations. The maximum height (as defined in
§ 182-24) of buildings or structures erected or enlarged in an
RUG-2 shall be a maximum of 40 feet. Accessory buildings
§ 182-120.10.1 WATER § 182-120.10.1
176:827
shall not exceed one story or 25 feet; except that a clubhouse
building shall not exceed 35 feet.
(c) Parking regulations. Parking requirements for in RUG-2 shall
be as follows:
[1] For the residents of each dwelling unit, no fewer than two
off-street automobile parking spaces shall be required. The
required spaces, when they are not an integral part of the
building design, shall be arranged within a court or
separate parking area(s). If one or more parking spaces
are provided within a garage for that unit, the off-street
area in front of the garage may also be counted as a
parking space.
[2] If a clubhouse, recreation facility, community center or
common facility is provided, parking for that facility will be
provided pursuant to the requirements for a private
meeting room or place of private assembly pursuant to
§ 182-179B(1)(d).
[3] No parking area of three or more cars shall be located
closer than 25 feet to a perimeter property line or to an
ultimate right-of-way line of any abutting road classified as
a limited-access highway on the Upper Providence
Township Ultimate Rights-of-Way Map, or closer than 50
feet to the right-of-way line of any other abutting road.
This provision shall not apply to parking for resident
access adjacent to mailbox facilities provided within the
community.
[4] In parking areas storing 10 or more cars, not less than
10% of the area devoted to parking facilities shall consist
of interior parking lot landscaping. As a requirement of
RUG-2, such landscaping shall be designated on a
separate landscape plan as set forth in
§ 182-120.10.1C(2)(i) and in accordance with Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the
Township of Upper Providence.
[5] When conditions warrant, the use of reserved parking is
encouraged. The requirements of § 182-180 of this chapter
shall be applicable.
(d) Signs. Signs shall be permitted, subject to the requirements of
Article XIX of this chapter.
(e) Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress
and egress to and from public streets and highways serving the
residential development, without causing undue confusion or
interference with the normal traffic flow.
§ 182-120.10.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.10.1
176:828
(f) Common areas and facilities. The provision of certain facilities
serving the entire development, such as parking lots, interior
pedestrianways, driveways and alleys, lighting facilities,
landscape planting areas, buffers, open space and recreation
facilities, etc., is hereby encouraged. In cases where they are
provided in common areas, provisions satisfactory to the Board
of Supervisors must be made for their perpetual maintenance
and care. The use of these facilities may be restricted to the
residents of the development, where practical, and may be
maintained by the developer, a homeowners' association or a
similar entity. In addition to the foregoing, RUG-2
developments shall provide the following facilities for the
general public:
[1] Bus stop for mass transit, if on an existing mass transit
route, or area set aside for a future bus stop for mass
transit, if none exists; and
[2] Public walkways or trails connecting the community to
surrounding properties and existing or planned pedestrian
circulation systems.
(g) Property maintenance area. A suitable outdoor area shall be
provided on site for the storage of landscaping, snow removal,
and other property-maintenance-related materials if it is
determined that such areas are necessary for the operation of
the use. Such area shall not occupy any required parking
spaces and shall be located screened from view from public
roads and surrounding properties to the extent feasible.
(h) Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as
needed and arranged in a manner which will protect the
highway and neighboring properties from unreasonable direct
glare or hazardous interference of any kind. Lighting facilities
shall be required for the safety and welfare of the residents of
the development and shall be installed by the developer at his/
her expense and shall be in accordance with the provisions of
§ 154-40 of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development,
of the Code of the Township of Upper Providence.
(i) Landscape planting. A separate landscape plan shall be
submitted as part of the land development approvals,
stipulating buffer and street tree landscaping proposed in
connection with the development of RUG Use Group-2
residential units.
[1] Shade trees shall be provided along street frontage
occupied by an RUG-2 residential development in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the
Township of Upper Providence.
§ 182-120.10.1 WATER § 182-120.10.1
176:829
[2] Buffer area. A permanent landscape planting area of at
least 25 feet in depth, designed for filtering from view any
uses which are adjoining and contiguous to the
development, will be provided. In addition, this buffer will
be applied to street frontages where the rear of dwellings
faces the street. All required buffers shall comply with the
evergreen and deciduous percentages of a Type 3 buffer
pursuant to § 154-36D(5)(e) of Chapter 154, Subdivision
and Land Development, of the Code of the Township of
Upper Providence, unless modified by the Board of
Supervisors during the land development process.
(j) Design standards. The architectural design standards set forth
in § 154-36.2 shall apply.
(3) Density and dimensional requirements.
(a) The following maximum density shall apply in an RUG-2:
[1] For residential dwellings, the maximum permitted density
shall be 12 dwelling units per developable acre of the lot or
parcel being developed with a residential use.
[2] The gross square footage of all residential uses shall not
exceed 40% of the gross square footage approved on the
Master Plan.
(b) Building coverage shall comply with the underlying district
requirement: maximum of 10%.
(c) Impervious coverage shall comply with the underlying district
requirement: maximum of 35%.
(d) All coverages shall be measured over the entire Master Plan
development and not on an individual lot basis.
(e) Setback from property lines and streets. A building setback of
75 feet shall be provided along the right-of-way of any street. A
building setback of 100 feet shall be provided from all other
property lines.
(f) Building separation:
[1] A distance of 30 feet between buildings containing
attached dwellings or a distance equal to the height of the
adjacent buildings, whichever is greater.
[2] A setback of 15 feet from internal private streets and
alleys for the front, sides, and rear of buildings.
[3] A setback of 15 feet from parking spaces.
[4] A setback of at least 200 feet between any residential use
building and any nonresidential use building.
§ 182-120.10.1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.10.1
176:830
(g) Building length. The maximum length of any residential
building shall be 160 feet.
D. Plan modifications. The Board of Supervisors may grant modifications
from the specific requirements herein, and those of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development, provided that the spirit and intent
of this article and the statement of community development objectives
contained in § 182-2 are observed and that the overall densities
specified herein are maintained.
E. A revised Master Plan for the entire development tract shall be
submitted as part of the conditional use application in accordance with
§ 182-120.7D.
F. In the case of a conflict between the provisions of the Residential Use
Group-2 regulations and those of the IO-2 district, or any other
provision of the Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, the provisions of the Residential Use Group-2
shall prevail.
§ 182-120.10.1 WATER § 182-120.10.1
176:831

ARTICLE XVIB
IO-3 Interchange Office, Retail, Service and Recreation District
[Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 434]
§ 182-120.11. Legislative intent. [Amended 8-7-2006 by Ord. No.
463]
In expansion of the community development objectives contained in Article
I, § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of this article
with respect to IO-3 Interchange Office, Retail, Service and Recreation
Districts to provide flexible standards for corporate headquarters or
multibuilding office, retail, service and recreation development in a campus
setting.
§ 182-120.12. Use regulations. [Amended 8-7-2006 by Ord. No. 463]
In an IO-3 District, a building or group of buildings may be erected, altered
or used and a lot may be used for any of the following uses or a combination
of the following uses and none others:
A. To encourage the development of employment centers at the
interchanges of State Route 422 (Pottstown Expressway).
B. To provide for retail and service uses to support office development and
their employees in the IO, IO-2 and IO-3 Districts.
C. To provide an attractive gateway into the Township.
D. To achieve the goals of the adopted Comprehensive Plan by supporting
the recommendations of the interchange studies.
E. To be applied in a manner that will reduce conflicts on existing major
arterial highways and minimize travel outside the interchange area.
A. Use Group A. Permitted uses, conditional uses and special exception
uses as enumerated in Article XVI, IO Interchange Office District, may
be allowed in this District as conditional uses, subject to all applicable
regulations in the IO Interchange Office District, except as may be
modified herein and subject to the procedural requirements of
§ 182-204 of this chapter; further provided, however, that the maximum
building height shall be 60 feet, and the maximum impervious coverage
shall not exceed 65% of the total tract not used for Group B (below).
[Amended 12-4-2017 by Ord. No. 570]
(1) Research, design, engineering and development, includes
manufacturing or assemblage of prototype or limited number of
products.
(2) The conditional uses enumerated in § 182-120.3 (IO-2 District).
(3) (Reserved)
§ 182-120.11 WATER § 182-120.12
176:833
(4) Fitness center or health club having memberships open to the
general public (either freestanding or within a permitted office
building).
(a) Fitness center having memberships limited only to employees
of the company or employees within the building where located
shall be permitted as an accessory use.
B. Use Group B. Retail, service, recreation and cultural uses may be
allowed in this District as conditional uses pursuant to the
requirements set forth herein and subject to the procedural
requirements set forth in § 182-204 of this chapter and further subject
to the provisions of § 182-120.15:
(1) Hotel, including extended-stay hotel which may provide access to
rooms by individual outside entrances.
(a) Convention facilities and meeting rooms when accessory to
hotel.
(2) Restaurants and taverns, excluding drive-through but permitting
take-out operations.
(3) Food court; banquet hall.
(4) Outdoor dining.
(5) Delicatessen.
(6) Tavern, bar or microbrewery.
(7) Movie theater.
(8) Live theater, dinner theater, comedy club.
(9) (Reserved)
(10) Health club, fitness center, massage therapy.
(11) Concert hall.
(12) Outdoor recreation areas for park and sports facilities, ice rink.
(13) Swimming pool, swim club, tennis club.
(14) Office buildings, training center.
(15) Retail stores.
(16) Bookstore, furniture sales and showroom, sporting goods.
(17) Supermarket.
(18) Specialty food stores, such as organic, cheese, fish, bakery, ice
cream, coffee bars.
§ 182-120.12 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.12
176:834
§ 182-120.13. Additional Group B uses. [Amended 8-7-2006 by Ord.
No. 463]
The following additional Group B uses may be allowed as conditional uses
subject to the requirements of this section, as well as pursuant to all
(19) Department stores.
(20) Specialty retail, seasonal and weekend pushcart sales.
(21) Green market.
(22) Dry cleaner.
(23) Bank, including drive-through lanes.
(24) Hair salon, barbershop, nail salon, spa.
(25) Mail and package services: Federal Express; Mailboxes, etc.; UPS;
USPS; Airborne; etc.
(26) Copy center.
(27) Convenience/milk retail.
(28) Day-care center.
(29) Pharmacy, including drive-through window.
(30) Alcoholic beverage sales, state store, beer and wine, beverage
center.
(31) Catering.
(32) Brokerage, financial, insurance, travel agency and real estate
offices.
(33) Medical and dental offices and clinics, limited to outpatient surgery
only.
(34) Urgent care, ambulance services facility.
(35) Parking garage.
(36) Pet supply superstore which may include overnight pet boarding,
out-patient veterinary clinics, pet training centers, pet grooming
centers and/or pet day-care centers as accessory uses to the
superstore. Accessory uses shall not exceed 45% of the gross store
area. No individual accessory use shall exceed 35% of the gross
floor area. All accessory uses shall be located entirely within the
interior of the pet supply superstore. A "pet supply superstore," as
that term is used in this section, is a specialty retail store which
maintains a retail space of a minimum of 25,000 square feet, within
a shopping center with over 500,000 square feet of retail space.
[Added 8-4-2008 by Ord. No. 492]
§ 182-120.12 WATER § 182-120.13
176:835
other applicable requirements of this District; and further, subject to the
procedural requirements set forth in § 182-204 of this chapter.
§ 182-120.14. Prohibited uses.
A. Gasoline sales without service and repair subject to the locational
limitations of Use Group B; see § 182-120.15A and B.
B. Twenty-four-hour service or uses open for patron and customer use
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
(1) The following commercial uses may be considered for operation
past 12:00 midnight or on a twenty-four-hour basis:
(a) Drive-in lanes associated with a permitted bank.
(b) Pharmacy, including any drive-in window.
(c) Convenience/milk retail establishment.
(d) Copy center.
(2) The burden shall be on an applicant for extended hours of
operation to demonstrate to the Board of Supervisors that the need
for a conditional use is vital to the business operations of the
applicant or to prove that the extended hours will provide a
necessary service to the community which is otherwise unavailable
in the immediate vicinity of the site.
(3) The applicant for a conditional use to permit extended hours of
operation shall submit a plan to the Board of Supervisors
demonstrating its intentions to mitigate or eliminate any adverse
noise or illumination upon adjoining residential districts or street
frontage which may arise from the extended hours of operation.
(4) Any use which is permitted by conditional use to operate after
12:00 midnight or on a twenty-four-hour basis must demonstrate
that it will have security patrol to the Township's satisfaction.
(5) Any use which is permitted by conditional use to operate after
12:00 midnight or on a twenty-four-hour basis must have adequate
lighting on all sides of the building in which the use is located or
accessed from.
A. Adult uses.
B. Uses open for patron or customer use between 12:00 midnight and 6:00
a.m. unless approved by conditional use.
(1) Liquor sales permitted by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board
past 12:00 midnight as part of an otherwise permitted use, theater
and hotels are specifically permitted on a twenty-four-hour basis
and shall not be considered a prohibited activity.
§ 182-120.13 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.14
176:836
§ 182-120.15. Specific regulations for the implementation of Use
Group B.
(2) Any use which is permitted by conditional use to operate after
12:00 midnight or on a twenty-four-hour basis must demonstrate
that it will have security patrol to the Township's satisfaction.
(3) Any use which is permitted by conditional use to operate after
12:00 midnight or on a twenty-four-hour basis must have adequate
lighting on all sides of the building in which the use is located or
accessed from.
(4) Freestanding communications antennas and transmission towers.
A. Group B uses, whether placed on individual sites or in combination with
other uses, shall not exceed 50% of the total land area of each IO-3
District but in no event greater than 75 acres.
B. Group B uses not otherwise permitted in Article XVI shall not extend
beyond a distance of 2,000 feet measured from the ultimate right-ofway
of Route 29 (Collegeville Road).
C. Site development requirements.
(1) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(2) Maximum impervious surface ratio: 80%.
(3) Maximum building height 55 feet; provided that hotel use shall be
permitted to a maximum building height of 60 feet. [Amended
12-4-2017 by Ord. No. 570]
(4) The provisions of § 182-117, Landscaping and open space, shall
apply with the exception that a minimum of 20% of the total tract(s)
devoted to Group B uses shall be devoted to open spaces.153
D. Parking. Parking shall be based upon the sum of the parking required
for the various uses contained in the development, based upon the
following standards for the uses therein:
(1) For all retail uses, four spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross
leaseable area. For the purposes of this District, the following uses
shall apply: Use Group B, uses (5), (15), (16), (17), (18), (19), (20),
(21), (22), (23), (24), (25), (26), (27), (29), (30).
(2) For hotel or extended stay hotel use, 1.25 spaces per guest room.
(3) For a restaurant designed to serve customers who are not hotel
guests within a hotel, 10 spaces per 1,000 square feet of area
devoted to patron uses.
153. Editor's Note: See the definition of "open spaces" in § 182-24.
§ 182-120.14 WATER § 182-120.15
176:837
§ 182-120.16. Special regulations for IO-3 uses.
(4) For a convention facility and meeting rooms, 20 spaces for each
1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(5) For office uses, four spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leaseable
area.
(6) Other uses as regulated by Article XXII, Off-Street Parking and
Loading.
E. The Board of Supervisors, by conditional use approval, may permit a
reduction in the sum total of the parking for all of the uses shown on the
master plan, based on the following:
(1) In the case of a development plan in which there are efficiencies
derived by shared parking for uses which have complementary
peak demands, the applicant shall submit parking generation data,
based upon standard methodology (such as that published by the
Urban Land Institute) sufficient for the Township to determine the
appropriate reduction.
(2) In the case of a development consisting solely of two or more
contiguous uses of the same classification not qualifying under
Subsection E(1) (above), the Board of Supervisors may permit a
reduction of the aggregate amount of required parking based upon
a determination that greater efficiency is effected by joint use of a
common parking area, but in such case the required number of offstreet
parking spaces shall not be reduced by more than 25%.
A. Trash stations. Dumpster or trash collection stations shall be permitted
to the side or rear of a building only, must be enclosed with opaque
masonry enclosure to a height of at least six feet and must be
maintained to prevent vermin.
B. Outdoor storage and sales other than restaurant service, specialty food
stores and green market when immediately adjacent to the use are
prohibited. No permanent or temporary storage of merchandise,
articles or equipment shall be permitted outside a building, and no
goods, articles or equipment shall be displayed or offered for sale
between the front line of any building in the case of an existing building
and the front line of the property.
C. Sign regulations shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article
XIX of this chapter.
D. All development within all use groups proposed in this district must
follow the design standards as established by the Township in
§ 154-36.2 in the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
[Amended 8-7-2006 by Ord. No. 462; 10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 476]
§ 182-120.15 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.16
176:838
§ 182-120.17. District regulations.
District regulations of § 182-118 shall not apply.
E. Utilities. All utility lines (electrical, telephone, etc.) shall be placed
underground.
A. Use Group A.
(1) Individual business/professional lots having a minimum two acres may be created,
provided necessary cross easements and restrictive covenants are
included to ensure compliance with standards otherwise required
but which may not be provided on the individual lot.
(2) Maximum building coverage shall be 20% calculated over the total
tract area utilized for Use Group A and accessory uses and facilities
and not applied to individual lots if created.
(3) Maximum building height: 60 feet but no more than four habitable
or occupied stories. [Amended 12-4-2017 by Ord. No. 570]
B. Use Group B.
(1) Individual lots may be created, provided necessary cross
easements and restrictive covenants are included to ensure
compliance with standards otherwise required but which may not
be provided on the individual lot.
(2) Maximum building coverage shall be 25% calculated over the total
tract area utilized for Use Group B and accessory uses and facilities
and not applied to individual lots if created.
C. Site development requirements for Both Use Group A and B.
[Amended 12-4-2017 by Ord. No. 570]
Tract Development Requirement Dimension
Minimum tract size (acres) 25
Minimum tract width along the ultimate
right-of-way line (feet)
500
Minimum building setbacks (feet)
From a limited access highway (Buffer
Type 2 required)*
50
From a controlled or semicontrolled
access or arterial highway (Buffer Type 2
required)*
75
§ 182-120.16 WATER § 182-120.17
176:839
Tract Development Requirement Dimension
For buildings of two or less stories in
height from a collector, feeder or road of
any other classification; but in no event
less than 100 feet from the ultimate rightof-
way of Route 29 (Buffer Type 2
required)*
50
For buildings three stories or more in
height from a collector, feeder or road of
any other classification (Buffer Type 3
required)
100
For buildings up to 60 feet in height from
a residentially or institutionally zoned or
developed property (Buffer Type 3
required)*
100
For buildings over 60 feet in height when
approved by conditional use from a
residentially or institutionally zoned
property (Buffer Type 3 required)*
200, plus 1 foot setback
for each 1 foot in height
over 65 feet
From any other district boundary line
(Buffer Type 2 required)*
50
From interior drives (Buffer Type 1
required)* [Amended 10-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 452]
10 minimum (15
average)
From parking areas (Buffer Type 4
required)* [Amended 10-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 452]
10 minimum (15
average)
From adjacent buildings (Buffer Type 4
required)*
20
Minimum parking setbacks (feet)
From a collector, feeder or road of any
other classification (Buffer Type 2A
required)*
25
From a controlled or semicontrolled
access or arterial highway (Buffer Type
2A required)*
40
From a residentially or institutionally
zoned property (Buffer Type 3 required)*
50
From any other district boundary line
(Buffer Type 2A required)*
50
§ 182-120.17 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.17
176:840
§ 182-120.18. Residential Use Group (RUG Use Group). [Added
9-17-2007 by Ord. No. 475]
Tract Development Requirement Dimension
From interior drives (Buffer Type 1A
required)* [Amended 10-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 452]
10 minimum; provided,
however, said setback
shall be 15 from a main
collector drive or “loop
road”
From parking areas (Buffer Type 4
required)* [Amended 10-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 452]
10 minimum
From adjacent buildings (Buffer Type 4
required)* [Amended 10-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 452]
10 minimum (15
average)
*Buffer types defined in the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance are required unless waived by the Board of
Supervisors.
A. Legislative intent; tract requirements.
(1) In expansion of the statement of community development
objectives contained in § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared
to be the intent of this section with respect to the RUG Use Group
to establish reasonable controls and standards of performance for
multifamily dwellings in those areas of Upper Providence Township
where the existing community presence or planned extension of
sewer and water facilities would most readily accommodate the
intensity of residential dwelling types permitted in the Township,
for the benefit of the residents of the development and in
furtherance of the general welfare of Upper Providence Township.
(2) The RUG Use Group shall be applicable to those tracts of property
which meet all the following criteria:
(a) The entire tract is located within the IO-3 Zoning District;
(b) The entire tract is at least 2,000 feet from the center line of a
road classified as an arterial road on the Upper Providence
Township Ultimate Rights-of-Way Map;
(c) The tract has frontage of at least 500 feet on a road classified
as a collector road on the Upper Providence Township Ultimate
Rights-of-Way Map; and
(d) The tract is at least 40 acres in size.
B. Permitted uses. In an RUG Use Group, by conditional use when
authorized in accordance with § 182-204, a building may be erected,
§ 182-120.17 WATER § 182-120.18
176:841
altered or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the
following uses and no others:
(1) Buildings which contain any combination of attached dwellings and
two-story multifamily dwellings. These dwellings may be open
market communities and age-restricted active adult communities.
(2) No-impact home-based business in accordance with standards set
forth in § 182-21.3 herein.
(3) A principal use permitted herein may be constructed on the same
lot with another permitted principal use(s).
(4) Home occupations, provided that all the requirements of § 182-21.4
herein shall be met.
C. Residential Use Group regulations. The following regulations shall
apply in the RUG Use Group:
(1) General regulations.
(a) Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one
ownership or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly
by the owners of the entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the
tract will be developed under single direction in accordance
with an approved plan.
(b) Sewer and water facilities. The tract of land shall be served by
public water facilities and public sewer facilities deemed
acceptable by the Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation
of the Township Engineer.
(c) Development plan. The application for conditional use shall be
accompanied by a traffic impact analysis consistent with the
requirements of § 182-120E, a community impact analysis
consistent with the requirements of § 182-120I, and a sketch
plan complying with the sketch plan requirements of Chapter
154, Subdivision and Land Development. Within one year
following the grant of conditional use approval, the applicant
shall file a plan or plans showing the detailed use of the entire
tract, which plan or plans also shall comply with all
requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development, and other applicable ordinances, unless these
ordinances are relaxed in accordance with § 182-120D herein.
The plan shall clearly designate the proposed use(s) of each
area of tract.
(d) Development stages and permits. The development of a tract,
carried out in either a single phase or in stages, shall be
executed in accordance with a development agreement. The
owner, developer and Township shall enter into said agreement
embodying all details regarding compliance with this article to
§ 182-120.18 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.18
176:842
assure the binding nature thereof on the overall tract and its
development, which agreement shall be recorded with the final
development plan.
(2) Development regulations. The following development regulations
shall be followed by all proposed developments within the RUG Use
Group:
(a) Utilities. All utility lines (electrical, telephone, etc.) shall be
placed underground.
(b) Height regulations. The maximum height (as defined in
§ 182-24) of buildings or structures erected or enlarged with
the RUG Use Group shall be a maximum of 35 feet. Accessory
buildings shall not exceed one story or 25 feet; however, a
clubhouse building shall not exceed 30 feet.
(c) Parking regulations. Parking requirements for the RUG Use
Group shall be as follows:
[1] For the residents of each dwelling unit, not less than two
off-street automobile parking spaces shall be required. The
required spaces, when they are not an integral part of the
building design, shall be arranged within a court or
separate parking area(s). If one or more parking spaces
are provided within a garage for that unit, the off-street
area in front of the garage may also be counted as a
parking space.
[2] If a clubhouse or common facility is provided, parking for
that facility will be provided pursuant to the requirements
for a private meeting room or place of private assembly
pursuant to § 182-179B(1)(a).
[3] For guest parking, the applicant shall demonstrate that
there is sufficient on- and off-street parking available. If
this cannot be demonstrated to the Township's
satisfaction, visitor parking shall be provided at the rate of
1/2 parking space per unit, in addition to the parking as
required in Subsection C(2)(c)[1] above. If centrally
located with respect to the majority of dwelling units,
clubhouse and common facility parking spaces provided
pursuant to Subsection C(2)(c)[2] above may be used in
calculating the number of visitor parking spaces provided.
[4] No parking area of three or more cars shall be located
closer than 25 feet to a perimeter property line or to an
ultimate right-of-way line of any abutting road classified as
a limited-access highway on the Upper Providence
Township Ultimate Rights-of-Way Map, nor closer than 50
feet to the right-of-way line of any other abutting road.
This provision shall not apply to parking for resident
§ 182-120.18 WATER § 182-120.18
176:843
access adjacent to mailbox facilities provided within the
community.
[5] In parking areas storing 10 or more cars, not less than
10% of the area devoted to parking facilities shall consist
of interior parking lot landscaping. As a requirement in the
RUG Use Group, such landscaping shall be designated on
a separate landscape plan as set forth in § 182-120C(2)(h)
below and in accordance with Chapter 154, Subdivision
and Land Development, of the Code of the Township of
Upper Providence.
[6] When conditions warrant, the use of reserve parking is
encouraged. The requirements of § 182-180 of this chapter
shall be applicable.
(d) Signs. Signs shall be permitted subject to the requirements of
Article XIX of this chapter.
(e) Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress
and egress to and from public streets and highways serving the
RUG Use Group residential development without causing
undue confusion or interference with the normal traffic flow.
(f) Common areas and facilities. The provision of certain facilities
serving the entire development, such as parking lots, interior
pedestrianways, driveways or alleys, lighting facilities,
landscape planting areas, buffers, open space and recreation
facilities, etc., is hereby encouraged and may be located either
on individual lots or in common areas. In cases where they are
provided in common areas, provisions satisfactory to the Board
of Supervisors must be made for their perpetual maintenance
and care. The use of these facilities may be restricted to the
residents of the development, where practical, and may be
maintained by the developer, a homeowners' association or
similar entity. In addition to the foregoing, RUG developments
shall provide the following facilities for the general public:
[1] Bus stop for mass transit, or area set aside for future bus
stop for mass transit, if there is not existing bus service to
the tract; and
[2] Public walkways connecting the community to the
surrounding properties and connecting the surrounding
properties with each other.
(g) Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as
needed and arranged in a manner which will protect the
highway and neighboring properties from unreasonable direct
glare or hazardous interference of any kind. Lighting facilities
shall be required for the safety and welfare of the residents of
the development and shall be installed by the developer at his
§ 182-120.18 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.18
176:844
expense and shall be in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code
of the Township of Upper Providence, § 154-40.
(h) Landscaped planting. A separate landscape plan shall be
submitted as part of the land development approvals,
stipulating buffer and street tree landscaping proposed in
connection with the development of RUG Use Group
residential units.
[1] Shade trees shall be provided along street frontage
occupied by an RUG Use Group residential development in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the
Township of Upper Providence.
[2] Buffer area. A permanent landscaped planting area of at
least 15 feet in depth, designed for filtering from view any
uses which are adjoining and contiguous to the
development, will be provided. In addition, this buffer will
be applied to street frontages where the rear of dwellings
face the street. All required buffers shall comply with the
evergreen and deciduous percentages of a Type 3 buffer
pursuant to § 154-36D(5)(e) of Chapter 154, Subdivision
and Land Development, of the Code of the Township of
Upper Providence.
(i) Design standards. The architectural design standards set forth
in § 154-36.2 shall apply, where relevant and practical.
(3) Density and dimensional requirements.
(a) The following maximum density shall apply in the RUG Use
Group:
[1] For residential dwellings, the maximum permitted density
shall be:
[a] 5.25 dwelling units per developable acre for tracts
abutting a road classified as a limited-access highway
on the Upper Providence Township Ultimate Rights-of-
Way Map; and
[b] 3.25 dwelling units per developable acre for all other
tracts.
(b) Building coverage: maximum of 25%.
(c) Impervious coverage: maximum of 50%.
(d) Setback from property lines and streets. A building setback of
100 feet shall be provided along the right-of-way for any feeder
road where residential uses occur on the opposite side of the
§ 182-120.18 WATER § 182-120.18
176:845
§ 182-120.19. Residential Use Group (RUG-3). [Added 12-4-2017 by
Ord. No. 570]
road and along the rear property line of residential lots. A
building setback of 50 feet shall be provided from collector,
arterial, and limited-access highways and all other property
lines.
(e) Building separation.
[1] Distance of 30 feet between buildings containing attached
dwellings or multifamily dwellings.
[2] Setback of 20 feet from internal private streets and alleys
for fronts, sides, and rears of buildings.
[3] Setback of 15 feet from parking spaces that are either
perpendicular or parallel to buildings.
(f) Building length. The maximum length of any residential
building shall be 155 feet.
D. Plan modifications. The Board of Supervisors may grant modifications
from the specific requirements herein, and those of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development, provided that the spirit and intent
of this article and the statement of community development objectives
contained in § 182-2 are observed and that the overall densities
specified herein are maintained.
A. Legislative intent. In expansion of the statement of community
development objectives contained in § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby
declared to be the intent of this section to establish reasonable controls
and standards of performance for residential multifamily dwellings in
those areas of Upper Providence Township where the confluence of
existing commercial shopping areas, infrastructure, public
transportation, and employment centers most readily accommodates
the intensity of the residential dwelling types permitted in this section.
B. Tract Requirements and Permitted Uses.
(1) RUG-3 shall be a conditional use applicable to parcels of land zoned
IO-3 (Interchange, Office, Retail, Service and Recreation District)
that meets all the following criteria:
(a) The entire tract is located within the IO-3 Zoning District;
(b) The tract or lot has frontage of at least 175 feet on an arterial
road;
(c) The tract under development for the RUG-3 is at least 25 acres
in size;
§ 182-120.18 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.19
176:846
(d) The tract has a common property line with a developed
shopping center.
(e) The proposal satisfies all applicable objective conditional use
criteria adopted by ordinance prior to submission of the
application.
(2) In any development pursuant to RUG-3, a master plan of the tract
shall be submitted in conjunction with the conditional use
application for approval by the Board of Supervisors.
(a) Master plans shall be drawn to tentative sketch plan
requirements, pursuant to § 154-111 of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(b) The master plan shall also include the information required
within § 154-12D for the proposed lot and road layout. This is
intended to show relationships among the various buildings
and parking areas, stormwater and sewage facilities, and shall
show how development of the entire tract, once executed in
accordance with the plan, will function cohesively as an
integrated development.
(c) Pedestrian accommodations shall be included on the
development tract in locations logical to provide pedestrian
movement between buildings, between buildings and parking
areas and between buildings and parking areas and open
spaces. Said pedestrian accommodations shall be reflected on
the Master Plan.
(d) Any change to proposed lots, buildings, circulations, parking,
landscaping or extent of natural features preservation which is
substantive in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors will
necessitate a revised master plan to be submitted, approved
and recorded to replace any prior master plan(s). No
subdivision or land development for any development on the
subject development tract shall be approved without a current
recorded master plan.
(3) In a RUG-3, a building may be erected, altered or used and a lot
may be used or occupied for any of the following uses and no
others:
(a) Residential buildings which contain any combination of
attached dwellings and multifamily dwellings.
(b) A hotel, including extended-stay hotels. Hotels built in
conjunction with a multifamily development under RUG-3 shall
not be considered a Group B use, as set forth in the underlying
IO-3 District.
§ 182-120.19 WATER § 182-120.19
176:847
[1] Hotels and associated parking are limited to an area not to
exceed four acres. This area shall include all setbacks and
land development associated with the hotel use. Common
driveways that serve both a multifamily and hotel use are
not included in the four-acre area.
[2] Hotels and associated parking shall be within 350 feet of
the property line shared with the shopping center and in
no event may exceed a height of 65 feet.
(c) No-impact home-based businesses in accordance with the
standards set forth in § 182-21.3.
(d) Recreational uses. In addition to accessory uses customarily
incidental to a residential use, appropriate accessory uses may
be developed in conjunction with any of the uses; provided,
however, that none is intended as an independent freestanding
commercial use, but which may include the following:
[1] Indoor or outdoor recreation facilities, clubhouse, or
similar use limited to use by the residents of the
residential buildings, including any hotel, by fences and
gates.
[2] Common open space available to the general population.
(e) Commercial uses with the following conditions:
[1] The use must be wholly contained (other than outdoor
seating) within the multifamily residential buildings.
[2] Commercial uses are limited to the ground floor of all
buildings; utility space may extend beyond the first floor,
but may not have public access.
[3] Commercial uses are limited to those multifamily buildings
with facades within 100 feet of the shared shopping center
property lines.
[4] Uses are limited to the following:
[a] Retail establishments directly serving the needs of the
residential units, including but not limited to
pharmacies, coffee shops, newsstands or any other
use of a similar nature.
[b] Service establishments directly serving the needs of
the permitted uses herein, including but not limited to
such uses as automated bank machines, fitness
centers, travel consultants, single practitioner
medical offices, and other small-scale office uses of a
similar nature.
§ 182-120.19 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.19
176:848
[c] Full-service restaurant serving food on premises with
table service and using reusable (nondisposable)
dishes and utensils.
(f) A principal use permitted herein may be constructed on the
same lot with other permitted principal uses.
C. RUG-3 regulations. The following regulations shall apply in a RUG-3:
(1) General regulations.
(a) Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one
ownership or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly
by the owners of the entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the
tract will be developed under single direction in accordance
with an approved plan.
(b) Sewer and water facilities. The tract of land shall be served by
public water facilities and public sewer facilities deemed
acceptable by the Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation
of the Township Engineer.
(c) Development plan. The application for the conditional use shall
be in accordance with § 182-204 of the Zoning Ordinance and
shall be accompanied by a traffic impact analysis consistent
with the requirements of § 182-120E, a community impact
analysis consistent with the requirements of § 182-1201, and a
tentative sketch plan as required by the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, § 154-12. The plan shall clearly
designate the proposed use(s) of each area or tract.
(d) Development stages and permits. If the development of a tract
is to be carried out in one or multiple phases or stages, said
development shall be executed in accordance with a
development agreement. The owner, developer and Township
shall enter into said agreement embodying all details
regarding compliance with this section to assure the binding
nature thereof on the overall tract and its development, which
agreement shall be recorded with the final development plan.
(2) Development regulations. The following development regulations
shall be followed by all proposed developments in a RUG-3:
(a) Utilities. All utility lines (electrical, telephone, etc.) shall be
placed underground.
(b) Height regulations. The maximum height (as defined in
§ 182-24) of apartment buildings or structures other than
hotels erected or enlarged in a RUG-3 shall be a maximum of
55 feet. Buildings may exceed 55 feet given the following:
[1] If maximum building height is greater than 55 feet, the
setback from any residential use shall be increased one
§ 182-120.19 WATER § 182-120.19
176:849
foot for every foot over 55 feet. In no case shall a building
exceed 75 feet.
[2] Buildings may have a maximum building height of 75 feet,
but there shall not be more than five floors of residential
use and one floor of parking within the seventy-five-foot
space.
[3] All buildings that exceed 55 feet in height shall be certified
Silver or higher classification by the United States Green
Building Council standards for LEED construction.
(c) Accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 35 feet,
including a separate clubhouse.
(d) Parking regulations. Parking requirements for RUG-3 shall be
as follows:
[1] For the residents of each dwelling unit, no fewer than 1.7
automobile parking spaces shall be required for the first
phase of development.
[2] Loading and unloading space shall comply with § 182-184.
[3] Parking for those nonresidential uses permitted in
§ 182-120.19B(2)(e) shall comply with the standards set
forth in Article XXII; however, parking spaces may be
provided at 1/2 of the amount described therein upon
presentation of a shared parking agreement through
which 1/2 of the total required parking can be shared as
between residential and nonresidential uses.
[4] Parking may be phased to run concurrent with the
residential buildings. The installation of parking spaces
shall be phased to ensure that at no time will parking be
less than 1.7 parking spaces per the number of built
dwelling units.
(e) Signs. Signs shall be permitted, subject to the requirements of
Article XIX of this chapter. No signage of any type shall be
permitted within 100 feet of an arterial highway or be
illuminated in any manner when facing an arterial highway as
defined by the Township's right-of-way map.
(f) Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress
and egress to and from public streets and highways serving the
residential development, without causing undue confusion or
interference with the normal traffic flow.
(g) Common areas and facilities. The provision of certain facilities
serving the entire development, such as parking lots, interior
pedestrianways, driveways and alleys, lighting facilities,
landscape planting areas, buffers, open space and recreation
§ 182-120.19 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.19
176:850
facilities, etc., shall be required. In cases where they are
provided in common areas, provisions satisfactory to the Board
of Supervisors must be made for their perpetual maintenance
and care. The use of these facilities may be restricted to the
residents of the development, and may be maintained by the
developer, a homeowners' association or similar entity. In
addition, the foregoing RUG-3 developments shall provide the
following facilities:
[1] A bus stop for mass transit will be set aside, and a bus
shelter shall be provided constructed by the developer if
and when determined as necessary, now or in the future,
by the Township Board of Supervisors or the mass transit
agency.
[2] At least one school bus stop shall be provided in an area
separate and distinct from the mass transit bus stop. If
required by Spring-Ford School District more than one bus
stop may be provided; and
[3] Public walkways or trails connecting the community to
surrounding properties, existing or planned pedestrian
circulation systems, and the bus stops for both mass
transit and school buses.
(h) Property maintenance area. A suitable outdoor area shall be
provided on site for the storage of landscaping, snow removal,
and other property-maintenance-related materials. Property
maintenance areas shall be:
[1] Clearly separate from any other uses on the site;
[2] Separate from any required parking spaces; and
[3] Screened from view from public roads and surrounding
properties with a Buffer Type-2 as defined in § 154-36D, in
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance. The requirement for a buffer width of 25 feet
only applies on those areas that face non-RUG-3
residential developments; in all other locations, the buffer
may be a minimum of 15 feet in width.
(i) Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as
needed and arranged in a manner which will protect the
highway and neighboring properties from unreasonable direct
glare or hazardous interference of any kind. Lighting facilities
shall be required for the safety and welfare of the residents of
the development and shall be installed by the developer at his/
her expense and shall be in accordance with the provisions of
§ 154-40 of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development,
of the Code of the Township of Upper Providence.
§ 182-120.19 WATER § 182-120.19
176:851
(j) Landscape planting. A separate landscape plan shall be
submitted as part of the land development approval process,
stipulating buffer and street tree landscaping proposed in
connection with the development of RUG-3 residential units.
[1] Shade trees shall be provided along all private and public
street frontage occupied by a RUG-3 residential
development in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, of the
Code of the Township of Upper Providence.
[2] Buffer area. A permanent landscape planting area
designed for filtering views from any uses which are
adjoining and contiguous to the development will be
provided as set forth in accordance with the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance, § 154-36D(5).
(k) Design standards. The architectural design standards set forth
in § 154-36.2 shall apply.
D. Conditional use application requirements in addition to those set forth
in Article XXIV, § 182-204, of this chapter.
(1) A market study shall be prepared and shall demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors, the need for said use(s).
Said study shall include, but not be limited to, a full description of
the proposed use(s) and the anticipated market area for the
proposed use(s), an estimate of the number of users, a description
of similar facilities within the market area, as well as any additional
factors which will adequately demonstrate the market demand for
the proposed use(s) both at the time of initial occupancy and at the
time of full usage.
(2) A community impact study shall be prepared and submitted with
the conditional use application that complies with the requirements
of § 182-120I of this chapter:
(3) A traffic impact study shall be prepared and submitted with the
conditional use application that complies with the requirements of
§ 182-120E of this chapter.
E. Phasing.
(1) If the development of a tract is to be carried out in two or more
phases, when authorized by the Board of Supervisors as part of the
conditional use application, and pursuant to the procedural
requirements set forth in Article XXIV, § 182-204, of this chapter
and pursuant to the requirements set forth herein executed in
accordance with a development agreement:
§ 182-120.19 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.19
176:852
(a) A phase plan must be submitted with the conditional use
application or the applicant may clearly delineate the phases
on the master plan required herein.
(b) The number of residential units in Phase 1 shall be no greater
than 70% of the total number of units being proposed. The
development of subsequent phases are subject to:
[1] The completion of 80% of the physical construction of the
dwelling units identified in Phase 1;
[2] Completion of parking, recreation amenities, and
commercial or recreation facilities as identified as part of
Phase 1 on the phase plan.
F. Tract development requirements. The requirements in this section are
applicable to any tract of land to be developed pursuant to this article.
All building setback, parking setback, building spacing and building
height regulations contained herein shall only apply to any RUG-3
development. All building and parking setbacks from a roadway shall be
from the ultimate right-of-way of that roadway; in the case of setbacks
from an internal road serving to access buildings within a development,
the setbacks shall be measured from the established curbline. All
buffers required pursuant to this section shall be installed in
accordance with the specifications contained in § 154-36, Planting, in
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development.
(1) Site density and bonus options.
(a) Base density: 20 units per developable acre.
(b) Density bonus provisions.
[1] By providing any of the following, developments within
RUG-3 may increase their density by 2.0 units per
developable acre for each amenity provided, up to four
amenities:
[a] Public square with amenities or fully developed park
over one acre.
[b] Public trails and sidewalk totaling 200 linear feet and
connecting to at least three existing trail or sidewalk
locations adjacent to the RUG-3 development.
[c] Multifamily buildings certified Silver or higher by the
United States Green Building Council (USGBC)
standards for LEED construction. Given that
certification by USGBC occurs post-construction, the
architect for the developer is required to submit a
report showing how the proposed buildings comply
with the current standards for Silver certification with
the conditional use application.
§ 182-120.19 WATER § 182-120.19
176:853
[d] Multifamily buildings are 80% one and two-bedroom
units, with 50% of all units having outdoor balconies.
[e] Commercial uses comprise 50% of the first-floor area
of all multifamily buildings.
(2) Standard development requirements.
(a) Building coverage: 25%.
(b) Impervious coverage: 65%.
(c) Building setback from property lines and streets.
[1] From a limited access highway (buffer type 2 required): 50
feet.
[2] From a collector, feeder or other classification road (buffer
type 2 required): 100 feet.
[3] Side yards.
[a] Residential use: 50 feet (buffer type 3 required).
[b] Commercial use: 15 feet.
(d) Building from site features.
[1] From on-site building to building separation: 60 feet.
[2] From interior or adjoining access drives (buffer type 1
required): 15 feet.
[3] From parking lots (buffer type 4 required): 12 feet.
[4] From buildings on adjoining properties.
[a] For buildings up to 60 feet in height from buildings on
adjacent properties: 100 feet.
[b] For buildings 60 feet to 70 feet in height from
buildings on adjacent properties: 125 feet.
(e) Building length. The maximum length of any residential
building in one direction shall be 250 feet.
(f) Parking setbacks.
[1] Forty feet from the ultimate right-of-way of a limitedaccess
highway.
[2] Twenty-five feet from the ultimate right-of-way from a
collector road.
[3] Twenty-five feet from a perimeter property line abutting a
residential use.
§ 182-120.19 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-120.19
176:854
[4] Fifteen feet from a perimeter property line abutting a
commercial use.
[5] Twelve feet from a building.
(3) Required amenities and recreation areas. For the use of the
residents of a RUG-3 development a minimum of eight of the
following must be provided:
(a) Tennis, basketball, or other surface-treated multipurpose court
area.
(b) Bocce court.
(c) A minimum of one pool of a size determined to sufficiently
serve the projected population at project completion, as
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(d) Tot lots or other play structures as approved by the Board of
Supervisors to sufficiently serve the projected population at
project completion.
(e) Indoor workout facilities with associated equipment.
(f) Indoor community meeting area.
(g) Dog run or other type of enclosed pet area.
(h) Electric car-charging stations.
(i) Outdoor kitchen and grilling stations.
(j) Bicycle storage, both long-term internal storage and outdoor
bike rack for short-term storage. Interior storage must be
provided at one storage space for 15% of the total units in a
given building.
(k) Game room/media center.
G. Plan modifications. The Board of Supervisors may grant modifications
from the specific requirements herein, and those of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development, provided that the spirit and intent
of this article and the statement of community development objectives
contained in § 182-2 are observed and that the overall densities
specified herein are maintained.
H. In the case of a conflict between the provisions of the RUG-3
regulations and those of the IO-3 district, or any other provision of the
Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,
the provisions of the RUG-3 shall prevail.
§ 182-120.19 WATER § 182-120.19
176:855

ARTICLE XVII
M-2 Manufacturing Industrial District
§ 182-121. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives
contained in § 182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent
of this article with respect to M-2 Manufacturing Industrial Districts to
establish reasonable standards of performance for the provision and
maintenance of general manufacturing and heavy industrial uses in the
Oaks area of the Township, where historic locational factors and
accessibility to the regional transportation network offer primary sites for
such intensive activities. Furthermore, it is the intent of this district to
provide buffering requirements and building and parking setbacks to
ensure that such uses will cause minimal conflicts with adjacent residential
development in the Oaks area in furtherance of the general welfare of
neighborhood residents and of the residents of Upper Providence Township.
§ 182-122. Permitted uses.
In an M-2 Manufacturing Industrial District, a building or group of buildings
may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any
of the following uses and no other:
A. Any use permitted in the M-1 Office and Limited Industrial District.
B. The manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, processing and packaging of
natural and man-made materials, chemicals, synthetics and other
organic and inorganic products, except those uses specifically
prohibited in Subsection E herein.
C. A public or governmental utility building or use, including a storage
yard, repair shop or similar use.
D. A warehouse or materials storage area, either open or enclosed,
including a junkyard, with appropriate screening as defined herein.
E. Any use of the same general character as the above permitted uses,
except that in no case shall the following uses or any use substantially
similar thereto be permitted: an abattoir; the bulk storage of explosives;
a fat rendering operation; wood or wood pulp processing; petroleum
refining; leather processing: the manufacture of asphalt, explosives,
fertilizer, linoleum or rubber or a dump, incineration or reduction of
garbage, except a sanitary landfill operated in accordance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
F. Any use permitted in the CRSC Community and Regional Shopping
Center District, provided that § 182-93, District regulations, are met,
and specifically the Site Development Requirements established for the
category "Regional Shopping Center" within said section are utilized.
§ 182-121 WATER § 182-122
176:857
[Added 5-4-1987 by Ord. No. 264; amended 3-16-1992 by Ord.
No. 309]
(1) Any Community and Regional Shopping Center must be a portion of
a total site containing at least 100 acres in single and separate
ownership, or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by
the owners of the entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract
shall be developed under single direction in accordance with an
approved master plan. Seventy-five percent of the site area shall be
located within a one-mile radius of an interchange of a limitedaccess
highway. Such one-mile radius shall be measured from the
point at which the center of the limited-access highway intersects
with the center of a public road connected to the limited-access
highway.
(2) Any property having Community and Regional Shopping Center
uses must first file a master plan for the entire property in the form
provided in § 182-120.7, and specifically following the
requirements in said section, with the exception of those in
Subsections C and E, of this chapter as a prerequisite for approval.
In addition, the master plan shall specifically allocate commercial
and industrial development areas and delineate separations
between uses, as well as required parking associated with each use
area, and provide a general landscape and buffer plan and a
circulation plan that would segregate automobile and truck traffic
from each other as well as commercial access from access to the
industrial development areas. Any required buffer areas shall
conform to the greater requirement of the CRSC or M-2 District.
(3) (Reserved)154
(4) The following uses shall not be permitted on any portion of a
property which is submitted for CRSC uses within the M-2 District:
(a) Dry-cleaning plants.
(b) Special exception uses under § 182-107A.
(c) The manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, processing,
packaging and handling of chemicals.
(d) Junkyards.
(e) Sanitary landfills.
(f) Animal hospitals and kennels.
(5) Upon approval of a final development plan for CRSC use pursuant
to this section, all CRSC uses shall not exceed 80% of the gross
154. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(3), which provided that all CRCS uses shall be
contiguous and uninterrupted by M-1 or M-2 uses, was repealed 3-15-2004 by Ord. No.
436.
§ 182-122 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-122
176:858
§ 182-122.1. Conditional uses. [Added 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 405]
The following conditional uses shall be permitted:
buildable area identified in the master plan, unless the balance of
M-1 and M-2 uses shall terminate within two years from the date
which the development attained 80% occupancy by CRSC uses.
[Amended 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
(6) In the case of a property used for CRSC development pursuant to
this section, whenever any M-1 and M-2 use(s) is subject to the
performance standards contained in §§ 182-109 and/or 182-123 of
this chapter, in any instance where reference is made to "the
property line" of the development site or "the district boundary
line" of the M-2 District, those lines shall be construed to also
include the line separating the CRSC uses from the M-1 and M-2
uses. This line shall be that line separating said uses, as designated
on the master plan required pursuant to Subsection F(2) of this
section, and as said master plan may be subsequently amended.
This line shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
G. Any use not specifically permitted nor prohibited in any zoning district
as included in this chapter may be permitted by special exception in the
M-2 District, provided that it meets all performance standards
contained in § 182-123 herein and all other requirements of this
district. [Added 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
H. Any use for which there is insufficient available land in the district in
which the use is normally permitted may be permitted by special
exception in the M-2 District, provided that it meets all performance
standards contained in § 182-123 herein and all other requirements of
this district. [Added 10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 329]
I. Communications antennas mounted on a communications tower and
communications equipment buildings, only upon a showing, in addition
to any other that may be required under this chapter, that is not feasible
to mount the communications antenna on an existing public utility
transmission tower, existing building or other existing structure.
Communications antennas shall conform to the requirements of
§ 182-21.1 and communications towers shall conform to the
requirements of § 182-21.2. [Added 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 372]
A. Heliports, subject to the specific requirements set forth in §§ 182-21
and 182-204 of this chapter.
B. Museums, provided that the museum is at least 75,000 square feet, and
subject to the specific requirements set forth in § 182-204. [Added
3-7-2010 by Ord. No. 514]
§ 182-122 WATER § 182-123
176:859
§ 182-123. Performance standards. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No.
490]
Notwithstanding the applicable laws and regulations of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, the following performance standards shall be
used by the Board of Supervisors, Township Planning Commission and
Township Engineer in reviewing the suitability and possible hazardous
impacts of a proposed use within the M-2 Manufacturing Industrial District.
A. In determining whether a proposed use is or may become noxious,
hazardous or offensive, the following standards shall apply. The
proposed use shall not:
(1) Constitute a nuisance or damage to health or any property by
reason of dissemination of toxic, noxious by corrosive fumes,
smoke, odor or dust in the immediately surrounding area or, in the
case of M-2 Manufacturing Industrial District, beyond the district
boundary line.
(2) Result in noise or vibration clearly exceeding the average intensity
of noise or vibration occurring from other causes at the property
line or, in the case of M-2 Manufacturing Industrial District, beyond
the district boundary line.
(3) Endanger surrounding areas by reason of radiation, fire or
explosion.
(4) Produce objectionable heat or glare beyond the property line or, in
the case of an M-2 Manufacturing Industrial District, beyond the
district boundary line.
(5) Result in electrical disturbance in nearby residences or adversely
affect the operation of equipment other than on the property on
which the disturbance is located.
(6) Discharge any untreated sewage or industrial waste into any
stream or the Schuylkill River or otherwise contribute to the
pollution of surface or underground waters.
(7) Endanger the underground water level or supply for other
properties.
(8) Create an objectionable traffic condition on the highway or in an
adjacent area or generate a nuisance to surrounding property by
reason of truck traffic.
(9) Create any other objectionable condition in an adjoining area
which will endanger public health and safety or be detrimental to
the environmental quality of the surrounding area.
B. The applicant shall demonstrate to the Township Engineer that:
§ 182-123 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-123
176:860
§ 182-124. District regulations.
The following regulations shall apply for any development proposal within
the M-2 Manufacturing Industrial District:
(1) The proposed use(s) will comply with the standards contained in
Subsection A herein.
(2) Adequate provisions will be made to reduce and minimize any
objectionable elements to the degree necessary to ensure that the
proposed use(s) will not be noxious, hazardous or offensive as
defined in Subsection A herein.
C. The Township Engineer may require, in order to determine that
adequate safeguards are provided, that:
(1) The applicant submit necessary information, impartial expert
judgments and written assurances.
(2) The applicant obtain the advice of appropriate local, state and
federal agencies and of private consultants.
(3) The applicant's proposed use(s) comply with such tests or provide
such safeguards as are deemed necessary by the Board of
Supervisors, upon the advice of the Township Engineer.
A. General regulations. The following general regulations shall apply for
any development proposal within the M-2 Manufacturing Industrial
District:
(1) Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one
ownership or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by
the owners of the entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract
will be developed under single direction in accordance with an
approved plan. The transfer of ownership to another applicant
prior to the commencement of construction shall render the
development agreement required in Subsection A(4) herein void.
Said agreement shall then be renegotiable between the new
owners and the Board of Supervisors. [Amended 12-16-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
(2) Sewer and water facilities. The tract of land shall be served by
public sewer facilities and water facilities deemed acceptable by
the Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Township
Engineer.
(3) Development plan. The application for development shall be
accompanied by a plan or plans showing the detailed use of the
entire tract, which plan or plans shall also comply with all
requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development,
and other applicable ordinances. The plan shall clearly designate
the proposed use(s) of each area of the tract.
§ 182-123 WATER § 182-124
176:861
§ 182-125. Site development requirements.
(4) Development stages and permits. The development of a tract
carried out in either a single phase or in stages shall be executed in
accordance with a development agreement. The owner, developer
and Township shall enter into said agreement embodying all details
regarding compliance with this article to assure the binding nature
thereof on the overall tract and its development, which agreement
shall be recorded with the final development plan.
A. The following site development requirements shall be complied with for
a development proposal in the M-2 Manufacturing Industrial District:
Site Development Requirements Dimensions
Minimum tract sizea (acres) 5
Minimum widthb (feet) 250
Minimum building setbacksc (feet) 1001
1502
503
04
Minimum parking setbacksd (feet) 501
1002
153
04
Maximum impervious coveragee 90%
Maximum building coverage 60%
Maximum height (feet) 50
NOTES:
a Excluding the rights-of-way of existing public roads.
b Measured along the building line.
c Measured from:
1 The ultimate right-of-way line.
2 An abutting residential or institutional district boundary line.
3 An abutting commercial or industrial district boundary line.
4 With zero lot line development, a building may be constructed
so that one wall may be coincidental with one lot line, provided
that the requirements of § 182-111C herein are met.
d Measured from:
§ 182-124 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-125
176:862
§ 182-126. Other development regulations.
The following additional development regulations shall apply for any
development proposed in the M-2 Manufacturing Industrial District:
1 The ultimate right-of-way line.
2 An abutting residential or institutional district boundary line.
3 An abutting commercial or industrial district boundary line.
4 With shared parking and loading facilities.
e The total paved and developed area of a tract.
B. Zero lot line development regulations. On those lots on which buildings
may be constructed on the lot line wherein only one side yard is
required pursuant to the minimum side yard provision contained in
Subsection A herein, the following regulations shall apply: [Added
9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 231]
(1) No building wall situated on a lot line shall contain windows, doors,
loading areas or other openings.
(2) The roof shall not be drained toward a wall situated on a lot line.
(3) No building wall shall be placed on a side lot line unless access is
provided onto the abutting property to allow for inspection,
maintenance and repair to the building wall and foundation.
Provision for access shall be guaranteed by irrevocable easement
or other legal mechanism to the satisfaction of the Township
Solicitor.
(4) Structures on abutting lots may be built along their common lot
line, creating a party wall between the abutting uses.
A. Utilities. All utility lines (electrical, telephone, etc.) shall be placed
underground.
B. Signs. Advertising signs and billboards are permitted as special
exception uses in the M-2 Industrial District. All signs in this district,
including advertising signs and billboards, shall be subject to the
requirements of Article XIX, Signs, of this chapter. [Amended
12-2-1985 by Ord. No. 249]
C. Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress
to and from public streets and highways serving the M-2 manufacturing
industrial development without causing undue confusion or
interference with the normal traffic flow. The Township Planning
Commission, with the advice of the Township Engineer, shall satisfy
itself as to the adequacy of the thoroughfares and access points
intended to accommodate the traffic generated by the proposed M-2
§ 182-125 WATER § 182-126
176:863
§ 182-127. Plan submission requirements.
All proposals for developments within the M-2 Industrial District shall
comply with the pertinent requirements of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development, concerning nonresidential developments.
manufacturing industrial development, as well as to the street frontage
of the proposed development.
D. Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as needed and
arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and neighboring
properties from unreasonable glare or hazardous interference of any
kind and shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
154, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township,
§ 154-40. [Amended 6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 416]
E. Trash and refuse areas. Provision shall be made for the storage of trash,
refuse and garbage either inside the building(s) or within a walled area
outside the building(s). The walls of such trash and refuse area(s) must
shield the trash and refuse from the direct view of any adjacent
property and must be at least six feet in height.
F. Landscaped planting and buffer areas. Along a side or rear property
line which is adjacent to a residential or institutional district, the owner
shall place and maintain a Buffer Type 2 as described in § 154-36D(5) of
Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development. [Amended
8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
G. Off-street parking and loading facilities. All off-street parking facilities
serving a proposed M-2 industrial development shall comply with the
pertinent requirements of Article XXII, Off-Street Parking and Loading,
hereof. All off-street loading facilities shall comply with § 182-184.
H. Minimum distance between buildings. The minimum distance between
a building or group of buildings shall be 25 feet, except that all
structures connected by common roof lines or covered walkways shall
be considered as one building.
§ 182-126 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-127
176:864
ARTICLE XVIII
SS Steep Slope Conservation District
§ 182-128. Legislative intent. [Amended 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 345]
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives in
§ 182-2 of this chapter, the specific intent of the SS Steep Slope
Conservation District shall be to conserve and protect those areas having
steep slopes, as defined herein, from inappropriate development and
excessive grading, as well as to permit and encourage the use of said
areas for open space purposes so as to constitute a harmonious aspect
of the continuing physical development of Upper Providence Township.
In implementing these principles and the general purposes of the
Comprehensive Plan, the Open Space and Recreation Plan, the Open Space
and Environmental Resource Protection Plan and this chapter, the following
specific objectives are intended to be accomplished by the adoption of the
Steep Slope Conservation District:
A. To combine with other zoning requirements, as an overlay, certain
restrictions for steep slope areas to promote the general health, safety
and welfare of the residents of Upper Providence Township.
B. To prevent inappropriate development of steep slope areas in order to
avoid potential dangers for human usage caused by erosion, stream
siltation, soil failure leading to structural collapse or damage and/or
unsanitary conditions and associated hazards.
C. To minimize danger to public health and safety by promoting safe and
sanitary drainage.
D. To permit only those uses that are compatible with development of
steep slope areas in order to avoid accelerated erosion, soil failure,
accelerated seepage or other conditions which may create a danger to
life and/or property.
E. To permit only those uses in steep slope areas that are compatible with
the preservation of existing natural features, including vegetative
cover, by restricting the grading of steep slope areas.
F. To promote the ecological balance among those natural system
elements, such as wildlife, vegetation and aquatic life, that could be
adversely affected by inappropriate development of steep slope areas.
G. To prevent development that would cause excessive erosion and a
resultant reduction in the water-carrying capacity of the watercourses
which flow through or around the Township, with the consequences of
increased flood crests and flood hazards within the Township and to
both upriver and downriver municipalities.
H. To protect individuals and adjacent landowners in the Township and/or
other municipalities from the possible harmful effects of inappropriate
grading and development on steep slope areas.
§ 182-128 WATER § 182-128
176:865
§ 182-129. District boundaries.
The SS Steep Slope Conservation District is defined and established as
follows:
§ 182-130. Overlay concept.
The Steep Slope Conservation District shall be deemed to be an overlay on
any zoning district(s) now or hereafter enacted to regulate the use of land
in Upper Providence Township.
I. To protect those individuals who choose, despite the cited dangers, to
develop or occupy land with steep slopes.
J. To protect the entire Township from inappropriate development of
steep slope areas, which could have an effect upon subsequent
expenditures for public works and disaster relief and, thus, adversely
affect the economic well-being of the Township.
K. To promote the provision of safe and reliable accessways, parking areas
and utility systems serving development on or around steep slope areas,
where more sensitive grading and siting is essential.
A. Those areas having slopes of 15% or greater as defined by a fieldgenerated
topographic survey using two-foot-interval contours and
which have an elevation difference of at least six feet. [Amended
8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 345]
B. Those areas referred to in Subsection A herein shall be plotted if, as and
when feasible on the Zoning Map to indicate the approximate
boundaries of the Steep Slope Conservation District.
C. The Zoning Map, including any additional steep slope areas plotted
upon it as referenced in Subsection B of this section, shall be available
to the public in the Township Building. [Amended 8-7-1995 by Ord.
No. 345]
D. Whenever there is a difference between the Zoning Map and the steep
slopes based upon data provided in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection A of this section, said data shall determine the boundaries of
the Steep Slope Conservation District. [Amended 8-7-1995 by Ord.
No. 345]
E. All subsequent changes in the boundaries of the Steep Slope
Conservation District shall be plotted if, as and when feasible on the
Zoning Map as amendments thereto.
A. The Steep Slope Conservation District shall have no effect on the
permitted uses in the underlying zoning district, except where said uses
intended to be located within the boundaries of the Steep Slope
Conservation District, as defined herein, are in conflict with the
permitted uses set forth in this article.
§ 182-128 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-130
176:866
§ 182-131. Boundary interpretation and appeals procedure.
An initial determination as to whether or not the Steep Slope Conservation
District applies to a given parcel shall be made by the Zoning Officer.
§ 182-132. Land use and development regulations.
In the SS Steep Slope Conservation District, the following land use and
development regulations shall apply:
B. In those areas of Upper Providence Township where the Steep Slope
Conservation District applies, the requirements of the Steep Slope
Conservation District shall supersede the requirements of the
underlying zoning district(s).
C. Should the Steep Slope Conservation District boundaries be revised as
a result of legislative or administrative actions or judicial decision, the
zoning requirements applicable to the area in question shall revert to
the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s) without
consideration of this article.
D. Should the zoning classification(s) of any parcel or any part thereof on
which the Steep Slope Conservation District is an overlay be changed
as a result of legislative or administrative actions or judicial decision,
such change(s) in classification shall have no effect on the boundaries of
the Steep Slope Conservation District, unless an amendment to said
boundaries was included as part of the proceedings from which the
subsequent change(s) originated.
A. Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Officer, either
because of an interpretation of the exact location of the Steep Slope
Conservation District boundary or because the criteria used in
delineating the boundary, as set forth in § 182-129 herein, is or has
become incorrect because of changes due to natural or other causes,
may appeal said decision to the Zoning Hearing Board as provided for
in Article XXIV of this chapter.
B. The burden of proving the incorrectness of the Zoning Officer's decision
shall be on the appellant, except as set forth in § 182-134 of this article.
A. On those lands having a slope of less than 15% as defined herein, the
Steep Slope Conservation District shall not apply. However, the use and
development of land in such areas shall still be governed by the
standards of the underlying zoning district(s) and the minimum acreage
requirements of Chapter 102, Erosion Control, of the Clean Streams
Law, P.L. 1987, and any subsequent amendments thereto.155
B. On those lands having a slope of 15% or more, as defined herein, the
Steep Slope Conservation District shall apply and only those uses
permitted in §§ 182-133 and 182-134 of this article shall be permitted.
155. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 182-130 WATER § 182-132
176:867
§ 182-133. Conservation uses permitted.
The following uses shall be permitted in the Steep Slope Conservation
District without the submission of an erosion and sediment control plan:
Furthermore, all applications for development on said areas as
permitted in § 182-134 of this article shall be accompanied by an
erosion and sediment control plan, notwithstanding the minimum
acreage requirements of Chapter 102, Erosion Control, of the Clean
Streams Law, P.L. 1987, and any subsequent amendments thereto. The
plan shall comply with the erosion and sediment control practices set
forth by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, as
well as other recognized conservation practices. [Amended 6-2-2008
by Ord. No. 490]
C. In evaluating the proposed development plan, the erosion and sediment
control plan and any additional information submitted by the applicant
in support of the application, the Township Planning Commission, the
Township Engineer and the Zoning Hearing Board, where appropriate,
shall consider the following factors:
(1) The percent of slope on the site.
(2) The extent and proposed disturbance of the existing vegetative
cover on the site.
(3) The soil types and underlying geology of the site.
(4) The length or extent of the slope both on the site in question and on
adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site.
(5) Evidence that the proposed development, any impervious ground
cover and the resultant disturbance to the land and existing
vegetative cover will not cause excessive runoff and/or related
environmental problems.
A. Wildlife sanctuaries, woodland preserves, arboretums and passive
recreation areas, including parks but excluding enclosed structures.
B. Game farms or hunting preserves for the protection and propagation of
wildlife, but excluding enclosed structures.
C. Forestry and reforestation in accordance with recognized soil
conservation practices.
D. The pasture and controlled grazing of animals in accordance with
recognized soil conservation practices.
E. Recreational uses such as parks with such activities as hiking, bicycle
and bridle trails, camps and picnic areas, but excluding enclosed
structures.
§ 182-132 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-133
176:868
§ 182-134. Special exception uses.
The following uses shall be permitted by a special exception from the
Zoning Hearing Board, upon the submission of an erosion and sediment
control plan and supporting evidence as set forth in § 182-132C of this
article.
§ 182-135. Prohibited uses.
The following uses shall be prohibited within the boundaries of the Steep
Slope Conservation District:
F. Outdoor plant nurseries or orchards in accordance with recognized soil
conservation practices.
G. The cultivation and harvesting of crops in accordance with recognized
soil conservation practices.
H. Nonstructural accessory uses, except swimming pools, necessary for
the operation and maintenance of the above-permitted uses.
I. Similar uses to the above which are in compliance with the intent of this
article.
A. Front, side and rear yards and required lot areas in the underlying
zoning district(s), provided that such yards are not to be used for an onsite
sewage disposal system, unless said system meets the applicable
requirements of Subsection E below.
B. Sealed public water supply wells, with the approval of the Township
Engineer and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
C. Sanitary or storm sewers and impoundment basins, with the approval of
the Township Engineer and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 490]
D. Underground utility transmission lines.
E. On-site sewage disposal systems, when constructed in compliance with
the Act 208 amendments to Act 537, the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act.156
F. Roads, access driveways and parking facilities, but only when no viable
alternative alignment or location is feasible, upon the determination of
the Township Engineer.
G. Those principal and accessory uses, except swimming pools, permitted
in the underlying zoning district, but only when no viable alternative
location is feasible, upon the determination of the Township Engineer.
156. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 182-133 WATER § 182-135
176:869
§ 182-136. Application procedure.
For any use of land in the Steep Slope Conservation District, excepting uses
existing as of the date of enactment of this chapter, an application for a
steep slope use permit shall be filed with the Zoning Officer who shall make
an initial determination on the application.
A. Freestanding structures, buildings and retaining walls, unless no
alternative location is feasible, as set forth in § 182-134G of this article.
B. Roads, access driveways and parking facilities, unless no alternative
alignment or location is available, as set forth in § 182-134F of this
article.
C. The filling or removal of topsoil, except when related to an activity
approved by special exception, as set forth in § 182-134 of this article.
D. Swimming pools.
E. Dumps, junkyards or other outdoor storage of vehicles and materials.
A. For a use other than those permitted in § 182-133, an application
seeking approval by special exception shall be forwarded to the Zoning
Hearing Board along with the required studies or information and the
findings of the Zoning Officer.
B. Any application concerning a use permitted by special exception in
§ 182-134 of this article shall be accomplished by the following
information:
(1) A plan certified by a registered professional engineer which
accurately locates the proposed use with respect to the Steep Slope
Conservation District boundaries and the existing development
within 200 feet of the proposed use, together with all pertinent
information such as the nature of the proposal, legal description of
the property, topographical elevations in two-foot intervals and
sediment and erosion control measures required by the provisions
of this article.
(2) The following additional information as deemed necessary by
either the Zoning Officer or the Zoning Hearing Board for the
evaluation of the impact of the proposed use:
(a) A plan surface view showing elevations or contours of the
ground, pertinent structure, grading or fill elevations, the size,
location and spatial arrangements of all proposed and existing
structures on the site, the location and elevations of streets,
the water supply and sanitary facilities, soil types, existing
vegetation and other pertinent information.
(b) Topographic surveys showing the contours of the property in
two-foot intervals, as well as typical tract cross-sections at a
scale of one inch to 100 feet or greater as deemed appropriate
§ 182-135 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-136
176:870
§ 182-137. Procedures and standards for special exception uses.
by the Township Engineer. In addition, typical tract crosssections
at a vertical and horizontal scale deemed appropriate
by the Township Engineer.
(c) Specifications for building construction and materials
including filling, grading, the storage of materials, the water
supply and sanitary facilities.
(d) Proposed modifications to the existing topography and
vegetative cover, as well as the means of accommodating
stormwater runoff and preventing erosion.
(e) Any additional engineering and conservation techniques
designed to alleviate environmental problems created by the
proposed development activities.
A. Procedures for consideration of a special exception. All applications for
approval by special exception shall be considered in accordance with
the following procedures:
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall hold a public hearing, giving
public notice in accordance with Article XXIV hereof.
(2) Prior to submission of an application for special exception, the
applicant shall submit a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan
to the Montgomery County Conservation District. The results of
said review and any recommendations of the Conservation District
shall be submitted as part of said application. [Amended
5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 383]
(3) The Zoning Officer, upon receipt of an application to the Zoning
Hearing Board, shall request, at least 30 days prior to the public
hearing, the review and recommendations of the Upper Providence
Township Planning Commission. [Amended 5-3-1999 by Ord.
No. 383]
(4) The Zoning Hearing Board may request the review and
recommendations of technical agencies or appropriate planning
agencies to assist in determining the environmental impact of the
proposed use(s). Any such review shall be requested at least 30
days prior to the public hearing. [Amended 8-7-1995 by Ord. No.
345]
(5) In rendering a decision, the Zoning Hearing Board may impose
special measures or conditions as deemed reasonably necessary
and appropriate for the proposed use(s) to conform to the intent of
this article.
§ 182-136 WATER § 182-137
176:871
§ 182-138. Nonconforming uses or structures.
Following the adoption of this article, any use or structure which is situated
within the boundaries of the Steep Slope Conservation District and which
does not conform to the permitted uses specified by § 182-133 of this
article shall become a nonconforming use or structure, regardless of its
conformance to the district in which it is located without consideration
of this article. The expansion or continuance of said nonconforming use
or structure shall be governed by the requirements of Article XXI of this
chapter. However, the Zoning Hearing Board shall also ensure that the
B. Standards for approval of uses by special exception. In considering a
use as a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the
following:
(1) The relationship of the proposed use to the specific objectives set
forth in § 182-128 of this article.
(2) The standards set forth in § 182-132C of this article.
(3) Abutting property shall not be adversely affected by possible runoff
or erosion from the proposed use.
(4) The general welfare, safety and public interest of Upper Providence
Township or adjacent municipalities shall not be adversely affected.
(5) Any structures permitted by special exception shall provide
evidence that:
(a) Proposed buildings or structures are of sound engineering
design and that footings are designed to extend to stable soil
and/or bedrock.
(b) Proposed vehicular facilities, including road, drives and/or
parking areas, shall be so designed that land clearing and/or
grading will not cause accelerated erosion. Both vertical and
horizontal alignments of vehicular facilities shall be so
designed that hazardous circulation conditions shall not be
created.
(c) Proposed on-lot sewage disposal facilities shall be properly
designed and installed in conformance with all pertinent health
regulations.
(d) Proposed nonagricultural displacement of soil shall be for
causes consistent with the intent of this chapter and shall be
executed in a manner that will not cause excessive erosion or
other unstable conditions.
(e) Surface runoff of water will not create unstable conditions,
including erosion, and that appropriate stormwater drainage
facilities or systems will be constructed as deemed necessary.
§ 182-137 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-138
176:872
standards contained in § 182-137 of this article are applied to the expansion
or continuance of said nonconforming use or structure.
§ 182-139. Certificate of compliance.
No vacant land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected,
altered or used and no steep slope areas shall be occupied until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer
shall request the applicant to submit a certification by a registered
professional engineer or land surveyor that the construction of said building
and any necessary grading or filling were accomplished in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall, within 10 days
after receipt of such certification from the applicant, issue a certification of
compliance only if the building or premises and the proposed use thereof
conform with all requirements of this chapter.
§ 182-140. Municipal liability.
The granting of a zoning permit or approval of a subdivision or land
development plan on or near the Steep Slope Conservation District shall
not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the
Township of Upper Providence or by any official or employee thereof of
the practicability or safety of the proposed use and shall create no liability
upon Upper Providence Township, its officials or employees. The degree of
erosion and sediment control protection intended to be provided by this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
engineering and scientific methods of study. This chapter does not imply
that areas outside the Steep Slope Conservation District boundaries or
land uses permitted within said district will always be totally free from the
adverse effects of erosion.
§ 182-138 WATER § 182-140
176:873

ARTICLE XIX
Signs
[Amended 2-21-1978 by Ord. No. 197; 12-2-1985 by Ord. No. 249;
12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 307; 11-5-2001 by Ord. No. 409; 5-5-2003 by
Ord. No. 426; 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 454]
§ 182-141. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the community development objectives contained in § 182-2
of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of this article to
recognize that signs provide an important function in the Township
providing for the identification of businesses, residences, services and other
matters of interest. This article provides standards and controls to balance
the need to provide information to residents and the desire not to impair the
visual character of Upper Providence Township or create potential hazards.
§ 182-142. Signs permitted for residential and agricultural uses.
A. One of each of the following signs is permitted for residential use,
provided that each sign not exceed one square foot in area:
(1) Identification sign.
(2) Incidental sign.
(3) Professional, accessory use or name sign, indicating the name,
profession or activity of the occupant of the residence.
(4) Trespassing sign indicating private ownership of a driveway or
property. One such sign shall be permitted for each 150 feet of
frontage on each street on which a property abuts.
B. Signs of contractors, mechanics, painters and artisans directed and
maintained on the premises where the work is being performed for the
period of time that the work is being performed and real estate signs
advertising either the sale or rental of the premises or the development
of the premises by the builder, contractor, developer or other persons
interested therein shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Each sign shall not exceed six square feet in area.
(2) All such signs shall be unlighted.
(3) All such signs shall be removed within 10 days of the completion of
the particular purpose for which the sign has been erected.
(4) One sign shall be permitted for each street frontage.
C. Agricultural uses are permitted one business sign advertising the sale
of farm products on the premises, not to exceed 15 square feet in area;
provided, however, that a farm which is also in the Township's
Agricultural Security District may instead have one business sign not
exceeding 48 square feet, as long as said farm has been permanently
§ 182-141 WATER § 182-142
176:875
§ 182-143. Signs permitted for institutional uses.
preserved as a result of the sale of its development rights and is
recognized as a business by the Township. Such sign shall not exceed
12 feet in height. Temporary signs used for special holiday events or the
sale of agricultural products shall be permitted in accordance with the
provisions of § 182-154C herein.
D. Residential developments may have one sign to identify the name of the
complex on each side of the entrance at each vehicular entrance to the
property. The aggregate area of signs at each vehicular entrance may
not exceed 25 square feet in area. A homeowner's association or, where
none exists, the lot owner on whose lot such signs are located, shall be
responsible for maintenance of such signs and any decorative walls,
fences or landscaping associated with them.
E. Residential developments with on-site recreation or community centers
may have one identification sign for said center, which shall be no
larger than 12 square feet. An additional directional sign with a
maximum area of two square feet may be either added to and combined
with the identification sign or be separate.
F. Temporary signs in accordance with the provisions of § 182-154 herein.
A. Wall signs shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) On lots less than one acre: total sign area of all wall signs shall not
exceed 48 square feet, and no wall sign shall exceed 5% of any
building face.
(2) On lots of one acre or more but less than five acres: total sign area
of all wall signs shall not exceed 96 square feet, and no wall sign
shall exceed 6% of any building face.
(3) On lots of five acres or more: total sign area of all wall signs shall
not exceed 144 square feet, and no wall sign shall exceed 7% of any
building face.
B. One incidental sign not to exceed four square feet in area.
C. One directional sign not to exceed six square feet in area.
D. One monument entrance sign to identify the name of the complex at
each vehicular entrance to the property not to exceed 25 square feet in
area. The height of said sign shall not exceed five feet.
E. Signs of contractors, mechanics, painters and artisans directed and
maintained on the premises where the work is being performed for the
period of time that the work is being performed and real estate signs
advertising either the sale or rental of the premises or the development
of the premises by the builder, contractor, developer or other persons
interested therein shall be subject to the following regulations:
§ 182-142 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-143
176:876
§ 182-144. Signs permitted for recreational and open space uses.
(1) Each sign shall not exceed 35 square feet in area for properties less
than five acres in size and 65 square feet for properties in excess of
five acres.
(2) All such signs shall be unlighted.
(3) All such signs shall be removed within 10 days of the completion of
the particular purpose for which the sign has been erected.
(4) One sign shall be permitted for each street frontage.
F. Temporary signs in accordance with the provisions of § 182-154 herein.
A. One entrance sign to identify the name of the complex at each vehicular
entrance to the property not to exceed 25 square feet in area.
B. One directional sign not to exceed six square feet in area for each
vehicular entrance. This may be added to and combined with the sign
permitted in Subsection A or be separate.
C. Temporary signs in accordance with the provisions of § 182-154C.
D. One identification sign per field or facility not to exceed six square feet
in area.
(1) If the field is surrounded by fencing, the sign must be flushmounted
on that fencing. In the event there is no fence, the sign
must be placed in a minimum of 20 feet outside the field of play.
(2) An identification sign on a structure or building must be flushmounted
on the wall of the facility. A rest room facility may have
two signs, one identifying each gender-specific rest room.
E. Scoreboards shall be exempt from sign provisions; provided, however,
the following regulations shall be applicable:
(1) A maximum of 25% of the total area of the scoreboard can be
devoted to advertising or information not directly related to the
activity on the field the scoreboard relates to.
(2) The side of the scoreboard with the activity-related information
(i.e., score, inning, quarter, etc.) and any advertising shall only be
facing inward towards the field of play and not exposed to adjacent
streets or highways. If the only possible position for the sign
exposes any game information or advertising to the adjacent
streets or highways, the planting requirements of a Type 3 buffer,
in accordance with § 154-36D(5)(e), Chapter 154 of the Township
Code, Subdivision and Land Development, shall be installed to
screen the exposure.
(3) The rear of the sign shall be buffered from the adjacent fields,
streets or highways, and parking. The planting requirements of a
§ 182-143 WATER § 182-144
176:877
§ 182-145. Signs permitted for office uses.
Type 2 buffer, in accordance with § 154-36D(5)(c), Chapter 154 of
the Township Code, Subdivision and Land Development, shall be
installed to screen the exposure.
F. In addition to the identification signs permitted in Subsection D of this
section, other signs may be affixed to fencing which surrounds playing
fields, subject to the following regulations:
(1) All signs shall face inward towards the field; none may be placed on
the outside of the fence.
(2) All such signs shall be affixed flat to the fence.
(3) No such signs shall extend higher than the top of the fence.
G. At a publicly owned field, one sign may be affixed to any portion of the
grandstands associated with said field, subject to the following
regulations:
(1) The sign shall not exceed 50 square feet.
(2) The sign shall not be visible from any abutting road or highway.
(3) The sign shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet from any abutting
road or highway.
(4) No such signs shall extend higher than the top of any portion of the
grandstand structure.
A. The total maximum sign area shall be based upon the size of the lot on
which the office use is located, distributed in any manner chosen by the
applicant, and as subject further to the limitations on size of individual
types of signs prescribed in the various subsections of this section.
(1) On lots of less than one acre: total sign area of 175 square feet,
provided that it may be increased to 275 square feet for lots with
more than one frontage.
(2) On lots of one acre or more but less than five acres: total sign area
of 200 square feet, provided that may be increased to 300 square
feet for lots with more than one frontage.
(3) On lots of five acres or more: total sign area of 235 square feet,
provided that it may be increased to 350 square feet for lots with
more than one frontage.
B. Wall, awning, window or blade signs are permitted on only the building
frontage that serves as the principal approach to the building, except as
noted below.
C. Ground signs shall be subject to the following regulations:
§ 182-144 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-145
176:878
(1) Overall height shall not exceed 12 feet.
(2) When located within 15 feet of the curbline, said sign shall have a
minimum clearance of eight feet.
(3) The size of such signs shall be based on the size of the lot and shall
be limited as follows:
(a) On lots of less than one acre: 20 square feet in size.
(b) On lots of one acre or more but less than five acres: 35 square
feet in size.
(c) On lots of five acres or more: 50 square feet in size.
D. Wall signs shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) No wall sign shall be placed above the sign height line.
(2) The sign area for the primary frontage shall be based on the gross
square footage of the building and shall be limited as follows:
(a) Buildings less than 10,000 square feet: 100 square feet.
(b) Buildings 10,000 square feet or more and less than 20,000
square feet: 150 square feet.
(c) Buildings 20,000 square feet or more and less than 30,000
square feet: 200 square feet.
(d) Buildings of 30,000 square feet or more: 300 square feet.
(e) In no case is the area of the sign(s) to exceed 20% of the
building frontage on which it is placed.
(3) When a building can be approached by vehicles from two or more
directions, a sign on one additional frontage shall be permitted at
up to 50% of the size permitted above for the principal approach
frontage. The sign area calculated for each frontage shall be
erected on that frontage only and shall not be increased by the sign
area calculated for another frontage.
(4) Tenants shall be required tohave an identification sign of four
square feet on the rear or service entrance side of tenant spaces for
delivery and emergency response purposes.
E. Additional monument signage for large-scale office or office/business
parks. Monument signs for those uses shall be subject to the following
regulations:
(1) Monument signs may only be permitted in office or office/business
park when the tract contains at least 25 acres (gross).
(2) When the entrance to an office or office/business park is via a
public or private road which intersects a public road that is
§ 182-145 WATER § 182-145
176:879
classified as feeder or higher by the Township's Ultimate Right-ofway
Map and Ordinance,157 the development may have a maximum
of two monument signs, one on either side of the entrance.
(3) Monument signs are subject to the following dimensional
requirements:
(a) The overall height of the sign and supporting structure shall
not exceed 12 feet measured from the grade of the abutting
roadways.
(b) Said sign shall be located a minimum of five feet back from the
ultimate right-of-way line, and in no case impede proper site
distance.
(c) Monument signs shall be limited to 200 square feet in size, not
including the structure upon which the sign is erected.
(4) Monument signs for an office or office/business park provided for in
this section may only contain the name of the overall office user or
the office/business park name.
(5) In addition to any directory sign which may be permitted in an
office or business park in accordance with Subsection H of this
section, one additional directory sign may be permitted as part of
the monument signage permitted herein. Said directory sign shall
be of like or coordinated design and materials as the main
monument sign and shall be designed as an integral part of the
monument sign structure or design appurtenances thereto. The
maximum overall size of said directory sign shall be as prescribed
in Subsection H of this section; provided, however, it may be
increased up to a maximum of 75 square feet, provided the total
area of the monument sign and the directory sign together do not
exceed 200 square feet.
(6) Uses within an office/business park on less than 25 acres (gross)
are entitled only to ground signs under Subsection C of this section.
[Amended 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 517]
F. Awning signs shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) A sign may be placed on the portion of the awning, canopy or
marquee that is in a plane parallel to the wall of the building and
visible from the public street.
(2) The size of the sign shall not exceed 20% of the area on that plane.
(3) In addition, a logo or other graphic, with no written copy, is
permitted on the sloped face of the awning. The size of the graphic
shall not exceed 20% of the sloped area of the awning.
157. Editor's Note: See Ch. 151, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. IV.
§ 182-145 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-145
176:880
§ 182-146. Signs permitted for commercial uses.
G. Signs of contractors, mechanics, painters and artisans directed and
maintained on the premises where the work is being performed for the
period of time that the work is being performed and real estate signs
advertising either the sale or rental of the premises or the development
of the premises by the builder, contractor, developer or other persons
interested therein shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Each sign shall not exceed 35 square feet in area for properties less
than five acres in size and 65 square feet for properties of five acres
or more.
(2) All such signs shall be unlighted.
(3) All such signs shall be removed within 10 days of the completion of
the particular purpose for which the sign has been erected.
(4) One sign shall be permitted for each street frontage.
H. In addition to the aforementioned signs, when there are three or more
establishments in a development, a multiple directory sign shall be
permitted, subject to the following regulations:
(1) Such signs shall be ground signs only and one such sign shall be
located at the main point of ingress and egress to the area served
by the sign and located on one of the properties serviced by this
sign.
(2) Individual spaces to indicate the name and location of each
industry or enterprise within the area, including the name of the
area if being developed as a single unit, may be provided on such
sign, provided that each such space shall not exceed three square
feet in area, and further provided that the total sign area shall not
exceed 36 square feet.
I. Temporary signs in accordance with the provisions of § 182-154 herein.
A. The total maximum sign area shall be based upon the size of the lot on
which the commercial use is located, distributed in any manner chosen
by the applicant, and as subject further to the limitations on size of
individual types of signs prescribed in the various subsections of this
section. However, signage for shopping centers of less than 10 acres is
regulated in § 182-146.1 herein; signage for shopping centers of 10
acres or greater is regulated in § 182-146.2 herein; and signage for
individual tenants within any shopping center or mixed-use
development is regulated in § 182-148 herein.
(1) On lots of less than one acre: total sign area of 225 square feet,
provided that it may be increased to 325 square feet for lots with
more than one frontage.
§ 182-145 WATER § 182-146
176:881
(2) On lots of one acre or more but less than five acres: total sign area
of 275 square feet, provided that it may be increased to 450 square
feet for lots with more than one frontage.
(3) On lots of five acres or more: total sign area of 325 square feet,
provided that it may be increased to 525 square feet for lots with
more than one frontage.
(4) A maximum of 15% of said total sign area specified in Subsection
A(1), (2) and (3) above may be devoted to changeable copy signs.
These signs may be ground or wall signs at the discretion of the
property owner.
B. Wall, awning, window or blade signs are permitted on only the building
frontage that serves as the principal approach to the building, except as
noted below.
C. Ground signs shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Overall height shall not exceed 15 feet.
(2) When located within 15 feet of the curbline, said sign shall have a
minimum clearance of eight feet.
(3) The size of such signs shall be limited as follows:
(a) On lots of less than one acre: 20 square feet in size.
(b) On lots of one acre or more but less than five acres: 35 square
feet in size.
(c) On lots of five acres or more: 50 square feet in size.
D. Wall signs shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Roof signs are not permitted; signs above sign height line may be
permitted as long as they are mounted on a parapet wall which is
designed as an integrated element of the building's architecture.
(2) The sign area for the primary frontage shall be based on the gross
square footage of the building and shall be limited as follows:
(a) Buildings/tenant space less than 10,000 square feet: 100
square feet.
(b) Buildings/tenant space 10,000 square feet or more and less
than 20,000 square feet: 200 square feet.
(c) Buildings/tenant space 20,000 square feet or more and less
than 30,000 square feet: 300 square feet.
(d) Buildings/tenant space of 30,000 square feet or more: 400
square feet.
§ 182-146 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-146
176:882
(e) In no case is the area of the sign(s) to exceed 20% of the
building frontage on which it is placed.
(3) When a building can be approached by vehicles from two or more
directions, a sign on one additional frontage shall be permitted at
up to 50% of the size permitted above for the principal approach
frontage. The sign area calculated for each frontage shall be
erected on that frontage only and shall not be increased by the sign
area calculated for another frontage.
(4) In addition to the above, window signs that contain a logo or other
graphic, with no written copy, are permitted on the glassed area of
the building face. The size of the graphic shall not exceed 15% of
the glassed area.
E. Awning signs shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) A sign may be placed on the portion of the awning, canopy or
marquee that is in a plane parallel to the wall of the building and
visible from the public street.
(2) The size of the sign shall not exceed 20% of the area on that plane.
(3) In addition, a logo or other graphic, with no written copy, is
permitted on the sloped face of the awning. The size of the graphic
shall not exceed 20% of the sloped area of the awning.
F. Signs of contractors, mechanics, painters and artisans directed and
maintained on the premises where the work is being performed for the
period of time that the work is being performed and real estate signs
advertising either the sale or rental of the premises or the development
of the premises by the builder, contractor, developer or other persons
interested therein shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Each sign shall not exceed 35 square feet in area for properties less
than five acres in size and 65 square feet for properties of five acres
or more.
(2) All such signs shall be unlighted.
(3) All such signs shall be removed within 10 days of the completion of
the particular purpose for which the sign has been erected.
G. In addition to the aforementioned signs, when there are three or more
establishments in a development, a multiple directory sign shall be
permitted subject to the following regulations; provided, however, that
a shopping center development entitled to signage in accordance with
§ 182-146.1 shall not also be entitled to this signage:
(1) Such signs shall be ground signs only, and one such sign shall be
located at the main point of ingress and egress to the area served
by the sign and located on one of the properties serviced by this
sign.
§ 182-146 WATER § 182-146
176:883
§ 182-146.1. Signs permitted for small shopping centers.
In a shopping center of less than 10 acres, the following sign provisions
apply in lieu of any other herein:
(2) Individual spaces to indicate the name and location of each
industry or enterprise within the area, including the name of the
area if being developed as a single unit, may be provided on such
sign, provided that each such space shall not exceed three square
feet in area, and further provided that the total sign area shall not
exceed 36 square feet.
(3) Tenants shall be required to have an identification sign of four
square feet on the rear or service entrance side of tenant spaces for
delivery and emergency response purposes.
H. Temporary signs in accordance with the provisions of § 182-154 herein.
A. One entrance sign identifying the shopping center at each vehicular
entrance from a public street, provided that:
(1) The overall height of all such entrance signs shall not be more than
25 feet in height.
(2) The total area of such sign shall not exceed 150 square feet. Larger
individual signs may be permitted if the total sign square footage
for which the site is entitled is not increased. In no event shall a
sign exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The spacing of such signs, with reference to each other, shall not be
less than 400 feet measured in single straight lines.
(4) There may not be more than two such signs for any one shopping
center.
(5) A maximum of 15% of the area of any entrance sign as specified in
Subsection A(2) above may be devoted to changeable copy.
B. Wall, awning, window or blade signs are permitted on only the building
frontage that serves as the principal approach to the building, except as
noted below.
C. Roof signs are not permitted; signs above sign height line may be
permitted as long as they are mounted on a parapet wall which is
designed as an integrated element of the building's architecture.
D. Pedestrian directory signs listing the names of commercial or business
establishments within the vicinity shall be permitted in any area used
solely by pedestrians, provided that such signs may not exceed 15
square feet in area.
E. Vehicular directory signs shall be permitted, subject to the following
regulations:
§ 182-146 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-146.1
176:884
§ 182-146.2. Signs permitted for large shopping centers.
In a shopping center of 10 acres or greater, the following sign provisions
apply in lieu of any other herein;
(1) Such signs shall be ground signs only, and one such sign shall be
located at the main point of ingress and egress to the area served
by the sign and located on one of the properties serviced by this
sign. A maximum of one directory sign in a shopping center shall be
permitted.
(2) Individual spaces to indicate the name and location of each use
within the area, including the name of the area if being developed
as a single unit, may be provided on such sign, provided that each
such space shall not exceed three square feet in area, and further
provided that the total sign area shall not exceed 36 square feet.
F. Signs of contractors, mechanics, painters and artisans directed and
maintained on the premises where the work is being performed for the
period of time that the work is being performed and real estate signs
advertising either the sale or rental of the premises or the development
of the premises by the builder, contractor, developer or other persons
interested therein shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Each sign shall not exceed 65 square feet.
(2) All such signs shall be unlighted.
(3) All such signs shall be removed within 10 days of the completion of
the particular purpose for which the sign has been erected.
G. Temporary signs shall be in accordance with § 182-154.
H. Signs for individual tenants shall be in accordance with § 182-148.
A. One entrance sign identifying the shopping center at each vehicular
entrance from a public street, provided that:
(1) The overall height of all such entrance signs shall not be more than
35 feet in height.
(2) The total area of such sign shall not exceed 200 square feet. Larger
individual signs may be permitted if the total sign square footage
for which the site is entitled is not increased. In no event shall a
sign exceed 300 square feet.
(3) The spacing of such signs, with reference to each other, shall not be
less than 400 feet measured in single straight lines.
(4) There may not be more than three such signs for any one shopping
center.
(5) A maximum of 15% of the area of any entrance sign as specified in
Subsection A(2) above may be devoted to changeable copy.
§ 182-146.1 WATER § 182-146.2
176:885
B. Tenants are permitted to have wall, awning, window or blade signs on
only the building frontage that serves as the principal approach to the
building, except as noted below.
C. Roof signs are not permitted; signs above sign height line may be
permitted as long as they are mounted on a parapet wall which is
designed as an integrated element of the building's architecture.
D. Pedestrian directory signs listing the names of commercial or business
establishments within the vicinity shall be permitted in any area used
solely by pedestrians, provided that such signs may not exceed 15
square feet in area.
E. Vehicular directory signs shall be permitted, subject to the following
regulations:
(1) Such signs shall be ground signs only, and one such sign shall be
located at the main point of ingress and egress to the area served
by the sign and located on one of the properties serviced by this
sign. A maximum of one per 30 acres or fraction thereof, but in no
case more than three directory signs in a shopping center, shall be
permitted.
(2) Individual spaces to indicate the name and location of each use
within the area, including the name of the area if being developed
as a single unit, may be provided on such sign, provided that each
such space shall not exceed three square feet in area, and further
provided that the total sign area shall not exceed 36 square feet. As
a conditional use, a total of 60 square feet of signage will be
permitted, with individual spaces not to exceed five square feet, if
the area for which the directory is intended is either remote from
any abutting roads or does not parallel same. One vehicular
directory sign of the increased size shall be permitted for each 30
acres or fraction thereof.
F. Signs of contractors, mechanics, painters and artisans directed and
maintained on the premises where the work is being performed for the
period of time that the work is being performed and real estate signs
advertising either the sale or rental of the premises or the development
of the premises by the builder, contractor, developer or other persons
interested therein shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Each sign shall not exceed 65 square feet.
(2) All such signs shall be unlighted.
(3) All such signs shall be removed within 10 days of the completion of
the particular purpose for which the sign has been erected.
G. Temporary signs shall be in accordance with § 182-154.
H. Signs for individual tenants shall be in accordance with § 182-148.
§ 182-146.2 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-146.2
176:886
§ 182-147. Signs permitted for industrial uses.
I. For shopping centers in the IO-3 District, the following additional
requirements apply, provided that signs in addition to those specified
herein, or in excess of the sizes enumerated herein, may be permitted
by special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board. [Amended
12-22-2009 by Ord. No. 505; 1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 525]
(1) No pylon signs are permitted. Entrance signs are to be monument
signs only. Maximum height is 12 feet.
(2) A coordinated signage package must be provided. All signs must
have similar sign style, lettering style, construction materials and
color.
(3) Wall signs can be transferred from another building, as long as the
total permissible wall sign area for the building facade on which it
is being placed is not increased.
A. The total maximum sign area shall be based upon the size of the lot on
which the industrial use is located, distributed in any manner chosen by
the applicant, and as subject further to the limitations on size of
individual types of signs prescribed in the various subsections of this
section.
(1) On lots of less than one acre: total sign area of 225 square feet,
provided that it may be increased to 325 square feet for lots with
more than one frontage.
(2) On lots of one acre or more but less than five acres: total sign area
of 275 square feet, provided that it may be increased to 450 square
feet for lots with more than one frontage.
(3) On lots of five acres or more: total sign area of 325 square feet,
provided that it may be increased to 525 square feet for lots with
more than one frontage.
B. Ground signs shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Overall height of sign shall not exceed 15 feet.
(2) When located within 15 feet of the curbline, said sign shall have a
minimum clearance of eight feet.
(3) The size of such signs shall be limited as follows:
(a) On lots of less than one acre: 20 square feet in size.
(b) On lots of one acre or more but less than five acres: 35 square
feet in size.
(c) On lots of five acres or more: 50 square feet in size.
§ 182-146.2 WATER § 182-147
176:887
C. Wall, awning, window or blade signs are permitted on only the building
frontage that serves as the principal approach to the building, except as
noted below.
D. Wall signs shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) No wall sign shall be placed above the sign height line.
(2) The sign area for the primary frontage shall be based on the gross
square footage of the building and shall be limited as follows:
(a) Buildings less than 10,000 square feet: 100 square feet.
(b) Buildings 10,000 square feet or more and less than 20,000
square feet: 150 square feet.
(c) Buildings 20,000 square feet or more and less than 30,000
square feet: 200 square feet.
(d) Buildings of 30,000 square feet or more: 300 square feet.
(e) In no case is the area of a sign to exceed 20% of the building
frontage on which it is placed.
(3) When a building can be approached by vehicles from two or more
directions, a sign on one additional frontage shall be permitted at
up to 50% of the size permitted above for the principal approach
frontage. The sign area calculated for each frontage shall be
erected on that frontage only and shall not be increased by the sign
area calculated for another frontage.
E. Additional monument signage for large-scale industrial park.
Monument signs for those uses shall be subject to the following
regulations:
(1) Monument signs may only be permitted in an industrial park when
the tract contains at least 25 acres (gross).
(2) When the entrance to an industrial park is via a public or private
road which intersects a public road that is classified as feeder or
higher by the Township's Ultimate Right-of-way Map and
Ordinance, the development may have a maximum of two
monument signs, one on either side of the entrance.
(3) Monument signs are subject to the following dimensional
requirements:
(a) The overall height of the sign and supporting structure shall
not exceed 12 feet measured from the grade of the abutting
roadways.
(b) Said sign shall be located a minimum of five feet back from the
ultimate right-of-way line, and in no case impede proper site
distance.
§ 182-147 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-147
176:888
(c) Monument signs shall be limited to 200 square feet in size, not
including the structure upon which the sign is erected.
(4) Monument signs for an industrial park provided for in this section
may only contain the name of the overall industry user or the
industrial park name. Uses within an industrial park on less than 25
acres (gross) are entitled only to ground signs, under Subsection B
of this section.
F. Awning signs shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) A sign may be placed on the portion of the awning, canopy or
marquee that is in a plane parallel to the wall of the building and
visible from the public street.
(2) The size of the sign shall not exceed 20% of the area on that plane.
(3) In addition, a logo or other graphic, with no written copy, is
permitted on the sloped face of the awning. The size of the graphic
shall not exceed 20% of the sloped area of the awning.
G. Signs of contractors, mechanics, painters and artisans directed and
maintained on the premises where the work is being performed for the
period of time that the work is being performed and real estate signs
advertising either the sale or rental of the premises or the development
of the premises by the builder, contractor, developer or other persons
interested therein shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Each sign shall not exceed 35 square feet in area for properties less
than five acres in size and 65 square feet for properties of five acres
or more.
(2) All such signs shall be unlighted.
(3) All such signs shall be removed within 10 days of the completion of
the particular purpose for which the sign has been erected.
(4) One sign shall be permitted for each street frontage.
H. In addition to the aforementioned signs, when there are three or more
establishments in a development, a multiple directory sign shall be
permitted, subject to the following regulations:
(1) Such signs shall be ground signs only and one such sign shall be
located at the main point of ingress and egress to the area served
by the sign and located on one of the properties serviced by this
sign.
(2) Individual spaces to indicate the name and location of each
industry or enterprise within the area, including the name of the
area if being developed as a single unit, may be provided on such
sign, provided that each such space shall not exceed three square
§ 182-147 WATER § 182-147
176:889
§ 182-148. Signs permitted for individual tenants in shopping
centers or in mixed-use multitenant developments.
feet in area, and further provided that the total sign area shall not
exceed 36 square feet.
(3) Tenants shall be required to have an identification sign of four
square feet on the rear or service entrance side of tenant spaces for
delivery and emergency response purposes.
I. Temporary signs in accordance with the provisions of § 182-154 herein.
A. Each tenant shall be permitted signage in accordance with the
following:
(1) Tenants are permitted to have wall, awning, window or blade signs
on only the building frontage that serves as the principal approach
to the building, except as noted below.
(2) The maximum total signage for each tenant shall be as follows:
(a) Buildings/tenant space of less than 10,000 square feet: 100
square feet.
(b) Buildings/tenant space of 10,000 square feet or more and less
than 20,000 square feet: 200 square feet.
(c) Buildings/tenant space of 20,000 square feet or more and less
than 30,000 square feet: 300 square feet.
(d) Buildings/tenant space of 30,000 square feet or more: 400
square feet.
(e) In no case is the area of the sign(s) to exceed 20% of the
building frontage on which it is placed.
(3) When a building can be approached by vehicles from two or more
directions, a sign on one additional frontage shall be permitted at
up to 50% of the size permitted above for the principal approach
frontage. The sign area calculated for each frontage shall be
erected on that frontage only and shall not be increased by the sign
area calculated for another frontage.
(4) In addition to the above, window signs that contain a logo or other
graphic, with no written copy, are permitted on the glassed area of
the building face. The size of the graphic shall not exceed 15% of
the glassed area.
(5) Awning signs shall be placed on the portion of the awning, canopy
or marquee that is in a plane parallel to the entrance wall of the
building. The size of the sign shall not exceed 20% of the area on
that plane. In addition, a logo or other graphic, with no written
§ 182-147 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-148
176:890
§ 182-149. Supplemental signs for certain uses along Route 422
Expressway.
Office, commercial or industrial uses with frontage along Route 422 may
provide additional signage along said frontage as a conditional use, beyond
what would ordinarily be permitted in this article, subject to the following,
provided signage is for uses on the site on which the sign is located:
copy, is permitted on the sloped face of the awning. The size of the
graphic shall not exceed 20% of the sloped area of the awning.
(6) One blade sign or under-canopy sign, not to exceed six square feet
in area, may be installed at each public entrance. The bottom of the
sign must be at least eight feet above the level of the sidewalk.
(7) Tenants shall be required to have an identification sign of four
square feet on the rear or service entrance side of tenant spaces for
delivery and emergency response purposes.
B. The total maximum sign area for a mixed-use development shall be
based upon the use on the property which is entitled to the least
allowable sign area, as prescribed in the various sections of this article.
C. As a conditional use for a mixed-use development, the total maximum
sign area may be based upon the use on the property which is entitled
to the greatest allowable sign area, as prescribed in the various
sections of this article, provided that: a coordinated signage package is
proposed for the property, for all ground and wall signs, including
similar sign style, lettering style, construction materials, and color.
A. Adequate evidence shall be provided to enable the Board of Supervisors
to determine that the additional signage is necessary to identify the use
to the passing motorist and that the use would not be adequately visible
without it.
B. Any sign permitted shall meet all requirements of PennDOT and the
Federal Highway Administration.
C. One sign shall be permitted for every 1,000 feet of frontage, or fraction
thereof.
D. Each sign shall have a maximum area of 300 square feet and a
maximum height of 40 feet unless adequate evidence of the need for
greater area and/or greater height can be justified through empirical
evidence to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors; however, in no
case shall a sign greater than 400 square feet in area and/or 45 feet in
height be approved.
E. If more than one sign is permitted, the spacing of the signs shall be at
the discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
F. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the ultimate
right-of-way.
§ 182-148 WATER § 182-149
176:891
§ 182-150. Advertising signs and billboards.
Advertising signs and billboards shall be permitted as a conditional use in
the industrial districts, subject to the following provisions:
§ 182-151. Moving or illuminated signs.
Where permitted, the illumination of signs shall be subject to the National
Electrical Code and to the following regulations:
G. No sign permitted by this section shall be installed within 500 feet of
any interchange ramp of the Route 422 Expressway, measured along
the ramp from its point of intersection with the intersecting roadway.
H. If signs under this section are approved for a property, that property
shall not qualify for signage under § 182-150.
A. The overall height of such signs shall not exceed 40 feet.
B. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the ultimate
right-of-way.
C. Such signs shall not be placed within 1,000 feet of one another.
D. Such signs shall be permitted to front only those public roads of a
controlled or semicontrolled access highway classification or greater,
as delineated on the Township Ultimate Right-of-way Map, adopted as
part of Article IV of Chapter 151, Streets and Sidewalks, and as the map
may be amended in the future.
E. Such signs shall not exceed an area of 300 square feet, and no
combination of signs at any single location shall exceed a total area of
300 square feet.
F. No sign permitted by this section shall be installed within 500 feet of
any interchange ramp of any qualifying road, measured along the ramp
from its point of intersection with the intersecting roadway.
A. Signs that move, rotate, oscillate, vibrate or shimmer are only allowed
in the M-2 Manufacturing Industrial District, and no other.
B. Indirect illumination may be provided by floodlights, spotlights,
ordinary incandescent bulbs, fluorescent tubes or mercury-vapor
lamps. Internally illuminated signs shall be permitted only for
commercial and industrial uses. Regardless of the type of illumination
employed, all illuminated signs, and/or the light fixtures illuminating
the signs, shall be properly shielded and so located as to prevent glare
or blinding effects upon surrounding buildings, properties, or motor
vehicle traffic so as not to cause a nuisance or hazard to building
occupants, residents or travelers in the area.
C. Neon lighting will be considered only as a part of a special sign, as
defined in § 182-152, and as such will be included as part of the special
§ 182-149 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-151
176:892
§ 182-152. Special signs.
When the architectural design of a building is integral with the sign
composition to such a degree that normal standards cannot be applied
with practicality, such a sign shall be deemed a "special sign" and may be
permitted when authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board, subject to the following conditions:
§ 182-153. Corporate or company flags.
Flags bearing a corporate or company name and/or insignia shall be
permitted to be flown on the property where the company is located,
provided the following:
exception required for such signs. In any case, neon lighting will only
be permitted for a commercial or industrial use.
D. No sign shall be permitted which is animated by means of flashing,
scintillating, blinking or traveling lights or any other means not
providing constant illumination. Public service information signs shall
be classified as "changing signs" and shall be permitted. A public
service information sign shall be any sign intended primarily to promote
items of general interest in the community, such as the time,
temperature, date and atmospheric conditions, and may be located in
any district except residential. Illuminated revolving barber poles shall
be permitted in conjunction with the use of a barbershop.
A. Such sign shall be limited to office, commercial, and industrial uses.
B. Such sign shall form an integral part of the structural or decorative
facade of a building wall to such an extent as to render impractical the
measurement or placement of sign area as defined herein; however,
such sign may not be placed on any decorative facade where the
purpose appears primarily to increase the permitted height of a sign
above the sign height line of the building.
C. Such sign may be of such unique materials, shape or design as to
render impractical the application of any of the regulations contained
herein which are intended to apply to the customary sign and materials,
shapes, designs or construction.
A. The flag must be flown in conjunction with the flag of the United States,
provided that such corporate or company flag shall not exceed in size
75% of the United States flag with which it is displayed.
B. In the event that a flagpole is attached to a building, such flagpole shall
not extend above the sign height line of such building, except where
such pole is used exclusively for the display of the United States flag.
C. Nothing herein precludes the flying of POW/MIA or other legally
sanctioned flags in recognition of nationally significant events or
persons.
§ 182-151 WATER § 182-154
176:893
§ 182-154. Temporary signs.
§ 182-155. Off-site directional signs.
A. Unless more restrictive regulations are stipulated for a specific type of
temporary sign, such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and
shall be in place for no longer than 30 days. Funds shall be placed in
escrow for removal of all temporary signs at the termination of their
allotted period of display, in an amount fixed by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors. Each sign left in place beyond the permitted time shall
be considered a separate violation.
B. Any candidate or group of candidates sharing sign space can erect any
number of election campaign signs. Said signs may be in place no
earlier than 60 days prior to said election and may stay in place no
longer than 15 days after the election.
C. For agricultural or other nonresidential uses, not more than one
additional temporary sign for each street frontage of an affected
property may be erected four times a year, provided that such sign shall
be displayed for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days. Such
signs may be used for special sales, events, openings, product
introductions, anniversaries and similar occasions. Such signs shall not
exceed 32 square feet in area and shall comply with all other
regulations for the district in which they are located. Notwithstanding
any provisions herein to the contrary, balloons, banners and/or
pennants without advertising copy thereon may be permitted for the
purposes described in this section. Four off-site directional signs may
be posted for the same time period as for the temporary on-site signs,
provided that the maximum size of each sign shall be 12 square feet.
D. Four signs directing prospective customers to a yard sale may be
posted a maximum of five days before the sale and shall be removed
within 24 hours of the conclusion of the sale. No individual sign shall
exceed six square feet in size.
E. Four signs directing prospective customers to an open house, for
purposes of selling real estate, may be posted no sooner than 12:00
noon on the Friday immediately prior to the weekend during which the
open house is scheduled; all said signs shall be removed by 8:00 a.m.
the Monday immediately following the conclusion of the sale. No
individual sign shall exceed six square feet in size. These signs shall be
exempt from the requirement for a sign permit.
F. No temporary sign may be posted on private property without the
express consent of the property owner.
A. Not more than two outdoor signs directing traffic to a business location,
hospital, community center, school, church, nonprofit or charitable
organization, park, etc., or the name and place of a meeting of an
§ 182-154 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-155
176:894
§ 182-156. On-site traffic control signage.
§ 182-157. Placement of signs.
All signs shall be placed with regard to the public safety and shall be
governed by the following regulations:
official civic or service body may be permitted in any zoning district on
property(ies) other than the location of said use.
(1) All such signs shall comply with the requirements of § 182-157 and
with the height requirements of the district in which they are
located.
(2) Any such sign shall not exceed six square feet in area.
B. Not more than one outdoor sign directing traffic to two or more
businesses may be permitted in any zoning district on property(ies)
other than the location of said uses.
(1) All such signs shall comply with the requirements of § 182-157 and
with the height requirements of the district in which they are
located.
(2) The total area of such sign shall not exceed 72 square feet, with the
identification of any individual business not exceeding six square
feet.
(3) Such sign is permitted on a road classified as collector or higher
according to the Ultimate Right-of-way Map and Ordinance.158
(4) All such signs shall be unlighted.
A. On-site traffic control signs which are not visible from any public rightof-
way may be permitted on a property without limitation on number of
such signs permitted.
B. In no case shall any such sign exceed two square feet in area and/or
have a height exceeding six feet.
A. No sign shall be erected or maintained as to prevent free ingress and
egress to or from any door, window or fire escape.
B. Only instructional signs shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
C. Any business sign must maintain a setback distance from an adjacent
residential district as required under this chapter for other business or
commercial structures or buildings.
D. No sign shall be erected at or near the intersection of streets or upon a
curve so as to obstruct free and clear vision. No red-, amber- or greencolored
discs or shapes may be permitted within 100 feet of a street
158. Editor's Note: See Ch. 151, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. IV, Ultimate Right-of-way.
§ 182-155 WATER § 182-157
176:895
§ 182-158. Advertising vehicles.
Any vehicle or trailer which is parked on a public right-of-way or on public
or private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way and which
has attached thereto or located thereon any sign or advertising device
for the basic purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing
people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property or
any other premises is hereby deemed to be an advertising vehicle and shall
be prohibited. This section shall not prohibit any form of vehicular signage,
such as a sign attached to a bus or lettered on a motor vehicle, where
the vehicle is not used for the basic purpose of providing advertisement or
direction as set forth above.
§ 182-159. Sign permits.
intersection or any location wherein it is determined by the Zoning
Officer that such colored lights or shapes might be confused with
official traffic signals.
A. A sign permit shall be required for all signs exceeding two square feet
in area unless otherwise provided. Applications for sign permits shall be
filed on forms furnished by the Zoning Officer and shall be accompanied
by detailed plans and specifications and any other such information
deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer to determine the location and
details of construction of such signs.
B. All signs for which a permit has been issued must be completely
constructed within six months after the date of issuance of the permit.
Upon written request, the Zoning Officer may grant one extension for
an additional three-month period, provided that the applicant presents
reasonable grounds for the extension request.
C. No permit to erect a sign shall be issued until a fee has been paid to the
Zoning Officer in an amount fixed by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
D. A nonrenewable permit may be granted to any person or organization in
the Township to permit the erection of temporary signs, as permitted in
§ 182-154. All such nonrenewable permits may be issued only upon
payment into an escrow account an amount of money to guarantee the
removal of such signs. The payment amount is determined by a fee
schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. In the
event that such signs are removed within the time periods stated
herein, the escrow deposit shall be returned. If such signs have not
been removed in the time period stated, the escrow deposit shall be
forfeited and such signs shall be removed at the direction of the
Township Zoning Officer.
§ 182-157 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-160
176:896
§ 182-160. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to official federal, state or
municipal signs erected within the Township. In addition, the trade names,
emblems or directions on service facilities or product dispensers, including
but not limited to gasoline pumps, telephone booths and vending machines,
shall not be considered to be a sign when such trade name, emblem or
single group of words or symbols are not more than three square feet in
area. Further, window signs shall not be considered in computing total sign
area, but in no event shall window signs cover more than 20% of the area of
any window opening.
§ 182-161. Nonconforming signs.
Any lawful sign existing on the effective date of this chapter that does
not conform to the provisions of this chapter shall be considered a lawful
nonconforming sign and may be continued. Nonconforming signs may be
repaired or repainted but shall not be altered or changed in overall
dimensions except to conform with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 182-162. (Reserved)
§ 182-163. (Reserved)
§ 182-164. (Reserved)
§ 182-165. (Reserved)
§ 182-166. (Reserved)
A. A nonconforming office use in a residential district shall be entitled to
one ground and one wall sign. The maximum size for the ground sign
shall be 20 square feet; the maximum size for the wall sign shall be
based upon the formula provided in § 182-145C(2)(a) herein.
B. A nonconforming commercial or industrial use in a residential district
shall be entitled to one ground and one wall sign. The maximum size for
the ground sign shall be 20 square feet; the maximum size for the wall
sign shall be based upon the formula provided in § 182-146C(2)(a)
herein.
§ 182-160 WATER § 182-166
176:897

ARTICLE XX
Fences
§ 182-167. Conformance required.
Any fence erected or maintained after the effective date of this chapter shall
conform to the following regulations.
§ 182-168. Application and fee.
Anyone wishing to erect a fence must make application to the Zoning Officer
on forms provided by the Township and pay the appropriate fee.
§ 182-169. Height.
General regulations governing the permitted height of fences in R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4 and VP Districts shall be as follows:
A. Fences on interior lots may not exceed four feet in height from the
building setback line to the street.
B. Fences on interior lots may not exceed six feet in height from and
including the building setback line to the rear property line.
C. Fences on corner lots may not exceed three feet in height from the
elevation of the center line of the street 30 feet in either direction from
the intersection of the exterior side lot line with the front lot line.
D. Fences on corner lots may not exceed four feet in height for the interior
side lot line or for the remainder of the exterior side lot line, measured
30 feet from the point of intersection of the exterior side lot line and the
front lot line.
E. Fences on rear lot lines of corner lots may not exceed four feet in height
between a point defined by the intersection of the exterior lot line and
the rear lot line and a point defined by the intersection of the rear lot
line and the abutting property building setback line.
F. Except as provided for in Subsections C, D and E, rear and interior side
yard fences may not exceed six feet on corner lots.
G. Fence placement diagram.
§ 182-167 WATER § 182-169
176:899
§ 182-169.1. Fences on lots with reverse-frontage buffers. [Added
2-7-2000 by Ord. No. 389]
Fences in the rear of lots on which reverse-frontage buffers are installed
pursuant to the requirements of § 154-24.1 of Chapter 154, Subdivision and
Land Development, shall meet the requirements of said section, in addition
to all other applicable requirements of this article as well as the following:
A. Fences may be permitted in the buffer planting easement as long as no
fence is located closer than two feet to the main trunk or stem of trees
and shrubs in the buffer.
B. No fence post or support for a gate shall be located closer than five feet
to the main trunk or stem of trees and shrubs in the buffer.
C. Fence and gate placement shall be in accordance with the following
diagram:
§ 182-169 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-169.1
176:900
§ 182-169.2. Fences in the floodplain. [Added 10-1-2007 by Ord. No.
476]
All proposed fencing in the Floodplain Conservation District shall comply
with the regulations within § 182-28 of this chapter.
§ 182-170. Construction.
A. General regulations governing the construction of fences in R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4, VP and IN Districts shall be as follows:
(1) If the fence is wood cover or wood frame, the framework must face
onto the interior of the lot, unless the fence is so designed to
provide equal frame and cover area to adjoining yards.
(2) If the fence is open metal mesh supported by posts and frames of
either pipe or wood, the posts and frames must be on the interior of
the mesh.
(3) If the fence is of masonry construction, a finished side must be
provided to the exterior side.
B. General regulations governing construction of fences in NC, CRSC, M-1
and M-2 Districts shall be as follows:
(1) Fences constructed of solid materials such as wood, metal, glass or
masonry, singly or in combination, may be erected to a height not
exceeding four feet in any front, side or rear yard, and chain-link
fences may be erected to a height not exceeding eight feet,
exclusive of barbwire topping, in any front, side or rear yard of any
§ 182-169.1 WATER § 182-170
176:901
commercial or industrial zone property. Fencing of other material
approved by the Township, up to six feet in height, may be used
in any side or rear yard of a commercial property when abutting
a residential zone/use to aid in the screening of the commercial
use. Unless specifically permitted within a zoning district herein,
fencing shall not be considered as a replacement for any required
landscape buffers. [Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 535]
(2) Any corner lot in a commercial or industrially zoned area may not
have erected any fence, wall, structure, shrub, hedge or plant
growth higher than three feet above the elevation of the center line
of the street, measured 30 feet in either direction from a point
defined by the intersection of the front lot line and the exterior side
lot line.
C. General regulations governing construction of fences in the IO and IO-2
Districts shall be as follows: [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 437]
(1) Fences may not exceed eight feet in height when placed 100 feet or
more back from an ultimate right-of-way line or property line;
provided, however, that when a required building setback is
greater than 100 feet, the fence may be no higher than six feet
between said one-hundred-foot distance and the prescribed
setback. For chain link fences, the prescribed heights shall be
exclusive of barbed wire topping. Buffering shall be installed on the
outside of the fence. At a minimum, a Buffer Type 3 shall be
installed, in accordance with the requirements of § 154-36D(5)(e)
of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development, unless, in the
opinion of the Township, existing vegetation serves as an
equivalent or superior buffer.
(2) As a conditional use, fences may be permitted closer to an ultimate
right-of-way line or property line than provided for in Subsection
C(1) above, in accordance with the requirements herein. Said
fences shall be ornamental and architecturally compatible with the
development on the tract being fenced. Chain link fences may be
permitted only, if in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors, the
view of the fence is adequately filtered with existing or
supplemental buffering or cannot be easily seen from off site.
(a) Fences proposed to be placed between 50 feet and 100 feet
from an ultimate right-of-way line or property line shall not
exceed six feet in height. If chain link fence is approved, the
prescribed height shall be exclusive of barbed wire topping.
(b) Fences proposed to be placed at or within 50 feet of an
ultimate right-of-way line or property line shall not exceed four
feet in height. If chain link fence is approved, the prescribed
height shall be exclusive of barbed wire topping.
§ 182-170 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-170
176:902
§ 182-171. Exemptions.
Fences erected on tracts of five acres or larger for agricultural uses are
exempt from permits and the requirements of this article other than the
three-foot height maximum in the thirty-foot sight triangle, § 182-10.
(c) Fences allowed as a conditional use shall be no more than 50%
opaque; walls shall only be permitted if they meet this
criterion.
(3) At all entries to a public street and for a minimum distance of 400
feet on either side of an entry drive/road, any fencing proposed
shall be ornamental and architecturally compatible with the
development on the tract being fenced. The height of said fencing
shall depend upon its distance back from the ultimate right-of-way
line as prescribed in Subsections C(1) and (2) of this section.
However, when said fences may impede sight distance, a reduced
height shall be required to maintain proper vehicular and
pedestrian safety. Said height shall be determined by the Township
Engineer. Fences provided for in this subsection shall be no more
than 50% opaque; walls shall only be permitted if they meet this
criterion. Decorative pillars shall be installed on either side of each
entry drive/road when fencing or walls are proposed. Additional
pillars may be provided. All such pillars shall have a minimum
width (or diameter if round) of two feet and may extend higher than
the fence, up to 1 1/2 feet above the top of the fence sections. All
such pillars shall be of a complementary design to the fence or wall.
(4) Any fence on top of which barbed wire, razor wire or other security
device is proposed to be installed shall require conditional use
approval. The applicant shall demonstrate that such security device
adds the minimum practical additional height to the fence and has
been properly considered in the buffering for the fence.
(5) Should there be any conflict between heights permitted in the
various subsections of this section, the lower height shall prevail.
(6) Regardless of any requirement to the contrary herein, chain link
fencing may be provided along the frontage of a limited access
highway. Said fence shall not exceed eight feet in height (exclusive
of barbed wire topping).
§ 182-170 WATER § 182-171
176:903

ARTICLE XXI
Nonconforming Uses, Premises, Structures and Lots
§ 182-172. Continuation.
Lawful uses located either within a building or other structure, or part
thereof, or on the land or in combination of both which, at the effective date
of this chapter or subsequent amendment thereto, become nonconforming
may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, including
subsequent sales of the property.
§ 182-173. Alteration or enlargement.
§ 182-174. Discontinuance.
If a nonconforming use of land or a building ceases operations for a
continuous period of more than one year, then this shall be deemed to be an
intent to abandon such use and any subsequent use of land shall conform to
the regulations of this chapter.
A. No structural alterations or additions or enlargements of any
nonconforming building, structure or land will be permitted which
would violate the side, front or rear yard setback lines or building
coverage of the zone in which the building, structure or land is located,
provided that in residential zones where there is a nonconforming use
as to side, front or rear yard setback line, a permissible alteration or
addition may be built on the line with the existing side, front or rear
nonconforming building line, respectively, except that a violation of a
setback line not previously violated shall not be permitted. [Amended
2-21-1978 by Ord. No. 197; 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 343]
B. No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in
part to another location on the lot unless every portion of said building
or structure is made to conform to all the regulations of the district in
which it is located.
C. Notwithstanding the requirements of Subsection A of this section, an
existing nonconforming building, structure or use may be expanded or
extended when authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board, up to a total maximum of 50% of the area devoted to the use as
of the effective date of this chapter or subsequent amendment thereto
at which time the use became nonconforming. The "area devoted to the
use" shall mean the total of the gross floor area and, for any portions of
the use not conducted in a building, the lot area actually utilized in
connection with the nonconforming use; provided, further, that any
expansion shall be limited to the lot on which the building, structure or
use is located, as that lot was defined when the building, structure or
use became nonconforming. [Added 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 343]
§ 182-172 WATER § 182-175
176:905
§ 182-175. Change in use. [Amended 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 343]
A nonconforming building or structure (e.g., residential use of a commercial
building) shall not be changed except to a conforming use or to another
nonconforming use as a special exception, with the approval of the Zoning
Hearing Board, upon a finding that the new use is the same or of a more
restrictive nature than the existing nonconforming use. If an existing
nonconforming use is discontinued as defined in § 182-174 of this chapter
or changed to a conforming use, future use of such building, structure or
portion shall be in conformity with the regulations of this chapter.
§ 182-176. Damage or destruction.
§ 182-177. Nonconforming lots of record. [Amended 2-21-1978 by
Ord. No. 197; 9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 231; 3-15-2004 by Ord. No.
435]
Any lot of public record not otherwise restricted from development in
single and separate ownership at the time of enactment of this chapter
or applicable amendment thereto which does not meet the minimum area
or lot width requirements of the district in which it is located shall be
considered a nonconforming lot. Said lot may be developed consistent with
the use and dimensional standards of the district in which it is located,
provided that if any setback standards cannot be met, the applicant shall
apply to the Zoning Hearing Board for request of the necessary variance(s).
Provided further, however, that if the area of the lot in question is less than
50% of the required minimum for the district in which it is located and if two
or more lots with continuous frontage in a single ownership are of record at
the time of passage or applicable amendment of this chapter, the land shall
be considered an undivided parcel and shall be combined and redefined in
such a way as to meet the requirements of this chapter to the maximum
possible extent.
A. In the event that a nonconforming use in any district is destroyed or
partially destroyed by fire, explosion or other cause or otherwise
damaged either to the extent of two or more times its assessed
valuation (as determined from the assessment rolls effective at the date
of damage or destruction) or 1/2 the bulk of all buildings, structures or
other improvements on the lot, such nonconforming uses shall
terminate and the lot shall thereafter be used only for conforming uses.
B. In any case, whether conforming or nonconforming, the remains of any
building so destroyed must be removed from the premises within six
calendar months so that the same shall not remain as a nuisance
thereon.
§ 182-175 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-178
176:906
§ 182-178. Registration of nonconforming uses, buildings, lots and
signs.
In order to administer this chapter, the Zoning Officer shall prepare a
complete list of all nonconforming uses, buildings, lots and signs in
existence in the Township.
§ 182-178 WATER § 182-178
176:907

ARTICLE XXII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 182-179. Required off-street parking facilities.
Any building or other structure erected, altered or used and any lot used or
occupied for any of the following purposes shall be provided with minimum
off-street parking spaces as set forth below, together with adequate
passageways, driveways or other means of circulation and access to and
from a street, alley or way.
A. Dwellings.
(1) For single-family detached homes, two all-weather parking spaces
per dwelling unit on the lot therewith, except that where a home
occupation is carried on, there shall be four such spaces. Said
requirement shall apply to any dwelling type in which a home
occupation is located. Further, provided, that if there is one
nonresident employee as provided for in the definition of "home
occupation" in § 182-24 herein, there shall be one additional
parking space provided. [Amended 2-21-1978 by Ord. No. 197;
3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 436]
(2) For two-family homes, two all-weather parking spaces per dwelling
unit on the lot therewith.
(3) For townhouses and garden apartments, two all-weather parking
spaces per dwelling unit, subject to the parking provisions of the
pertinent articles of this chapter, as specified herein.
(4) For a rooming house, two all-weather parking spaces plus one
additional parking space for each room for rent, on the same lot
therewith or on land adjacent thereto.
B. Other uses. Off-street parking spaces with proper access from a street
or alley shall be provided in the amounts indicated below, on or near
any lot on which the following types of uses are hereafter established.
Nothing in this subsection shall be constructed to prevent the
establishment of joint parking facilities for two or more uses.
(1) For any of the following primary uses, the required parking spaces
shall be all-weather and shall be located on the same lot therewith:
(a) A church, school, public auditorium, assembly or meeting room
or similar place of public or private assembly: one space for
each four seats or stacked chairs available for assembly; for
elementary schools, one space for each six seats.
(b) A stadium: one space for every four seats.
(c) A hospital: one space for every four beds, plus one space for
every employee on the largest work shift.
§ 182-179 WATER § 182-179
176:909
(d) A community center, library or other similar place: one space
for every 800 square feet of floor area in public use.
[Amended 3-7-2010 by Ord. No. 514]
(e) An institutional home: one space for every 10 occupants, plus
one space for each employee on the largest work shift.
(f) A club: one space for each employee on the largest work shift,
plus one space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area in
public use.
(g) A day-care center: one space for every 10 children of designed
capacity, plus one space for every employee. In addition, at
least one space for every 15 children of designed capacity shall
be provided for child drop-off; required parking may be used to
meet this requirement if the drop-off does not require crossing
a street or driveway to reach the entry door. [Added 2-7-2000
by Ord. No. 388]
(h) A museum: one space for every 800 square feet of floor area
where visitors are able to walk unrestricted and the travel path
of any motorized vehicle used for touring. [Added 3-7-2010
by Ord. No. 514]
(2) For any of the following primary uses, the required parking space
shall be all-weather and shall be paved, and such parking spaces
shall be located on the same lot therewith: [Amended 12-2-1985
by Ord. No. 251; 11-21-1988 by Ord. No. 289]
(a) A retail store or shop: one space for each 100 square feet of
gross floor area.
(b) A department store or supermarket: one space for each 60
square feet of gross floor area.
(c) An indoor theater: one space for every four seats, plus one
space for each employee on the largest work shift.
(d) A bowling alley or similar recreational establishment: one
space for every four seats, plus one space for each employee on
the largest work shift.
(e) Hotel, motel, or tourist home: 1 1/4 spaces for each rental unit.
Hotels within a master-planned office park may request a
reduction of parking to a ratio of one space per each rental unit
as a conditional use. That conditional use shall be compliant
with the following: [Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 513]
[1] Any food service must primarily serve hotel patrons; hotels
requesting this conditional use may not include a fullservice
restaurant open and advertised to the public.
§ 182-179 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-179
176:910
§ 182-180. Parking reserve areas.
The total number of parking spaces required by § 182-179 shall be clearly
set forth and labeled as such on the development, subdivision or other plan
required to be filed by the landowner or developer with the Township before
the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy. However,
the number of spaces required to be constructed by this chapter may
be reduced and the land area equal to the reduction shall be denoted
"Parking Reserve Area." Said reduction may be accomplished only upon full
compliance with each of the following conditions:
[2] Hotels requesting the conditional use must demonstrate
that any meeting rooms or other gathering spaces are
predominately used at times that do coincide with
overnight guest parking.
(f) An office building: one space for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area.
(g) A restaurant, cafe or tearoom: one space for each four seats
provided, plus one space for each employee on the largest
work shift.
(h) A laboratory, industrial establishments or other commercial
buildings: one space for each employee on the largest work
shift, plus an additional 10% which additional amount shall not
be less than two additional spaces. Additional parking areas as
determined by § 182-180 below shall also be constructed.
(i) Open areas used for commercial purposes: the number of
spaces to be determined by the use, as set forth above, to
which the ground is devoted.
(j) Office park: one space for each 285 square feet of gross floor
area.
(k) A self-service storage facility: one space for each employee on
the largest work shift, plus 1.5 spaces for each 100 self-storage
units. [Added 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 496]
A. The landowner or developer shall certify that the parking needs for the
use to which the lot or property is to be devoted are less than those
required by the terms of this chapter.
B. The Township Engineer shall concur with and approve the certification
that a lesser number of parking spaces is sufficient.
C. The parking reserve area created by such reduction shall be clearly set
forth and labeled as such on the development, subdivision or other plan
required to be filed with the Township.
§ 182-179 WATER § 182-180
176:911
§ 182-181. Reduction of requirements by special exception.
The parking spaces required herein may be located elsewhere than on the
same lot when authorized as a special exception, subject to the following
conditions:
§ 182-182. Design requirements for industrial and commercial
parking lots.
All parking lots in industrial or commercial districts shall be operated and
maintained in accordance with all of the following conditions:
D. The parking reserve area so created shall be utilized as open space and
shall be maintained by the owner or owners of the proposed
development.
E. The parking reserve area shall be converted to a parking area at such
time when the landowner or developer further certifies that the need to
use such reserve area for parking has arisen or when the Township
Engineer, upon review and inspection of the premises in question,
certifies to such fact. Such reserve area shall be paved pursuant to the
applicable ordinance and regulations immediately after certification
and shall be completed within the time set forth by the Township.
A. That the owners of two or more establishments shall submit with their
application for special exception a site plan showing joint use and
location of a common off-street parking area.
B. That some portion of the common off-street parking area lies within 200
feet of an entrance regularly used by patrons into the buildings served
thereby.
C. That the Zoning Hearing Board may, in its discretion, reduce the
aggregate amount of required space upon determination that greater
efficiency is affected by joint use of a common parking area, but in no
case shall the ratio of total off-street parking area to total sales floor
area be reduced by more than 25%. [Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord.
No. 231]
A. They shall not be used for the sale, repair or dismantling of any
vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies.
B. They shall be properly graded for drainage, surfaced with concrete,
asphaltic concrete, asphalt, oil or any dust-free surfacing and
maintained in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash or debris.
C. They shall be provided with entrances and exits so located as to
minimize traffic congestion and the effect of headlight glare.
D. They shall be provided with steel or bumper guards so located and
arranged that no part of any parked vehicles will extend beyond the
boundaries of the parking lot.
§ 182-180 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-182
176:912
§ 182-183. Reduction of facilities.
Off-street parking facilities existing at the effective date of this chapter shall
not subsequently be reduced to an amount less than required hereunder
for a similar new building or new use. Off-street parking facilities provided
to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall not subsequently be
reduced below the requirements of this chapter.
§ 182-184. Loading and unloading space. [Amended 8-1-2011 by
Ord. No. 517]
At least one permanently maintained off-street loading and unloading space
shall be provided for each building on which a commercial, office, or
manufacturing use is hereafter established, provided that:
E. Lighting facilities shall be so arranged that they neither unreasonably
nor unnecessarily disturb occupants of adjacent residential properties
nor interfere with traffic by either location or glare and shall be
installed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 154, Subdivision
and Land Development, of the Code of the Township, § 154-40.
[Amended 6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 416]
F. A planting strip shall be provided along each property line which is
opposite or adjacent to a residential district, on which shall be planted
hedges, evergreens or other suitable shrubbery so arranged as to
minimize noise, glare and dust from all parking facilities.
G. There shall be no more than one attendant shelter building containing
not more than 50 feet of gross floor area and set in a distance of not less
than 20 feet from any boundary of the parking lot which abuts a
residential district.
A. This requirement shall not be mandatory for uses which have a total
floor area of 3,000 square feet or less; however, those uses shall still be
required to provide enough area for a standard delivery (i.e., postal
service, Federal Express/UPS) to turn around.
B. This requirement may be waived when authorized as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board in any case where the
unreasonableness of this regulation is clearly demonstrated.
C. Shared loading and unloading space. For professional office uses and
other similar uses with shared parking areas, as permitted within this
chapter, a shared loading and unloading space providing service to
those businesses sharing the parking may be authorized at the
discretion of the Board of Supervisors. [Added 12-16-2013 by Ord.
No. 535]
§ 182-182 WATER § 182-184
176:913

ARTICLE XXIII
(Reserved)
§ 182-185. (Reserved)159
159. Editor's Note: Former Art. XXIII, Open Space Requirements, added 2-21-1979 by Ord. No.
197, as amended, was repealed 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 342.
§ 182-185 WATER § 182-185
176:915

ARTICLE XXIV
Administration and Enforcement
§ 182-186. Zoning Officer.
§ 182-187. Appeals.
Any appeal from a decision or action of the Zoning Officer shall be made
directly to the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 182-188. Complaints regarding violations.
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs or is alleged to have occurred,
any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the
causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Zoning Officer. He shall
record promptly such complaint, immediately investigate and take action
thereon as provided by this chapter.
A. The duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter is
hereby conferred upon the Zoning Officer, who shall have such powers
as are conferred on him by this chapter and who shall administer this
chapter in accordance with its literal terms. The Zoning Officer shall
not have the power to permit any construction or any use or change of
use which does not conform to this chapter.
B. Duties. The duties of the Zoning Officer shall be:
(1) To examine all applications for permits.
(2) To issue permits only for construction and uses which are in
accordance with the regulations of this chapter and other
applicable ordinances as may be subsequently amended.
(3) To record and file all applications for permits with the
accompanying plans.
(4) To issue permits for uses by special exception only after such uses
and buildings are approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the regulations of this chapter.
(5) To receive all required fees and issue all necessary stop orders.
(6) To inspect nonconforming uses, buildings and signs and to keep a
filed record of such nonconforming uses and buildings as a public
record and to examine them periodically.
(7) Upon the request of the Planning Commission or of the Zoning
Hearing Board, to present to such body the facts, records and any
similar information on specific requests to assist such body in
reaching its decision.
§ 182-186 WATER § 182-189
176:917
§ 182-189. Notice of violations. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No.
297]
If the Zoning Officer shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter
are being violated, he shall notify, in writing, the person responsible for
such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and order the action
necessary to correct it. The notice given by the Zoning Officer shall be in
accordance with Section 616.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.160
§ 182-190. Enforcement. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 297]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer. No permit of any kind
as provided in this chapter shall be granted by him for any purpose except
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or a decision of the Zoning
Hearing Board or a court of competent jurisdiction. The Zoning Officer may
institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcement, with the
approval of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 182-191. Causes of action. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 297]
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is or is proposed to be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used
in violation of this chapter, the Board of Supervisors or, with the approval
of the Board of Supervisors, the Zoning Officer or any aggrieved owner
or tenant of real property who showed that his property or person will be
substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies,
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land or to prevent
in or about such premises any act, conduct, business or use constituting
a violation. when any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant,
notice of that action shall be served upon Upper Providence Township at
least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the
complaint on the Board of Supervisors of Upper Providence Township. No
such action may be maintained until such notice has been given.
§ 182-192. Enforcement remedies. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No.
297]
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to the enforcement remedies set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code including, without limitation, Section 617.2 thereof, as now
or hereafter amended.161
160. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10616.1.
161. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10617.2.
§ 182-189 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-193
176:918
§ 182-193. Zoning permit required.
A zoning permit shall be required prior to the erection, construction or
alteration of any building, structure or any portion thereof, prior to the
moving of a building into the Township or from one place in the Township
to another and prior to the change or extension of nonconforming use and
shall be issued simultaneously with the required building permits.
§ 182-194. Application for permits.
Application for permits shall be made in writing to the Zoning Officer
on such forms as may be furnished by the Township. Such application
shall include building and plot plans of a satisfactory nature, in duplicate,
and shall contain all information necessary for such official to ascertain
whether the proposed erection, alteration, use or change in use complies
with the provisions of this chapter. No permit shall be considered complete
or permanently effective until the Zoning Officer has certified that the work
meets all the requirements of applicable codes and ordinances.
§ 182-195. Issuance of permits.
§ 182-196. Expiration of permits.
No permit for the erection, razing, change, alteration or removal of
buildings shall be valid or effective after six months from the date of
issuance thereof, and it shall thereafter be void, unless the work authorized
by such permit shall have been substantially commenced within six months
from the date of issuance and proceeded with, with due diligence. If,
however, the applicant has been delayed in proceeding with the work for
which the permit was granted by reason of any reasonable cause not due to
A. No zoning permit shall be issued except in conformity with the
regulations of this chapter, and except after written order from the
Zoning Hearing Board or the courts.
B. In case of refusal, the applicant shall be informed of his right to appeal
to the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. Proceedings of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be governed by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.162 The Board
shall fix its own rules of procedure. The Board of Supervisors shall
establish by resolution a schedule of fees for appeals to the Zoning
Hearing Board.163
D. Any building permit or any other permits to which an applicant may be
entitled as a result of a decision of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be
applied for within six months of the date thereof. Failure to do so will
render the decision null and void.
162. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
163. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 182-193 WATER § 182-196
176:919
his own negligence, the permit may be renewed without additional cost to
the applicant.
§ 182-197. Certificate of occupancy.
§ 182-198. Temporary permits.
A temporary permit may be authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as
a special exception for a nonconforming structure or use which it deems
beneficial to promote the proper development of the community, provided
that such nonconforming structure or use shall be completely removed upon
expiration of the permit without cost to the Township. Such a permit shall
be issued for a specified period of time not exceeding six calendar months
and may be renewed for an aggregate period of not more than two years.
§ 182-199. Permits for variances and special exceptions.
A. Upon completion of the erection or alteration of any building or portion
thereof authorized by any permit and prior to occupancy or use and
prior to any change in occupancy or use, the holder of such permit shall
notify the Zoning Officer of such completion or change. No building may
be used or occupied until a certificate of use and occupancy has been
issued, except as provided for in Subsection B below. [Amended
2-21-1978 by Ord. No. 197; 9-20-1982 by Ord. No. 231]
B. In commercial and industrial zoning districts, at such time as
performance standards are imposed, no certificate of occupancy shall
become permanent until 30 days after the facility is fully operating,
when upon a reinspection by the Zoning Officer it is determined that
the facility is in compliance with all performance standards.
A. All applications for variances and special exceptions shall be made in
writing on forms furnished by the Township Secretary.
B. Special exceptions shall not be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board
unless the applicant therefor shall establish:
(1) That the granting of the special exception will not adversely affect
the public interest.
(2) That the proposed structure or development complies with the
letter and intent of this chapter.
(3) That the public health, safety and welfare have been protected in
the following respects, where applicable:
(a) Ingress and egress to and from property and proposed
structures thereon, with particular reference to automotive
and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control
and access in case of fire or catastrophe.
§ 182-196 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-199
176:920
§ 182-200. Amendments. [Amended 6-9-1980 by Ord. No. 216;
6-2–2008 by Ord. No. 490]
The Board of Supervisors may from time to time amend, modify or repeal
this chapter, including the Zoning Map, as follows:
(b) Off-street parking and loading areas, where required, with
particular attention to the items in Subsection B(1) above with
the noise, glare or odor effects of the special exception on
adjoining properties and properties generally in the district.
(c) Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the
items in Subsection B(1) and (2) above.
(d) Utilities, with reference to locations, availability and
compatibility.
(e) Screening and buffering, with reference to type, dimensions
and character.
(f) Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to
glare, traffic safety and compatibility and harmony with
properties in the district.
(g) Required yards and other open spaces.
(h) The general compatibility with adjacent properties and other
property in the district.
C. To the extent permitted by law, all burdens of proof, persuasion and
going forward with evidence shall be upon the landowner in connection
with any variance or special exception. In allowing a variance or special
exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards in addition to those expressed in the chapter,
as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and this chapter. [Added
1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 297]
A. Requests for zoning changes shall be considered at the discretion of the
Board of Supervisors.
B. Applicants for rezoning shall petition the Board of Supervisors by letter
on or before the fifth day of the month preceding the month in which
the hearing shall be held.
C. Applications shall be accompanied by payment as a deposit against
advertising, stenographic, legal, engineering and other expenses
connected with the application. The Board shall bill or credit applicants
when total expenses are determined after the hearing.
D. Applications shall be accompanied by development plans for the area
proposed to be rezoned, including layout, elevations and architectural
§ 182-199 WATER § 182-200
176:921
§ 182-201. Notice of rezoning hearing.
Notice of rezoning hearings shall be given as follows:
§ 182-202. Referral to planning agencies.
The Board of Supervisors shall refer all requests for Zoning Ordinance
amendments to both the Upper Providence Township Planning Commission
and the Montgomery County Planning Commission for review and
recommendations at least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the
proposed amendment. The respective planning commissions shall consider
whether the proposed amendment(s) would be consistent with the intent
of the Upper Providence Comprehensive Plan and the Montgomery County
Preliminary Land Use Plan, as well as general planning principles.
§ 182-203. Schedule of fees.
The Board of Supervisors shall determine a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses, as well as a collection procedure for special permits, variances,
amendments and other matters pertaining to this chapter, by resolution.
Said schedule of fees shall be posted in the offices of the Zoning Officer and
the Township Secretary.
§ 182-204. Procedure for consideration of conditional use
application. [Amended 6-26-1978 by Ord. No. 204]
An application for any condition use as specified in the various districts of
this chapter shall be considered by the Board of Supervisors according to
the following procedure:
sketches, along with a study of the impact on the Township to be
expected from the development.
E. All applications shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission, and its
recommendations shall be forwarded to the Board of Supervisors
before the 20th day of the month preceding the month in which the
hearing will be held.
A. By publishing a notice thereof once each week for two successive weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall
state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered at the hearing and that full opportunity will be
given to any citizen and all parties in interest attending such hearing.
The first publication shall be not more than 30 days nor less than 14
days from the date of the hearing. [Amended 9-20-1982 by Ord. No.
231]
B. Whenever a proposed amendment affects a particular property, there
shall be posted upon such property or premises at such places as the
Township Secretary shall direct notice of the said amendment and the
date on which it will be heard.
§ 182-200 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-204
176:922
§ 182-205. Zoning Hearing Board. [Added 8-1-2011 by Ord. No.
517]
A. Conditional use application. An application shall be submitted, in
writing, to the Township Manager. Such applications shall include, as a
minimum, a tentative sketch plan indicating basically how the applicant
intends to develop the property and sufficient data to document
compliance with the applicable standards of this chapter. The Board of
Supervisors shall schedule a public hearing on said application within
60 days, unless this time limit is waived by the applicant.
B. Public hearing. Prior to deciding to approve or deny the use of a tract
for the proposed use, the Board of Supervisors shall hold a public
hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice. At least 45 days prior to the
date of the hearing, one copy of the development proposal and all
additional submitted information shall be transmitted to the Township
[planning agency and one to the Montgomery County Planning
Commission, together with a request that these agencies submit
recommendations regarding said use.
C. To the extent permitted by law, all burdens of proof, persuasion and
going forward with the evidence shall be upon the landowner in
connection with any conditional use application before the Board of
Supervisors. In allowing a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors
may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to
those expressed in the chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and this
chapter. In addition, any conditional use application shall be subject to
the provisions of § 182-199B applicable to special exceptions.
[Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 297]
A. Establishment of Zoning Hearing Board, membership, terms and
removal.
(1) For purposes of this section, references to "the Board" shall refer to
the Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) There shall be a Zoning Hearing Board which shall consist of five
residents of Upper Providence Township who shall be appointed by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors of Upper Providence
Township. In addition to the five member appointments, the Board
shall consist also of two alternate members who shall also be
appointed by the Board of Supervisors of Upper Providence
Township.
(3) The terms of office shall be three years for Board members and
three years for alternates and shall be so fixed that a member term
shall expire each year. Members may succeed themselves. The
Board shall promptly notify the Board of Supervisors whenever any
vacancies occur, and the Board of Supervisors shall thereupon
appoint a resident of the Township to serve for the unexpired
§ 182-204 WATER § 182-205
176:923
portion of the term. Members of the Board and alternates shall hold
no other office in the Township, and no member of the Board or
alternate may also be a member of the Planning Commission.
(4) Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance
or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of
the Board of Supervisors, taken after the member has received 15
days' advanced notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing
shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall
request it in writing.
B. Organization of Zoning Hearing Board.
(1) The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who
shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves.
(2) When by reason of absence or disqualification one or more
members is unavailable for a hearing, the Chairman of the Board
shall designate one or both alternate members of the Board to sit
on the Board as may be needed to provide a quorum. Any alternate
member of the Board shall continue to serve on the Board in all
proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate
was initially appointed until the Board has made a final
determination of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate
pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case basis in
rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates.
(3) For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a
quorum shall be no less than three voting members, but the Board
may appoint from its own membership a hearing officer to conduct
any hearing on its behalf, and the parties may waive further action
by the Board.
(4) The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Township and laws of
the Commonwealth.
(5) The Board shall keep public records of its business, which records
shall be property of the Township, and shall submit reports of its
activities to the Township as requested by the Board of
Supervisors.
C. Expenditure for services.
(1) Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Board of Supervisors,
the Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal
council, consultants, and other technical and clerical services.
(2) Members of the Board shall receive such compensation as may be
fixed by the Board of Supervisors for the performance of their
duties as members of the Zoning Hearing Board. Alternate
members of the Board may receive compensation as may be fixed
§ 182-205 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-205
176:924
by the Board of Supervisors for the performance of their duties.
Both with respect to members and alternate members, the
compensation paid to members or alternate members shall not
exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to members
of the Board of Supervisors.
D. Powers and duties; jurisdiction.
(1) Powers and duties of the Board shall be as set forth in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code164 as amended.
(2) The Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final
adjudications in accordance with the requirements of Article IX of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
E. Hearings; notice of hearing.
(1) The Board shall conduct hearings and render decisions as set forth
by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.165 All hearings
shall be open to the public.
(2) Upon the filing with the Board of an appeal or of an application for
any matter within its jurisdiction, the Board shall fix a reasonable
time and place for a public hearing thereon.
(3) Notices herein required shall state the location of the building or
lot and the general nature of the question involved.
F. Burden of proof. The burden of proof shall always be on the applicant
before the Board to sustain his appeal before the Board, and in any
application for a special exception, the burden shall be upon the
applicant to prove that approval of the application will not be
detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
G. Parties. The parties to the hearings shall be the municipality, any
person affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the Board and any other person, including civic or
community organizations, permitted to appear by the Board. The Board
shall have the power to require that all persons who wish to be
considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms provided by
the Board for that purpose.
H. Evidence. The Board shall consider in making its official findings or
decisions only that evidence properly submitted at hearings, with the
exception of legal briefs, provided that all parties are given an equal
opportunity to submit legal briefs and any responses thereto, but the
allowance of the submission of such legal briefs and responses thereto
shall be entirely within the discretion of the Board. Information from
federal, state or county agencies when submitted on official stationery
164. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
165. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
§ 182-205 WATER § 182-205
176:925
shall be admitted as evidence only at public hearings, and the Board,
in its sole discretion, shall determine the weight to be given to such
evidence. Information from the Upper Providence Township Planning
Commission or from any other Township agency, board, commission
or committee shall be submitted to the Board only at public hearings
as authorized by the Board of Supervisors or the Township Manager,
but this shall not prevent any member of an official agency, board,
commission or committee of Upper Providence Township from
appearing and being heard as a private citizen.
I. Decisions and copies of decisions and findings.
(1) The Board shall render a written decision or, when no decision is
called for, make written findings on the application within 45 days
after the last hearing before the Board. Where the application is
contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by
findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, together with the
reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, other statutes or of any
ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the
provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed
appropriate in light of the facts found.
(2) Where the Board has power to render a decision and the Board fails
to render the same within the period required by this Subsection I,
the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing or on record,
to an extension of time.
(3) In addition to the requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code and its amendments,166 a copy of the decision or
findings of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be mailed or delivered
promptly to each of the following: the Chairman of the Board of
Supervisors, the Chairman of the Upper Providence Township
Planning Commission, the Township Manager, the Township
Secretary and the Township Zoning Officer.
J. Fees. The fees for applications to the Zoning Hearing Board, for cost of
stenographic record of the same, and for subpoenas, shall be in
accordance with a schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
K. Appeals. Appeals from the decisions of the Zoning Hearing Board shall
be in accordance with the rules of procedure of the Zoning Hearing
Board and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and its
amendments.167
166. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
167. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
§ 182-205 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § 182-205
176:926
Appendix
Chapter A186
FRANCHISES
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
405 8-6-2001 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
406 8-6-2001 Zoning Map amendment NCM
407 8-6-2001 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
408 8-6-2001 Official Map NCM
409 11-15-2001 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
410 12-17-2001 Vehicle and traffic amendment Ch. 169
411 2-19-2002 Zoning Map amendment NCM
412 2-19-2002 Zoning Map amendment NCM
413 3-18-2002 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
414 5-20-2002 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
415 5-20-2002 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
416 6-3-2002 Subdivision and land development
amendment; zoning amendment
Chs. 154; 182
(repealed by
Ord. No. 489)
417 6-17-2002 Connection fees and sewer rents
amendment
Ch. 143, Art. II
418 7-15-2002 Zoning Map amendment NCM
419 7-15-2002 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
420 9-3-2002 Street vacation NCM
§ 182-205 FRANCHISES § DL-1
A186:927
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
421 12-2-2002 Official Map amendment NCM
422 2-3-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
423 3-17-2003 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
424 4-7-2003 Police pension plan amendment Ch. 28, Art. I
425 4-21-2003 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
426 5-5-2003 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
427 5-19-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
428 5-19-2003 Police pension plan amendment Ch. 28, Art. I
429 6-2-2003 Peddling and soliciting amendment Ch. 124
430 10-6-2003 Attorney's fees Ch. 10, Art. I
431 10-6-2003 Police pension plan amendment Ch. 28, Art. I
432 12-1-2003 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
433 2-17-2004 Stormwater management Ch. 150
434 3-15-2004 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
435 3-15-2004 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
436 3-15-2004 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
437 3-15-2004 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
438 3-15-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
439 3-15-2004 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
440 4-5-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
441 4-19-2004 Uniform construction codes Ch. 60
442 4-19-2004 Fire Commission Ch. 85
443 6-7-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
444 6-7-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
445 10-4-2004 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 60
446 11-15-2004 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 60
§ DL-1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § DL-1
A186:928
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
447 11-15-2004 Sewers and sewage disposal:
grinder pumps
Ch. 143, Art.
IV
448 2-7-2005 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
449 2-7-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
450 5-2-2005 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
451 10-17-2005 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
452 10-17-2005 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
453 11-7-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
454 11-7-2005 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
455 11-21-2005 Sewers and sewage disposal: on-lot
sewer system management
Ch. 143, Art. V
456 12-5-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
457 2-6-2006 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 60
458 3-20-2006 OSR-2 Open Space Residential
Community District-2
Ch. 182, Art.
VIID
459 4-17-2006 Streets and sidewalks: official
street map (repealer only)
Ch. 151, Art.
III (footnote
only)
460 4-17-2006 Official Map amendment NCM
461 5-1-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
462 8-7-2006 Subdivision of land; zoning
amendment
Chs. 154; 182
(repealed by
Ord. No. 489)
463 8-7-2006 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
464 9-5-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
465 Pending
466 9-18-2006 Sewers and sewage disposal
amendment
Ch. 143
467 10-16-2006 Township Manager amendment;
Parks and Recreation Board
amendment
Chs. 24; 37
§ DL-1 FRANCHISES § DL-1
A186:929
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
468 11-6-2006 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
469 12-4-2006 Sewers and sewage disposal
amendment
Ch. 143
470 12-4-2006 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
471 6-4-2007 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 169
472 6-18-2007 Realty transfer tax amendment Ch. 160, Art.
IV
473 6-18-2007 Parks and open space Ch. 120
474 7-16-2007 Department of Fire and
Emergency Services
Ch. 85
475 9-17-2007 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
476 10-1-2007 Subdivision and land development
amendment; zoning amendment
Chs. 154; 182
(repealed by
Ord. No. 489)
477 11-5-2007 Cable franchise agreement See Ch. A186
478 11-19-2007 Local services tax Ch. 160, Art. I
479 12-3-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
480 12-3-2007 Subdivision and land development
amendment; zoning amendment
Chs. 154; 182
(repealed by
Ord. No. 489)
481 1-7-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
482 1-7-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
483 2-4-2008 General obligation note NCM
484 3-3-2008 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
485 3-3-2008 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
486 4-7-2008 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 489
487 5-5-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
488 5-5-2008 Official Map amendment NCM
489 5-19-2008 Zoning readoption Ch. 182
§ DL-1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § DL-1
A186:930
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
490 6-2-2008 Hazardous substances
amendment; sewers and sewage
disposal: retaining tanks
amendment; solid waste: municipal
waste amendment; stormwater
management amendment;
subdivision and land development
amendment; zoning amendment
Chs. 103; 143,
Art. III; 148,
Art. II; 150;
154; 182
491 7-21-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
492 8-4-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
493 9-2-2008 Sewers and sewage disposal:
wastewater collection and
treatment
Ch. 143, Art.
VI
494 11-3-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
495 12-15-2008 Subdivision and land development
amendment; zoning amendment
Chs. 154; 182
496 12-15-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
497 12-15-2008 Special events Ch. 149
498 12-15-2008 Pensions: police plan amendment Ch. 28, Art. I
499 1-5-2009 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 150
500 2-17-2009 Taxation: amusement tax Repealed by
Ord. No. 508
501 4-6-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
502 8-3-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
503 12-7-2009 Pensions: police plan amendment Ch. 28, Art. I
504 12-7-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
505 12-22-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
506 1-4-2010 Fire Code Ch. 80
507 1-19-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
508 2-1-2010 Amusement tax repealer Ch. 160, Art. V
(footnote only)
509 7-6-2010 Sewer connections amendment Ch. 143, Art. I
510 8-10-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
511 9-7-2010 Solid waste: recycling amendment;
municipal waste amendment
Ch. 148, Arts.
I and II
512 12-20-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
513 2-7-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
§ DL-1 FRANCHISES § DL-1
A186:931
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
514 3-7-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
515 7-5-2011 Uniform construction codes
amendment; numbering of
buildings repealer; Fire Code
amendment
Chs. 60; 64
(reference
only); 80
516 8-1-2011 Taxation: earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 160, Art.
III
517 8-1-2011 Subdivision and land development
amendment; zoning amendment
Chs. 154, 182
518 10-3-2011 Fire insurance claims Ch. 90
519 12-5-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
520 12-19-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
521 12-19-2011 Sewer connections amendment Ch. 143, Art. I
522 1-17-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
523 3-5-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
524 12-3-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
525 1-7-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
526 4-1-2013 Parks and Recreation Board
amendment
Ch. 37
527 4-15-2013 Department of Fire and
Emergency Services amendment
Ch. 85
528 5-20-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
529 9-16-2013 Subdivision and land development
amendment; zoning amendment
Chs. 154; 182
530 8-19-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
531 8-19-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
532 10-7-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
533 11-4-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
534 11-18-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
535 12-16-2013 Subdivision and land development
amendment; zoning amendment
Chs. 154; 182
536 12-16-2013 Intermunicipal water service
agreement
NCM
537 2-18-2014 Taxation: Tax Collector fees
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. V
538 4-7-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
539 4-21-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
§ DL-1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § DL-1
A186:932
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
540 5-5-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
541 10-6-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
542 1-20-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
543 2-17-2015 Intergovernmental cooperation
agreement to authorize
participation in the Delaware
Valley Health Trust
NCM
544 3-16-2015 Parks and open space amendment Ch. 120
545 4-6-2015 Department of Fire and
Emergency Services amendment
Ch. 85
546 5-18-2015 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
547 7-6-2015 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
548 7-20-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
549 10-5-2015 Peddling and soliciting amendment Ch. 124
550 2-1-2016 Grease traps and interceptors Ch. 144
551 2-16-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
552 3-7-2016 Taxation: per capita tax
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 557
553 3-21-2016 Street vacation NCM
554 3-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
555 11-7-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
556 2-6-2017 General obligation note NCM
557 2-6-2017 Per capita tax repealer Ch. 160, Art. II
558 2-6-2017 Tax Collector compensation See Ch. 42
559 2-21-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
560 2-21-2017 Department of Fire and
Emergency Services: recovery of
costs
Ch. 85, Art. II
561 3-20-2017 Subdivision and land development
amendment; zoning amendment
Ch. 154; Ch.
182
562 3-20-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 182
563 6-19-2017 Intergovernmental cooperation
agreement to authorize
participation in the Delaware
Valley Workers' Compensation
Trust
NCM
564 9-5-2017 Department of Fire and
Emergency Services
Ch. 85
§ DL-1 FRANCHISES § DL-1
A186:933
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
565 10-2-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
566 10-2-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 169
567 10-16-2017 Taxation: Collection of Delinquent
Real Estate Taxes
Ch. 160, Art.
VI
568 12-4-2017 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 169
569 12-4-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 182
570 12-4-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 182
571 4-2-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 169
572 12-17-2018 Administrative Code Ch. 2
573 3-4-2019 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 169
574 3-4-2019 Peace and Good Order Amendment Ch. 122
575 3-18-2019 General Obligation Note NCM
576 5-6-2019 Peddling and Soliciting
Amendment
Ch. 124
577 6-17-2019 Limitations On Political Campaign
Contributions
Ch. 43
578 6-17-2019 Subdivision and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 154
580 8-19-2019 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 169
§ DL-1 UPPER PROVIDENCE CODE § DL-1
A186:934

ORDINANCE NO. 581
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF UPPER
PROVIDENCE ( MONTGOMERY COUNTY), PA, CHAPTER 182 ENTITLED
ZONING," TO ADD A NEW ZONING DISTRICT KNOWN AS THE YMU
YERKES MIXED USE DISTRICT; BY ADDING A NEW ARTICLE XIIA
ENTITLED " YMU YERKES MIXED USE DISTRICT" AND TO PROVIDE FOR
USE, AREA AND BULK, AND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS OF THE
YMU YERKES MIXED USE DISTRICT; AND TO IDENTIFY THE
MONTGOMERY COUNTY TAX PARCEL NUMBERS LISTED ON
ATTACHMENT " A" AS PART OF THE NEW YMU YERKES MIXED USE
DISTRICT.
WHEREAS, the Upper Providence Township Comprehensive Plan recommends
that the Route 29 corridor in proximity to Collegeville Borough allow for a mix of uses
including transitional residential uses and non -intensive commercial uses; and
WHEREAS, Upper Providence Township desires to encourage the development
and redevelopment of transitional residential uses and non -intensive commercial uses in
the Route 29 corridor in an environmentally sustainable manner; and
WHEREAS, Upper Providence Township recognizes that in order to incentivize
the development of environmentally sustainable communities utilizing environmentally
sustainable design techniques in this corridor, certain development bonuses may be
appropriate; and
WHEREAS, Upper Providence Township desires to establish a YMU Yerkes
Mixed Use District on certain properties in order to encourage the development of said
properties in an environmentally sustainable manner while allowing for a mix of
transitional uses as described herein.
Be it ordained by the Board of Supervisors of Upper Providence Township, as
follows:
Section I: Amendment to the text of Chapter 182, " Zoning" of the Code of the Township
of Upper Providence (Montgomery County), Pennsylvania.
1. Add a new Article XIIA to read as follows:
ARTICLE XIIA
YMU Yerkes Mixed Use District
182- 90.4 Legislative Intent.
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives contained in
182-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of this article with
respect to YMU Yerkes Mixed Use District to establish reasonable controls and
standards of performance for transitional residential uses and complimentary non -
intensive commercial uses in the Route 29 corridor in proximity to the
Township' s border with Collegeville Borough. Additionally, it is the intent of
this article to encourage the use and application of environmentally sustainable
and green building design standards.
182- 90.5 Use Regulations.
In the YMU Yerkes Mixed Use District, a building may be erected, altered or
used and a tract may be used or occupied for any of the following uses and no
others:
A. Single-family detached dwelling(s) on Lots measuring not less than one ( 1)
acre in compliance with the regulations outlined in the R-1 District.
B. On parcels that, as of the date of enactment of Article.XIIA, have frontage on
a road then classified as an arterial road by the Upper Providence Township' s
Ultimate Right of Way Map, to a maximum depth of 450 feet measured from
the center line of said arterial road, the following uses are permitted:
1) Conversion of a single family detached dwelling to a use described in
182- 96.2.A.( 1) through (5).
2) Personal service shops such as barbers, hairdressers, and repair shops
for jewelry, clocks, and other small household items). Machine laundry
self-service or otherwise) and dry- cleaning plants shall not be permitted
within the YMU Yerkes Mixed Use District.
3) Professional office for doctors, dentists, orthodontists, chiropractors,
or any other licensed practitioner of the healing arts for humans, lawyers,
engineers, architects, urban planners, accountants, economic consultants,
business and management consultants and other similar professionals.
4) Multiple business or professional offices, in a single building, with no
more than four individual tenants.
C. On parcels that, as of the date of enactment of Article XIIA, have at Ieast 400
feet of frontage on a road then classified as an arterial road by the Upper
Providence Township' s Ultimate Right of Way Map, and with a gross
minimum tract area of 7 acres, and to a maximum depth of 600 feet measured
from the center line of said arterial road:
1) Multifamily dwellings.
2) Day- care center.
2
3) Mixed- use structures containing a combination of uses permitted in
Sections B( 2) through B( 4) and Section C( 2) herein when a multifamily
use is present on the second floor and above.
D. On parcels that, as of the date of enactment of Article XIIA, have at least 400
feet of frontage on a road then classified as a collector or arterial road by the
Upper Providence Township' s Ultimate Right -of -Way Map, and with a gross
minimum tract area of at least 20 acres, as a conditional use, when authorized
by the Board ofSupervisors, in compliance with § 182- 204:
1) Semidetached houses (twins).
2) Single-family attached dwellings.
3) A combination of semidetached houses ( twins) and single-family
attached dwellings.
E. On parcels that, as of the date of enactment of Article XIIA, have frontage on
a road then classified as a collector or arterial road by the Upper Providence
Township' s Ultimate Right -of -Way Map, and with a gross minimum tract
area of at least 5 acres, single family detached homes are permitted using the
flexible lot standards as established in § 182-44 when authorized by the Board
of Supervisors, in compliance with § 182- 204.
F. Residential uses are permitted as secondary uses to those in Section B herein,
with the following provisions:
I) All residential uses shall be above the first floor.
2) Parking shall be cumulative.
G. Subject to compliance with the 100 foot wide setback requirement as set forth
in § 182-90.6.B(2)( a) where applicable, parks, playgrounds, tot -lots and open
spaces.
H. Subject to compliance with the 100 foot wide setback requirement as set forth
in § 182- 90. 6.13( 2)( a) where applicable, accessory uses on the same lot with
and incidental to any permitted use, which may include appropriate accessory
uses developed in conjunction with any of the uses in Subsections C, D and E,
including but not limited to indoor and outdoor recreational facilities,
community centers and other similar uses; provided, however, that none is
intended as an independent freestanding use.
182- 90.6 District Regulations.
3
A. The following regulations shall apply in the YMU Yerkes Mixed Use District:
1) Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one
ownership or shall be subject of an application filed jointly by the owners
of the entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract shall be developed
under a single direction in accordance with an approved plan.
2) Sewer and water facilities. The tract of land shall be served by public
water and sewer facilities deemed acceptable by the Board of Supervisors,
upon recommendation of the Township Engineer.
B. Development regulations. The following development regulations shall be
followed by all proposed developments within the YMU Yerkes Mixed Use
District:
1) On parcels that, as of the date of enactment of Article XIIA, have
frontage on a road then classified as an arterial road by the Upper
Providence Township' s Ultimate Right -of -Way Map, and to a maximum
depth of 450 feet measured from the center line of said arterial road,
single-family detached uses developed as a permitted use under § 182-
90.5.A shall be in compliance with those regulations outlined with Article
V, the R-2 District.
2) Semidetached houses ( twins) and single-family attached uses
developed as permitted uses under § 182- 90.5.D shall comply with those
regulations as follows:
a) Semidetached houses ( twins) and single family attached dwellings
shall have a setback of 15 feet from internal development roads,
100 feet from property lines that abut an existing residential use or
zone, and 50 feet from public road right of ways. No man- made
above ground building or structure, including decks and patios,
regardless of whether a permit for same is required, shall be
permitted or located within the 100 foot wide setback abutting any
existing single-family detached homes or R- 1 Zoning except for
utility facilities or stormwater management facilities.
b) Building coverage may not exceed 25% ofthe total tract area.
c) Impervious coverage may not exceed 50% ofthe total tract area.
d) Single family attached dwellings may not have more than three ( 3)
units attached, and may not have a building length that exceeds
100 feet. Semidetached houses ( twins) may not have a building
length that exceeds 70 feet. 
e) Building separation may not be less than 25 feet.
f) The minimum open space requirement is 30% of the total site area.
All other open space requirements outlined within Article IVA,
Open Space and Recreational Facilities, of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall apply.
g) No parking shall be located closer than 50 feet to a tract boundary
or external road right of way except where the 100 foot wide
setback applies as set forth in § 182- 90.6. B( 2)( a).
h) Semidetached houses ( twins) and single family attached dwellings
developed under the regulations herein shall not have a density that
exceeds 3. 25 units per developable acre.
3) Conversion of a single-family detached dwelling as a permitted use
under § 182-90. 5.B( 1) and freestanding commercial and mixed uses
developed as a permitted use under § 182- 90.5. B(2) through ( 4), shall
comply with those regulations within Article XIIIA the Village
Commercial and Office (VCO) District for that specific use.
4) Multifamily and mixed uses built in multifamily developments as a
permitted use under § 182- 90.5. 0 above shall comply with the following:
a) Minimum tract size: 7 acres, excluding existing rights-of-way of
all public roads.
b) Density: Tract residential density and bonus options:
1] Base residential density: 20 units per developable acre.
c) Residential density bonus provisions.
1] By providing any of the following, developments
containing multifamily dwellings within the YMU District
may increase their density by 2.0 units per developable acre
for each amenity provided, up to three amenities:
a] Three ofthe following site amenities:
i] An internal trail system that connects to existing an
existing township or regional trail network.
ii] Recreational amenity such as a tennis court, bocce
court, multipurpose court, or a pool of sufficient
size to serve the projected population at project
completion.
iii] Outdoor grilling station ( gas)/ outdoor kitchen.
iv] Tot lot or other play structure as approved by the
Board of Supervisors to sufficiently serve the
population at project completion
v] Media center, game room, or other community
meeting area.
vi] Both an indoor / all weather and outdoor bicycle
storage area to serve at least 10% of the projected
population at project completion.
vii] Other site amenity as presented by the developer
and approved by the Board of Supervisors.
b] Green roofs utilized on one or more multifamily
buildings.
c] MultifainiIy buildings designed to achieve compliance
with a nationally recognized green certification
program such as Green Globes or LEED. Given that
certification occurs post -construction, the architect for
the developer is required to submit a report showing
how the proposed buildings comply with the current
standards during land development.
d] A dog park, dog run, or other enclosed pet area.
e] Electric car charging stations with a minimum of one
station provided per building.
d) Overall building coverage for the entire tract shall not exceed 25%.
e) Overall impervious coverage for the entire tract shall not exceed
65%.
f) Perimeter setbacks from streets. Buildings shall have a minimum
setback of 25 feet from the right-of-way of each street external to the
YMU District development tract. 
g) Setback from property lines. Building shall have a minimum
setback of 50 feet from any other YMU District development tract
perimeter property line.
h) Minimum distance between buildings: 40 feet.
i) No parking area of three or more cars shall be located closer than
15 feet to a side or rear property line or closer than 10 feet to a rightof-way line. Installation of a knee wall, plantings or combination
thereof shall be provided between said parking area and the property
or right-of-way line. Plantings shall meet the standards outlined for a
Buffer Type 4, as detailed in § 154- 36.D( 1)( f) of Chapter 154,
Subdivision and Land Development.
j) For parking areas containing parking spaces that are not an integral
part of the building design or are parallel parking spaces along an
access drive and which store 10 or more cars, not less than 10% of the
area devoted to parking facilities shall consist of interior parking lot
landscaping, unless said parking areas are separated by a landscaped
strip of more than 5 feet in width.
5) Height regulations. The maximum height of buildings or structures
erected or enlarged within the YMU Yerkes Mixed Use District shall be:
a) For buildings containing only multifamily dwellings or a
combination of multifamily dwellings and nonresidential uses: 60 feet.
If two of the amenities listed in § 182- 90.6.B( 4)( c)[ I] are provided
which are different than those that may be provided for any increase in
density, building height for one building containing only multifamily
dwellings may be increased by 5 feet to a maximum of 65 feet.
b) For any building containing only nonresidential uses: 40 feet.
c) For any building accessory to a dwelling or nonresidential building:
15 feet.
d) For any other dwelling unit: 35 feet.
6) Utilities. All utility lines ( electrical, telephone, etc.) shall be placed
underground.
7) Parking regulations. The following standards shall control required
parking spaces in the YMU Yerkes Mixed Use District:
a) Not less than 1. 7 off-street parking spaces shall be required for
each multifamily dwelling unit. 
b) All other uses shall comply with the applicable requirements of §
182- 179.B; however, shared parking is permitted for those uses
permitted under § 182-90.5. E and § 182- 90.5. C. In addition to the
requirements of § 182- 181 the following shall apply:
1] Adequate documentation to substantiate a reduction in
parking requirements shall be submitted with an applicant' s
subdivision and/or land development application. At the
discretion of the Board of Supervisors and based upon the
recommendation of the Township professionals, a
reduction in required parking may be granted.
2] For proposed shared parking in the YMU District, a
conditional use shall be required in lieu of a special
exception as stipulated in § 182- 181.
3] The shared parking facilities may be in one ownership or
multiple ownerships. If applicable, proper cross easements
and liability indemnification shall be provided to the
satisfaction ofthe Township Solicitor.
8) Signs. Subject to compliance with the 100 foot wide setback
requirement as set forth in § 182- 90.6.B(2)( a) where applicable, signs
shall be permitted subject to the requirements of Article XIX of this
chapter.
9) Common areas and facilities. Subject to compliance with the 100 foot
wide setback requirement as set forth in § 182- 90.6.B( 2)( a) where
applicable, the provision of certain facilities serving the entire
development, such as parking Tots, interior pedestrianways, driveways or
alleys, lighting facilities, landscape planting areas, buffers, open space,
recreation facilities, etc. are hereby encouraged and may be located either
on individual lots or condominium units, or in common areas in any
multifamily or multi -unit development. In cases where they are provided
in common areas, provisions satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors must
be made for their perpetual maintenance and care. The use of these
facilities may be restricted for particular residents or users of the facilities,
where practical, and may be maintained by the developer, a condominium
association or similar instrument.
10) Lighting facilities. Subject to compliance with the 100 foot wide
setback requirement as set forth in § 182- 90. 6. B( 2)( a) where applicable,
lighting facilities shall be provided as needed and arranged in a manner
which will protect the highway and neighboring properties from
unreasonable direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind. Lighting
facilities shall be required for the safety and welfare of the residents ofthe
development, shall be installed by the applicant at its expense and shall be
designed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 154 of this Code,
Subdivision and Land Development, § 154- 40.
11) Landscaped planting. Landscaping shall be considered an integral
part of any YMU Yerkes Mixed Use Development and shall follow the
requirements of Chapter 154 of this Code, Subdivision and Land
Development, provided that an applicant may utilize the Pennsylvania
Native Species List for plantings within a YMU Yerkes Mixed Use
Development including but not limited to plantings in buffer areas.
12) Buffer area. A multifamily dwellings, single family attached
dwellings or semidetached houses ( twins) use within YMU Yerkes Mixed
Use District development shall provide a permanent landscaped Buffer
Type 2A, as described in Section 154- 36.D( 5) of Chapter 154, Subdivision
and Land Development, against any existing single family detached homes
or R-1 Zoning. Existing mature trees or woodland areas may be utilized in
place of required plantings, as approved by the Township. Tract buffer
area requirements may be included within the required tract setbacks.
13) Recreation and Open Space. Subject to compliance with the 100 foot
wide setback requirement as set forth in § 182- 90.6.B(2)( a) where
applicable, the developer shall provide community areas and other
recreational areas for the prospective residents of the multifamily
dwellings. In this regard, the developer shall provide a minimum of 15%
of the total area as usable open space for the use of residents of the
development, unless a greater amount is required herein. Such open space
shall be governed by the provisions of Article IVA, Open Space and
Recreational Facilities, of Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land
Development.
14) Property maintenance area. A suitable outdoor area shall be provided
on site for the storage of landscaping, snow removal, and other property -
maintenance related materials for a multifamily dwellings use. Property
maintenance areas shall be:
a) Clearly separate from any other uses on the site;
b) Separate from any required parking spaces; and
0) Screened from view from public roads and surrounding
properties with a Buffer Type -2 as defined in § 154- 36.D,
in Chapter 154, Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance. The buffer may be a minimum of 15 feet in
width. 
15) Design guidelines for buildings developed under § 1. 82- 90. 5. C. Any
new building or group of new buildings developed under § 182- 90.5. 0
should, through its architectural design, reflect the nature of the setting
relative to its size and the transition from one district to another. In
addition, the following design guidelines are required:
a) Building facades.
1] The exterior building envelope shall be articulated
to create interest. Buildings should be designed to be
viewed from all sides.
2] Walls without relief or ornament are not permitted
along the main roadway and if visible from a right-ofway or accessway shall be articulated by details in
masonry courses, window openings, or other visual
devices.
3] Building facades greater than 50 feet in length,
including separate buildings that are attached, shall
incorporate one or more architectural features.
Architectural features include but are not limited to the
following:
a] Change of setback of building facade:
minimum change shall be two feet.
b] Dormers, spires and/or towers.
c] Bay windows or similar features.
d] Change in building material.
e] Change in wall plane or feature angles.
f] Change in roof style and/ or height.
g] Change of building height.
b) Criteria for exterior materials include:
1] Glass may not exceed 60% of the total exterior wall
area of the building.
10
2] Stucco and synthetic stucco may not exceed 10% of
the total exterior wall area excluding glass areas and
openings.
3] A single dominant material should comprise at least
30% and no more than 80% of the exterior wall area
excluding glass areas and openings.
4] Painted standard CMU and exposed standard CMU
shall not be permitted except within 24 inches of the final
grade.
5] Dominant exterior materials may include wood,
brick, stone or stone veneer ( cultured stone or equivalent),
glass, stucco and synthetic stucco, or modular masonry
units.
6] Dominant exterior building materials may not
include aluminum siding, vinyl siding, smooth -faced CMU,
or highly reflective/mirrored glass.
7] Dominant facade colors shall be complementary to
the architectural style of the building. Detailed elevations
with facade treatment examples, complete with color
choices, shall be submitted to the Township for review
during the land development process. Trim and accent
colors should be considered as part of the overall color and
material palette. Colors, utilized specifically in the
branding of identity of an establishment, such as logos or
emblems, will be given special consideration by the
Township.
c) There shall be no uninterrupted length of facade that
exceeds 50 feet.
d) In developments with multiple buildings, building designs
may not be identical. Buildings should create a cohesive
community and diversity by using similar elements while
not building the same building multiple times. Diversity
can be attained by variation in the building height and use,
material and color. Diversity can be attained by variation
in the building height and use, material and color.
e) Variations and features at the roofline may be used to
screen HVAC equipment, and provide interest. Vegetated
roofs and roof decks are encouraged.
11
0 All ground -mounted HVAC units or other utility equipment
shall be screened. This shall be accomplished using
durable walls and landscaping.
16) Design guidelines for buildings developed under § 182- 90.5. D.
For any new building or group of new buildings developed under § 182-
90.5. D, the following design criteria shall apply:
a) At least 50% of the front elevation of a residential building
shall be a masonry product (stone, stucco, brick, etc.).
b) Building materials including siding, masonry products,
garage doors, windows, trim, roofing and shutters shall generally
be consistent through the build -out ofthe development.
c) Exterior materials shall not include exposed natural or
painted concrete (except for basement walls) or aluminum siding.
d) Conceptual renderings depicting potential building facades
shall be submitted to the Township for review with the conditional
use application.
17) Plan Modifications. The Board of Supervisors may grant
modifications from those of Chapter 154 of this Code, Subdivision and
Land Development, provided the spirit and intent of this article and the
statement of community development objectives contained in § 182-2 are
observed.
Section II: Amendment to the Zoning Map of Upper Providence Township: The Upper
Providence Zoning Map, which is adopted as part of the Upper Providence Township
Zoning Ordinance, as amended, in Section 182- 6 is hereby amended establish the YMU
Yerkes Mixed Use District on the Tax Parcel Numbers on Attachment "A" hereto in the
area identified as " YMU Yerkes Mixed Use District".
Section III: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
Section IV: If any provision or part of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid, the
remaining provisions and parts of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby. If the
application of this ordinance or any of its provisions or parts to any persons, property or
circumstances is held invalid, the application of this ordinance to other persons, property
or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
Section V: This ordinance shall become effective five (5) days from date of adoption.
12
ENACTED AND ORDAINED THIS 4
ATTEST:
DAY OF JA/041.6 12019.
UPPER PROVIDENCE TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
Township Secretary
13
61- 00- 01207-00-
1
61- 00- 01204- 00-
4
61- 00- 01201- 00-
7
61- 00- 01198- 00-
1
61- 00- 01195- 00-
4
61- 00- 01192-00-
7
61- 00- 01190-00-
9
61- 00- 01189-00-
1
61- 00-01186-00-
4
61- 00- 01183- 00-
7
61- 00- 02590- 00-
4
61- 00-01180- 00-
1
61- 00-01177-00-
4
61- 00-01174-00-
7
61- 00-02587-00-
7
61- 00-02584-00-
1
61- 00- 02593- 00-
1
61- 00- 02566-00-
1
61- 00- 02565- 00-
2
61- 00-01041- 00-
5
61- 00-01042-00-
4
61- 00- 01045- 00-
1
61- 00- 05671- 00-
1
61- 00- 05704-00-
4
61- 00- 01039- 00-
7
61- 00-01036-00-
1
61- 00- 05725- 00-
1
61- 00- 05722- 00-
4
61- 00- 05719- 00-
7
61- 00- 05716-00-
1
61- 00- 05713- 00-
4
61- 00- 05701- 00-
7
61- 00- 05689- 00-
1
61- 00- 05692-00-
7
61- 00- 05695-00-
4
61- 00-01708- 00-
4
61- 00- 01711- 00-
1
61- 00- 05686- 00-
4
61- 00- 05677- 00-
4
61- 00- 05674- 00-
7
61- 00-05707-00-
1
ATTACHMENT "A"
14
1
Also, a parcel that fronts Route 29 opposite Perkiomen Boulevard, between Tax Parcel
Nos. 61- 00- 01201- 00-7 and 61- 00- 01198- 00- 1, and identified in Montgomery County
records as Block 61033, Unit 006 (no tax parcel number).
15
r
j( 