West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 

Table of Contents 
Page 
Article 1: General Provisions 
Section 101: Preamble 1 Section 102: Short Title 1 Section 103: Purpose Statements 1 Section 104: Community Development Objectives 2 Section 105: Application and Interpretation 2 

Article 2: Definitions 
Section 201: General Interpretation  3 Section 202: Specific Terms 3 

Article 3: Zoning  Map and Zoning  Districts 
Section 301: Establishment of Zoning Districts and Overlay Districts 36 Section 302: Official Zoning Map 36 Section 303: Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries 37 Section 304: Application of Zoning District Regulations 37 

Article 4: Zoning  District Regulations 
Section 401: Statement of Intent 39 Section 402: Agricultural Preservation District (R-1) 39 Section 403: Rural Residential District (R-2) 44 Section 404: Suburban Residential District (R-3) 48 Section 405: Village Commercial District (C-1) 52 Section 406: Limited Industrial District (I-1) 59 

Article 5: Conservation Overlay Districts 
Section 501: Statement of Intent 65 Section 502: Flood Hazard Overlay District 65 Section 503: Wetlands and Hydric Soil Overlay District 75 Section 504: Steep Slope Overlay District 76 Section 505: Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District 78 Section 506: Historical Preservation Overlay District 81 
Page 
Article 6: Residential Land Use and Development Requirements 
Section 601: Statement of Intent 84 Section 602: Single Family Detached Residential Uses 84 Section 603: Single Family Semi-Detached Residential Uses 85 Section 604: Townhouse Uses and Developments 85 Section 605: Apartment Uses and Developments 89 Section 606: Residential Lot Averaging Design for the R-1 District 92 Section 607: Residential Cluster Design for the R-2 District 97 Section 608: Residential Cluster Design for the R-3 District 101 Section 609: Group Homes 105 Section 610: Assisted Living Care, Convalescent Home or Nursing Home 106 Section 611: Manufactured Home Parks 108 Section 612: Bed and Breakfast Establishments 111 Section 613: Boarding or Rooming House 112 Section 614: Accessory Apartment for Relatives 113 Section 615: Home Occupation Regulations 114 Section 616: Mixed Use Residential and Commercial Uses 116 

Article 7: Non-Residential Land Use  and Development Requirements 
Section 701: Statement of Intent 117 Section 702: Adult Business and Entertainment Uses 117 Section 703: Agricultural Uses 119 Section 704: Airports, Heliports and Helistops 126 Section 705: Automotive Sales, Service Stations and Car Washing Facilities 126 Section 706: Banks and Financial Institutions 130 Section 707: Business and Professional Offices 131 Section 708: Business, Professional Office and Industrial Parks 131 Section 709: Club, Lodge or Social Quarters 133 Section 710: Commercial Campgrounds 134 Section 711: Commercial Communication Towers and Facilities 136 Section 712: Commercial Composting, Mulch Production and Mushroom Production 137 Section 713: Commercial Greenhouse and Tree Farm 140 Section 714: Commercial Water Resource Uses 141 Section 715: Community Center 143 Section 716: Construction Services 144 Section 717: Convenience Stores and Mini-Markets 144 Section 718: Daycare Facilities and Uses 145 Section 719: Educational Uses 150 Section 720: Emergency Services Operation 151 Section 721: Fabrication and Finishing Uses 151 Section 722: Food Processing Facility 152 Section 723: Funeral Home 153 
Page 
Section 724: Golf Courses 154 Section 725: Home Centers 155 Section 726: Horseback Riding School and Stables 156 Section 727: Hospitals, Medical Centers, Ambulatory Care Centers and Health Care Clinics 157 Section 728: Hotel or Motel Uses 158 Section 729: Incarceration Facility 159 Section 730: Junk Yard, Salvage Yard and Impoundment Facility 160 Section 731: Kennels and Animal Shelters 162 Section 732: Laundromats and Dry Cleaners 163 Section 733: Manufacturing Uses 164 Section 734: Medical, Dental, Vision, Counseling and Health Care Services 165 Section 735: Mini-Malls 166 Section 736: Municipal and Governmental Uses 167 Section 737: Nurseries and Landscaping Centers 168 Section 738: Personal Service Establishments 169 Section 739: Places of Worship, Religious Uses and Cemeteries 169 Section 740: Printing or Publishing Facilities 170 Section 741: Quarrying and Mining Operations 171 Section 742: Recreational Uses 174 Section 743: Recycling Operations 176 Section 744: Research Facilities 176 Section 745: Restaurants 177 Section 746: Retail Uses 178 Section 747: Self-Storage Units and Portable Storage Facilities 178 Section 748: Solid Waste Disposal and Reduction Facilities 180 Section 749: Truck Service and Maintenance Establishments 183 Section 750: Utilities 184 Section 751: Veterinary Hospitals 185 Section 752: Warehouse and Freight Terminal 166 Section 753: Wholesale and Distribution Uses 187 Section 754: Undefined or Other Land Uses 188 

Article 8: Supplemental Regulations 
Section 801: Statement of Intent 190 Section 802: Access to Lots, Buildings, Structures and/or Uses 190 Section 803: Accessory Uses and Structures 190 Section 804: Residential Conversion Standards 194 Section 805: Height Exceptions 195 Section 806: Front Yard and Lot Width Exceptions 195 Section 807: Flag Lots or Key Hole Lots 196 Section 808: Visibility at Intersections 197 Section 809: Corner Lot Restrictions and Requirements 197 
Page 
Section 810: Fences, Walls and Hedges 197 Section 811: Projections into Yards 198 Section 812: Non-Residential Performance Standards and Controls 199 Section 813: Landscaping 201 Section 814: Temporary Structures and Uses 201 Section 815: Commercial Drive-Through Establishments 202 Section 816: Commercial Outdoor Storage and Sales 202 Section 817: Exterior Lighting 203 Section 818: Swimming Pools and Therapeutic Spas 204 Section 819: Alternative and Emerging Energy Facilities 205 Section 820: Blasting and Detonation Requirements 212 Section 821: Domestic Livestock Use 212 Section 822: Exotic Pets 215 Section 823: Prohibited Uses 215 

Article 9: Off-Street Loading and Parking 
Section 901: Statement of Intent 216 Section 902: General Provisions for Off-street Loading and Parking 216 Section 903: Off-Street Loading Areas 218 Section 904: Off-Street Parking Areas 219 Section 905: Driveways, Private Roads, Access Lanes and Fire Lanes 225 

Article 10: Signs 
Section 1001: Statement of Intent 226 Section 1002: General Standards and Requirements for all Signs 226 Section 1003: Summarization Chart for Categorical Sign Requirements 229 Section 1004: Signs Requirements for Residential Uses 232 Section 1005: Sign Requirements for Non-Residential Uses 233 Section 1006: Off-Premises Advertising Signs or Billboards 234 Section 1007: Special Use Signs, Temporary Signs and Promotional Signs 236 Section 1008: Nonconforming Signs and Abandoned Signs 239 Section 1009: Prohibited Signs 239 

Article 11: Nonconformities 
Section 1101: Statement of Intent 241 Section 1102: Continuation 241 Section 1103: Discontinuance 241 Section 1104: Nonconforming Use of Land 241 Section 1105: Expansion of Nonconforming Use 241 Section 1106: Reconstruction 242 Section 1107: Change of Use 242 Section 1108: Nonconforming Lots of Record 242 Section 1109: Registration of Nonconformities 242 
Page 
Article 12: Administration  and Enforcement 
Section 1201: Statement of Intent 243 Section 1202: Zoning Permits, Certificates of Use and Occupancy, and Other Permits 243 Section 1203: Zoning Officer 245 Section 1204: Zoning Hearing Board 246 Section 1205: Public Hearings and Procedures 247 Section 1206: Zoning Variances 249 Section 1207: Special Exceptions 250 Section 1208: Conditional Uses 252 Section 1209: Amendments 255 Section 1210: Curative Amendments 256 Section 1211: Appeals 256 Section 1212: Filing Fees and Costs 257 Section 1213: Violations, Penalties and Remedies 257 

Matrix Charts 
Matrix Chart 1:  R-1 Zoning District: Utility and Dimensional Requirements 42 Matrix Chart 2: R-2 Zoning District: Utility and Dimensional Requirements 46 Matrix Chart 3: R-3 Zoning District: Utility and Dimensional Requirements 50 Matrix Chart 4: C-1 Zoning District: Utility and Dimensional Requirements 55 Matrix Chart 5: I-1 Zoning District: Utility and Dimensional Requirements 62 Matrix Chart 6: Dimensional Requirements for Subdivision within the R-1 Zoning District 95 Matrix Chart 7: Maximum Animal Unit Requirements for General Agricultural Uses 119 Matrix Chart 8: Maximum Animal Unit Requirements for Intensive Agricultural Uses 120 Matrix Chart 9: Convenience Store Gross Floor Area to Fuel Pump Ratio 145 Matrix Chart 10: Standard Animal Weights for Domestic Livestock Use 213 Matrix Chart 11: Off-Street Loading Space Requirements 218 Matrix Chart 12: Off-Street Parking Space Requirements 220 Matrix Chart 13: Handicapped Parking Space Requirements 223 Matrix Chart 14: Summary of Categorical Sign Requirements 230 

Article 1: General  Provisions 
Section 101:   Preamble 
An ordinance establishing regulations, specifications and restrictions for: the uses of land, watercourses and other bodies of water; the size, height, bulk, location, erection, construction, repair, maintenance, alteration, razing, removal and use of structures; the areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water to be occupied by uses and structures including areas, courts, yards and other open spaces and distances to be left unoccupied by uses and structures; and the density of population and intensity of land uses, within West Nantmeal Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania, and for said purposes dividing West Nantmeal Township into districts and prescribing certain uniform regulations for each such districts and providing for the administrative enforcement and amendment provisions in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 
Section 102:   Short Title 
This ordinance shall be known as, and may be cited as the "West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010” or as the “West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance”. 
Section 103:   Purpose 
(A) 	
The West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance has been adopted in accordance with: the requirements of  the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code; the goals, objectives and policies established within the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan; and consideration for the overall character of West Nantmeal Township regarding issues relative to growth, development, preservation and redevelopment.  In addition, the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance is designed to accomplish the following: 

(1) 	
To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: the public health, safety, general welfare, coordinated and practical community development, proper density of population, civil defense, emergency management, airports and national defense facilities, the provisions of adequate light and air, police protection, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water, sewage, schools, public grounds and other public requirements. 

(2) 	
To prevent the overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in travel and transportation as well as the loss of health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers. 

(3) 	
To identify, protect and preserve important natural features and resources, with specific emphasis upon farmland, floodplains, stream valleys, wetlands, steep slopes, woodlands and water supply. 

(4) 	
To have planned aesthetic, innovative and orderly residential growth and development by considering environmentally sensitive land areas, agricultural uses, existing land uses, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, utilities, infrastructure, groundwater recharge areas, and rural characteristics. 

(5) 	
To sustain and improve the quality of life within the community. 

(6) 	
To conserve, protect and sustain natural features, resources and ecological habitats. 

(7) 	
To preserve, protect and enhance historical, cultural and scenic resources. 

(8) 	
To protect the property rights of residents and landowners. 

(9) 	
To maintain and continue agriculture as a viable resource within West Nantmeal Township. 

(10) 	
To provide planned residential growth and development considering environmentally sensitive land areas, agricultural uses, infrastructure and the rural character of West Nantmeal Township. 

(11) 	
To provide for non-residential development by considering environmental limitations, existing land uses, infrastructure, and the rural characteristics of West Nantmeal Township. 

(12) 	
To have a diversified supply of housing that meets the existing and projected demands. 

(13) 	
To promote employment and economic development opportunities to ensure a continuation of sound economic growth. 

(14) 	
To provide community facilities and services, which meet the needs of the community while staying within fiscal budget limitations. 

(15) 	
To provide parks, recreation facilities and open space areas, which meet the needs of the residents. 

(16) 	
To plan for sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities and other public utilities in an effort to meet the needs of the community, protect the environment and compliment land use plans. 

(17) 	
To provide and maintain a safe, efficient and diversified transportations system, which optimizes mobility, improves accessibility and protects the environment. 

(18) 	
To achieve a high level of intergovernmental planning by coordinating efforts with local and regional groups within the public and private sectors. 

(19) 	
To implement the policies of the Chester County Vision Partnership Program. 

(20) 	
To implement Landscapes, the Chester County Comprehensive Policy Plan. 

(21) 	
To implement the recommendations contained within the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan. 



(B) 	
The purpose statements contained in this Zoning Ordinance are intended to provide overall guidance and direction, as well as to establish the foundation for community growth, development, preservation and redevelopment efforts in West Nantmeal Township.  Should one or more purpose statements become unfeasible or cannot be implemented for any reason, the validity of this West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance shall not be invalid or unconstitutional. 


Section 104:   Community Development Objectives 
The West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance attempts to emulate through its regulations the goals, objectives and policies of the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan.  These regulations have been established with considerations of physical characteristics, population trends, housing characteristics, existing land use, community facilities and services and existing transportation characteristics.  
Section 105:  Application and Interpretation 
(A) 	
Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure, land, watercourse, or parts thereof within West Nantmeal Township shall be used or occupied, erected, constructed, assembled, moved, removed, demolished, eliminated, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered unless in conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The provisions contained within this Zoning Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health and safety and the general welfare of the residents and occupants of West Nantmeal Township. Where the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance impose greater restrictions than those of any other municipal statute, ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be complied with. Where the provisions of any other municipal statute, ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than this Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of such other municipal statute, ordinance or regulation shall be complied with. 

(C) 	
This Zoning Ordinance contains various supplemental matrix charts that are intended to specify certain zoning requirements or summarize certain zoning requirements.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within the supplemental matrix charts, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. 

(D) 	
The state and federal requirements for code enforcement, construction, emergency management and property maintenance, as adopted by West Nantmeal Township, shall supersede the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 



Article 2: Definitions 
Section 201:  General Interpretation. 
(A) 	
Certain terms and words are defined under Section 202 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The following guidelines shall be utilized to interpret the terminology of this Zoning Ordinance: 

(1) 	
Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. 

(2) 	
Words in the singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the singular. 

(3) 	
Words in the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter. 

(4) 	
The word "shall", “must” or “will” is mandatory. 

(5) 	
The word "may" or “should” is permissive. 

(6) 	
The word "person" includes “individual”, “corporation”, “partnership”, “organization”, “association”, “trust”, or other similar entities. 

(7) 	
The words "used for" include "designed for", "arranged for", "intended for", "maintained for", or "occupied for". 

(8) 	
The word "building" shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof". 

(9) 	
The word “structure” includes “building” and shall be construed as if followed by the phrase “or part thereof”. 

(10) 	
The word “street” includes “expressway”, “arterial”, “highway”, “thoroughfare”, “avenue”, “boulevard”, “court”, “lane” and “road”. 

(11) 	
The word “watercourse” includes “channel”, “creek”, “ditch”, “drain”, “dry run”, “spring”, “stream” and “swale”. 



(B) 	
Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of standard usage. 


Section 202:   Specific Terms 
The terms or words used in this Zoning Ordinance shall be construed as defined below. When terms or words are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context may imply. 
Abandoned Vehicle:  Any inoperable vehicle lacking a current state license or inspection sticker, as further regulated by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.  
Abandonment: The relinquishment of property, or the cessation of the use thereon for a continuous period of time, with or without the intention to resume the said use.  The act of abandonment shall also apply to the intent to abandon a use at any given time during occupancy of that use. 
Abut:	  The state of being side by side, next to or adjoining one another.   
Access Drive:  An improved cartway or paved service road designed to provide vehicular access between the public road and the off-street parking area for the designated use. 
Access Point: A clearly defined point of ingress and egress for vehicles at the street line. 
Accessory Building or Structure: A building or structure subordinate to the principal building or principal structure on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the principal use. 
Accessory Use: A subordinate use of a portion of a lot, which is customarily incidental to the main or principal use of land or of a building on a lot. 
Acre: Forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. 
Act:  The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended and codified. 
Act 247: The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended and codified. 
Act 537: The Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, as may be amended from time to time. 
Act 537 Plan: The West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with Pennsylvania Act 537, as amended. 
Adjacent: The state of being side by side, next to or adjoining one another. 
Administrative Office(s): An establishment primarily engaged in overall management and supervisory functions, such as executive, personnel, finance, legal and sales activities, typically performed in a single location or building for other branches or divisions of the same company. 
ADT (Average Daily Traffic): The average number of vehicles that pass over a given point per day. 
Adult Business Use or Adult Entertainment Use: Any adult arcades, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult novelty stores, adult video stores, escort agencies, nude model studios, sexual encounter centers, non-therapeutic massage parlor, or other similar adult business uses or adult entertainment uses, whereas, under the provisions of West Nantmeal Township and the State Obscenity Code, as amended, must exclude minors or may not knowingly disseminate to minors.  The following sub-definitions shall specifically apply to “adult business uses or adult entertainment uses”: 
Adult Arcade or Mini-Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building offering video presentations distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons within private viewing booths and/or by use of token, coin-operated viewing booths, projectors, video machines, or other electronic media sources projectors, as defined by West Nantmeal Township and/or the State Obscenity Code, as amended. 
Adult Bookstore and Adult Novelty Store: A commercial establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade (for sale or rental) books, magazines, periodical, photographs, films, videos, motion pictures, slides or similar materials, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined by West Nantmeal Township and/or the State Obscenity Code, as amended.  An adult bookstore and/or adult novelty store may include the sale of instruments, devices, novelties or paraphernalia, which are designed for the use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult Cabaret:  A nightclub, bar, club, restaurant tavern, theater, or similar commercial establishments, which features: persons who appear in the state of nudity or semi-nudity; live performances which are categorized by the exposure of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and/or films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, which are categorized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult Establishment:  An adult business use and/or an adult entertainment use, as permitted under the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance. 
Adult Theater:  A theater, concert hall, auditorium, business, or similar commercial establishment, which features:  persons who appear in the state of nudity or semi-nudity; live performances which are categorized by the exposure of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and/or films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, which are categorized by the depiction or description of  specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort:  A person who, for consideration, agrees, or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie, or to privately perform a striptease for another person.  
Escort Agency:  A person or business association, who or which furnishes, offer, or advertises to furnish escorts for a fee, tip, or other consideration, as part of its business. 
Nude Model Studio: Any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state of nudity, or displays specific anatomic areas, and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons, who may pay money or any other form of consideration.  
Nudity or State of Nudity: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, the showing of the female breast with less than fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, or as defined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Seminude or Seminude Condition:  The state of dress in which clothing partially or transparently covers or exposes specified anatomical areas. 
Sexual Encounter Center: A business or commercial enterprise that as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex: activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in the state of nudity or semi-nudity; any variation of “mud wrestling”; or any sexual encounter activities defined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Sexually Oriented Business:  Any adult business or entertainment use. 
Specific Anatomical Areas:  Human genitals, pubic region, anus, buttocks, female breasts(s) below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or human male genitals (covered or uncovered) in a discernibly turgid state, or as defined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Specified Sexual Activities: Activities including: the fondling or other erotic touching of human genital, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the sexual activities set forth in this Zoning Ordinance; or any specified sexual activities defined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
State Obscenity Code:  Section 5903, Title 18, Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, as amended. 
Agricultural Operation: An enterprise that is actively engaged in the commercial production and preparation for market of crops, livestock and livestock products and in the production, harvesting and preparation for market or use of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and aquacultural crops and commodities. The term includes an enterprise that implements changes in production practices and procedures or types of crops, livestock, livestock products or commodities produced consistent with practices and procedures that are normally engaged by farmers or are consistent with technological development within the agricultural industry. 
Agriculture (General): The cultivation of the soil and the raising and harvesting of the products of the soil, including but not limited to nursery, horticulture, forestry and animal husbandry.  This Zoning Ordinance outlines the limitations for general agricultural activities.  These limitations shall not disrupt any of the rights and privileges established under the Pennsylvania Agricultural Security Act, the Right to Farm Law, the Nutrient Management Law, and the Agriculture Communities and Rural Environment (ACRE) Law. 
Agriculture (Intensive): Specialized agricultural activities, including but not limited to mushroom, swine, dairy, beef and poultry production, and any other livestock production, which due to the intensity of production or raw material storage needs, necessitate special control of operation, raw material storage and processing, and disposal of liquid and solid wastes. Intensive agricultural activities shall also include general agricultural activities exceeding the standards and specifications outlined under this Zoning Ordinance. This Zoning Ordinance also outlines the limitations for intensive agricultural activities.  These limitations shall not disrupt any of the rights and privileges established under the Pennsylvania Agricultural Security Act, the Right to Farm Law, the Nutrient Management Law, and the Agriculture Communities and Rural Environment (ACRE) Law. 
Agronomic: The science and technology of utilizing plants for food, fuel, feed, and fiber in a sustainable environment by applying the sciences of biology, chemistry, ecology, earth science, and genetics. 
Aquaculture: The raising and harvesting freshwater and saltwater organisms including mollusks, crustaceans and aquatic plants under controlled conditions. 
Horticulture:  The cultivation of fruits, vegetables, flowers and ornamental plants. 
Hydroponics: The growing of plants without soil in water to which nutrients have been added.  Other names for hydroponics are soil-less gardening, soil-less culture, chemiculture, and water gardening. 
Silvaculture:  The science of controlling the establishment, growth, composition, health, and quality of forests over land areas, which are generally not suitable for a sustainable forest. 
Airport: A private, public or commercial facility utilized for the landing and takeoff of aircraft including any appurtenant areas utilized as airport buildings or navigation facilities, which are permitted in accordance with local, state and federal regulations. 
Alteration(s):  Any change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, joists, rafters, headers, or enclosed walls, or any enlargement or modification thereof, whether by extension on any side or by an increase in height, or the moving of such building from one location or position to another, or any other change of use of a building or a lot.  All permitted alterations shall comply with the appropriate building codes adopted by West Nantmeal Township. 
Alternative and Emerging Energy Facilities: A private facility capable of converting solar, water, wind, wood, fire and/or other emerging green technology source into a viable energy source for a permitted use in accordance with the provisions and design criteria specified under Section 819 of this Zoning Ordinance. The following definitions shall specifically apply to “alternative and emerging energy facilities”: 
Alternative Energy:  A source of energy generated from solar, water, wind, geothermal or similar sources, which is capable of providing energy and utility provisions to a permitted use. 
Alternative Energy Facility: A private facility capable of converting solar, water, wood, fire and/or wind into a viable energy source and utility provisions for a permitted use.  Such facilities may include solar panels, wind turbines, geothermal systems and/or other similar alternative energy facilities. 
Applicant:  A person or entity filing an application for an alternative and/or emerging energy facility. 
Attached Alternative Energy Facility: A facility that is physically mounted, attached and/or connected (except utility and energy transfer connections) to a permitted principal building in accordance with all pertinent zoning, utility and building code requirements. 
Emerging Energy: A source of energy generated from a renewable or green technology source, other than solar, water, wind or geothermal sources, which is capable of providing energy and utility provisions to a permitted use. 
Emerging Energy Facility: A private facility capable of converting renewable or green technology energy sources into a viable energy source and utility provisions for a permitted use. 
Facility Owner: The entity or entities having an ownership interest in the alternative and/or emerging energy facility, including their successors and assigns. 
Freestanding Alternative Energy Facility: A facility that is not physically mounted, attached and/or connected (except utility and energy transfer connections) to a permitted principal building. All such facilities shall be considered a separate or accessory structure that has the abilities to convert and convey energy to the principal use in accordance with all pertinent zoning, utility and building code requirements. 
Hub Height:  The distance measured from the surface of the tower foundation to the height of the wind turbine hub, to which the blade or other accessory components are attached. 
Landowner: Any person(s) or entity owning property within the Township. 
Non-Participating Landowner:  Any landowner except those on whose property all or a portion of an alternative and/or emerging energy facility is located pursuant to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Occupied Building: A building located on a parcel of land utilized as a permitted use in accordance with the provisions of the Township. 
Operator: The entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the alternative and/or emerging energy facility. 
Private Energy and Utility Provider: A principal use owned, operated and/or maintained by a private or independent utility company for the purposes of providing energy within a defined service area or grid system in accordance with the provisions established by the Public Utility Commission and the Public Utility Code. 
Turbine Height:  The distance measured from the surface of the tower foundation to the lowest and/or highest point of the turbine rotor plane. 
Wind Energy Facility: An electric generating facility, whose main purpose is to convert and supply electricity to a permitted use.  Such facilities may include wind turbines, blades, spirals, helixes and/or other accessory wind generating structures, which may also include buildings, substations, meteorological towers, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and other appurtenant structures and facilities. 
Wind Turbine:  A wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy into electricity through the use of a generator, which may include a nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer pad, blades, spirals, helixes and/or and the supporting energy apparatus. 
Wood-Fired Boiler: An alternative energy facility designed to burn clean wood or other permitted solid fuels, which transfers heated air or liquid through a piping or ventilation system.  All such systems are generally contained within an accessory structure that is not intended for habitation by humans or animals.  An outdoor wood-fired boiler may also be known as outdoor wood-fired furnaces, outdoor wood-burning appliances, outdoor hydraulic heaters and/or water stoves. 
Ambulatory Care Center: A medical facility including lands and buildings not part of a hospital in which a variety of outpatient medical services not including emergency medical services are provided to persons including: occupational therapy; physical therapy and rehabilitation; physical fitness and cardiac rehabilitation; speech therapy; hearing testing; behavior modification; outpatient surgery and procedures not requiring hospitalization; renal dialyses; dental care; laboratory procedures, include blood draw, collection of other bodily fluids and analysis thereof; eye care; sports medicine clinic; and similar medical provider services.  Transport of patients by helicopter to or from an ambulatory care facility or by other emergency medical support vehicles with sirens or other audible warning systems engaged shall be prohibited. 
Animal Shelter: A facility owned, operated or maintained by an individual, association, humane society, animal welfare society or other non-profit organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals. 
Animal Husbandry:  The raising and keeping of farm animals for any commercial purpose.  The keeping of livestock and poultry as farm pets for domestic purposes shall not be considered as animal husbandry. 
Animal Unit: Farm animals or livestock equaling 1,000 pounds of body weight of any species. 
Antenna: A transmitting and/or receiving device utilized for communication. 
Antenna Height: The vertical distance measured from the average grade plane adjacent to the footings or support structure of the base of the antenna to the highest point of the structure.  If the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height. 
Antenna Support Structure:  Any pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod or any other structure which supports a device used in the transmitting or receiving communications. 
Applicant:  A landowner, equitable landowner, developer or authorized agent of the landowner, who has filed an application for development including his heirs, successors and assigns. 
Application for Development: Every application, whether preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of construction or development including but not limited to an application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan or for the approval of a development plan. 
Appointing Authority: The West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors. 
Architect: An architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Assisted Living Facility:  A building, complex or distinct part thereof designed to foster assisted living and consisting of self-contained living units where services are available to support resident independence, autonomy, and aging in place in the least restrictive environment possible, including where cognitive support services are required. The residence promotes resident self-direction and active participation in decision-making while emphasizing individuality, privacy and dignity. The term includes housing required to be licensed under the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development assisted living conversion program. The term does not include a personal care home, domiciliary care home, publicly financed housing, an independent living community, or a housing unit in a continuing care retirement community certified by the Insurance Department, where residents of such homes or units contract for services directly. Assisted Living Facilities are licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare. 
Attic: That part of a building, which is immediately below and wholly or partly within the roof framing. 
Automobile Sales: Any building or land area devoted to the sale of three (3) or more new or used vehicles at any given time, including customary service and repair facilities within an enclosed building. 
Automobile Service Station: Any building or land area devoted to the repair, servicing, restoration, reconstruction and maintenance of vehicles, including the retail sale of gasoline, motor oil, car washes, batteries and other similar vehicular accessories. 
Barn: A structure utilized for the storage of farm products, agricultural equipment, animal feed and/or the housing of farm animals. 
Basement: That portion of a building that is partly or completely below the grade plane.  A basement shall be considered a story above grade plane when the finished surface of the floor above the basement is as follows: more than six (6) feet above the grade plane; more than six (6) feet above the finished ground level for more than 50 percent of the total building perimeter; and/or more than twelve (12) feet above the finished ground level at any point. 
Bed and Breakfast: The use and occupancy of a single-family detached dwelling for the purpose of accommodating transient guests for compensation or rent up to a maximum of ten (10) consecutive days. 
Block: A tract of land or a lot or group of lots bounded by streets, public parks, railroad rights-of-way, water courses or bodies of water, boundary lines of West Nantmeal Township, or by any combination of the above. 
Board: The Board of Supervisors of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania. 
Board of Supervisors:  The West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors, Chester County, Pennsylvania. 
Boarding House:  A single-family dwelling containing not more than three (3) guest rooms or suites, where lodging is provided with or without meals, for compensation over a period of time exceeding one (1) week. 
Buffer Yard:  A continuous strip of land, which is clear of all buildings and paved areas and is adequately landscaped in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance. 
Building:  Any combination of material forming any structure, which is erected on the ground and designed to be affixed thereto, whereas the framed components or structural parts are designed for the complete enclosure (with walls and a roof) and support for individuals, animals or property of any kind. 
Building Area: The total area taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of all primary and accessory buildings on a lot, excluding unroofed porches, paved terraces, steps, eaves and gutters, but including all enclosed extensions.  The definition of “building area” should not be considered synonymous or be compared with the subordinate definitions for “lot area” including “lot area (building)”. 
Building Coverage:  The percentage of a lot covered by principal and accessory buildings. 
Building Envelope: The area of a lot that has no building or construction restrictions such as, building set back requirements, rights-of-way, easements, floodplains, wetlands, slopes over 20 percent in grade, or similar restrictions as defined in this Zoning Ordinance.  
Building Frontage:  The front of a building considering the location of the main entrance and the public street providing access.  For corner lots, the building frontage shall be established along both streets to which the building has frontage or access. 
Building Height:  The vertical distance measured from the grade plane to the average roof height, as further defined by the appropriate building codes adopted by West Nantmeal Township. 
Building Length:  The longest horizontal dimension of a building, as measured in a single straight direction. 
Building Permit:  A statement issued and signed by the Zoning Officer and Building Code Official authorizing the erection, construction, alteration, conversion, replacement or enlargement of a building or structure in accordance with the pertinent codes adopted by West Nantmeal Township. 
Building Setback: The minimum distance a building or structure must be set back from the ultimate street right-of­way line (where it exists) or from the street legal right-of-way line (where the ultimate right-of-way does not exist) of the street immediately adjacent thereto. 
Building Setback Line: The line within a property establishing the minimum required distance between any building or structure, or portions thereof, to be erected or altered and a street right-of-way (except the right-of-way of a service street). The distance shall be measured at right angles from the street right-of-way line, which abuts the property, and the building setback line shall be parallel to said right-of-way line. 
Business, Professional Office and Industrial Park: A group of mixed uses located within a planned non-residential development, which are principally related to business, professional office and industrial uses, as further specified and regulated under Section 708 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Caliper or Caliper at Breast Height: The diameter of a tree trunk, as measured fifty-four (54) inches from the ground surface. 
Car Washing Facility: A commercial facility to clean the exterior or interior portion of automobiles, which may include self-service facilities or full-service facilities as a principal use or subordinate use. 
Carport: A building open on two (2) or more sides and used in association with a dwelling for the storage of private motor vehicles. 
Cartway:  The portion of a street right-of-way, whether paved or unpaved designed for vehicular use. 
Cemetery:  Land used or intended to be used for the burial of human or animal remains, which may include columbariums, crematoriums, mausoleums, mortuaries and memorial gardens when operated and maintained within the boundary of such cemetery. 
Certificate of Occupancy: A statement issued and enforced by the authorized Zoning Officer and/or Building Code Official, whereas upon the completion, conversion, extension or modification of a new building or existing building, a certificate of compliance is issued and the building can be lawfully occupied for the intended use or activity. 
Child:  An individual considered by law to be a minor that is under eighteen (18) years of age.  For the purposes of a daycare center or facility, a child shall be considered any person who is under fifteen (15) years of age. 
Church:  A building used for public worship by a congregation, excluding buildings used primarily for residential, educational, burial, recreational or other uses not normally associated with worship. 
Clear Cutting:  The removal or destruction of all vegetation from an area of land, or the removal or cutting of woodlands in accordance with the provisions specified under Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance.  
Clear Sight Triangle: An area of unobstructed vision at a street intersection, as prescribed by West Nantmeal Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, which shall be measured thirty (30) inches above the ground elevation and under ten (10) feet below ground elevation, which is further defined by a line of sight between points at the centerlines of a street at the point of intersection of the proposed street. 
Club, Lodge or Social Quarters:  An association of persons for some common nonprofit activity, not including groups organized primarily to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
Private Club or Country Club: Land and buildings containing private or semi-private recreation facilities, social quarters, restaurants, meeting rooms, banquet facilities, bars, taprooms, and similar uses, for the exclusive use of the members and their guests. 
Social Club or Lodge: Land and buildings containing recreation facilities, social quarters, restaurants, meeting rooms, banquet facilities, bars, taprooms, and similar uses, owned and operated by non-profit organizations for the exclusive use of the members or guests. 
Commercial Campground:  A commercial use involving a parcel of land, which is temporarily occupied by more than two (2) campsites during specified seasons, including tents and recreation vehicles. 
Commercial Communication Towers and Facilities: The structural components, antennae and framework utilized for the transmission and/or reception of radio, television, microwave or other communication signals.  The facilities include the equipment necessary for the receipt, transmission and/or relay of such signals.  Examples include, but are not limited to, cellular phone, transmitting devices and radio transmission, reception and relay equipment. 
Commercial Composting: A commercial use involving the accumulation, processing, packaging and/or distribution of biodegradable and organic materials from approved uses including: mushroom production uses; municipal uses; landscaping uses; nursery uses; forestry uses; agricultural uses; and other similar uses, as determined appropriate by West Nantmeal Township. 
Commercial Drive-Through Establishment: A permitted commercial use, where the patrons have the option to be provided services without leaving their vehicle, as per the provisions of Section 815 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Commercial Greenhouse: A retail or wholesale business operation devoted to the raising and/or selling of trees, ornamental shrubs, flowers, houseplants, and similar items, for transplanting, along with the sale of ancillary supplies, wherein the growing operation is conducted indoors. 
Commercial Schools: An educational facility carried on as a business and not operated by a public agency.  The range of curriculums can include, but not limited to, academic instruction, business, technical programs, art, music, dance, language, and other similar commercial school uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Commercial Use: A use or activity that includes, but not limited to, retail sales, businesses, offices, personal services, banks, financial institutions, restaurants, communications, recreation, and other similar commercial uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Commercial Water Resource Use: The exportation of naturally occurring surface water or groundwater exceeding an average volume of 5,000 gallons or more per day, which is transported off-site for other purposes. 
Commercial Vehicle: Any motor vehicle utilized for a business or trade activity of any kind, including construction, excavating, earthmoving equipment, or similar equipment, regardless of the use, excluding a Class I and II motor vehicle, which is properly licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Common Open Space: A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and water, within a development, designed and intended for use or enjoyment of all residents of the development in which it is located.  
Common Parking Area: A designated area for the parking of vehicles serving a multi-family residential development or a planned non-residential development containing more than one (1) use. 
Common Wall:  Any wall located on a lot or parcel line between adjacent buildings, which is used or adapted for joint service between the two (2) buildings.  The term “common wall” shall be synonymous with the term “party wall”. 
Community Center: A public or quasi-public municipal, institutional or recreational use devoted exclusively to accommodate one or more group activities, including but not limited to, civic, social, recreational, educational, or cultural, or other similar activities determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer. 
Comprehensive Plan. The West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan, or any part thereof, as adopted by the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors. 
Conditional Use:  A use in a particular zoning district by approval of the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the specific criteria set forth in this Zoning Ordinance. 
Conservation Overlay Districts:  Overlay provisions established to consider conservation management, environmental resource protection, natural resources, and open space preservation.  These provisions are intended to supplement and enhance the existing underlying zoning district regulations for certain land areas and water features including: floodplains; wetlands and hydric soils; steep slopes; woodlands; and historical resources. 
Conservation Use: The preservation and utilization of land and surface water as wildlife habitats, forests, farmland, meadows, wetlands, lakes, streams, rivers, and other similar uses or features that involve no site improvements other than those required for education, recreation or municipal uses. 
Construction:  The placement of materials and equipment in a defined area to be assembled, built, applied and/or demolished in a temporary or permanent manner, as approved by the designated officials of West Nantmeal Township. 
Convalescent Home: A facility primarily designed to provide a home-like environment while patients recover from long term illnesses or medical procedures in accordance with the provisions specified under Section 610 of this Zoning Ordinance. Convalescent homes may provide a combination of medical services and support staff. 
Convenience Store or Mini-Market: A building with less than 10,000 square feet in gross floor area, which is opened to the general public for up to 24 hours per day and designed and intended to be utilized solely for both the retail sale within the building of limited food items, beverages, take-out only delicatessen, newspapers, magazines, and incidental personal care items (but excluding the sale of prescription drugs and clothing) and the location within the building of not more than two ATM banking machines for the convenience of the general public, and the retail sale of gasoline outside of the building when dispensed from gasoline fueling positions located under a canopy. 
Conversion: To change or adapt land or structures to a different use, occupancy or purpose. 
County: The County of Chester, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
County Planning Commission: The Chester County Planning Commission. 
Courtyard or Court:  A portion of a lot unoccupied above grade but partially or wholly surrounded by the walls of a structure or buildings. 
Critical Environmental Area: An area of land or water with one or more of the following characteristics: steep slopes; floodplain; wetlands; hydric soils; high water table soils; land subject to hazardous, municipal or industrial waste; fault areas; sinkholes; stream corridors; estuaries; habitats of endangered species; and/or other protected areas, species or habitats listed on the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory. 
Curb Line: The point where the face of the curb meets the edge of the cartway.  If no curb exists, the curbline shall be considered the edge of the improved cartway. 
Curative Amendment:  A proposed zoning amendment that is filed with the Board of Supervisors by any landowner/applicant who desires to challenge on substantial grounds the validity of an ordinance which prohibits or restricts the use or the development of land in which the landowner/applicant has an interest. 
Customary Household Pets: Domesticated animals which are customarily kept in or in conjunction with a dwelling unit by the owners or residents, including but not limited to, cats, dogs, rabbits, pigs, small birds, fish and other similar pets normally sold by retail pet stores. 
Daycare Facilities and Uses: The offering of care or supervision to minors or adults with special needs.  The following sub-categories are related to daycare facilities and uses: 
Family Child Daycare Home:  A home other than a child’s own home operated for profit or not for profit in which child daycare is provided at one time to four (4) to six (6) children unrelated to the operator.  All such uses shall comply with the provisions specified under Section 718.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Group Child Daycare Home:  A home other than a child’s own home operated for profit or not for profit in which child daycare is provided at one time to more than six (6) children but less than thirteen (13) children who are unrelated to the operator.   All such uses shall comply with the provisions specified under Section 718.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Child Daycare Center: A premises in which care is provided at any one time to seven (7) or more children unrelated to the operator.  All such uses shall comply with the provisions specified under Section 718.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Adult Care Facility: A facility which provides supervision and/or instruction on a daily basis for one (1) or more individuals who have a physical or mental disability who are not related to the care giver or operator, where tuition, fees or other forms of compensation are charged, whether governmental subsidized and/or licensed and whether operated for profit or not for profit.  An adult care facility may also be referred to as an adult training facility. All such uses shall comply the provisions specified under Section 718.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Deck: An open or partially enclosed structure attached or connected to a permitted use, which is constructed in accordance with the building codes of West Nantmeal Township. 
Dedication:  The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for general public use. 
Deed: A written document whereby an estate in real property is described, conveyed and recorded. 
Deed Restriction:  Clauses included in a deed or other recorded document, which restricts, controls or limits the general use of a defined parcel of land or development. 
Density: The total number of residential dwelling units per acre or lot area. 
Developer: Any landowner, agent of such landowner, equitable owner, or tenant with the permission of the landowner, for whom subdivision or land development plans are being or have been made. 
Development:  Any man made change to improved or unimproved land, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the installation of utilities, filling, grading, paving, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling operations. 
Development Plan: A proposal for the development of land, prepared in accordance with the provisions specified by West Nantmeal Township, including a plan for subdivision or land development, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and public facilities.  The phrase "provisions of the development plan" when used in this Zoning Ordinance shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition. 
District: A designated portion of West Nantmeal Township within which certain uniform regulations, permitted uses, procedural requirements, utility provisions and dimensional specifications, or combinations thereof, as they apply under the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Domesticated Animal: Any dog, cat, equine animal, bovine animal, sheep, goat, snake, lizard or porcine animal. 
Domestic Livestock Use: Any activity involving the breeding, raising, caring for, housing, hobby/personal use of domestic animals and products derived from those animals by the occupant, owner or lessee of the lot on which such use is located.  Such animals may include, but need not be limited to, equine species such as horses and ponies, camelids such as llamas and alpacas, and other species not defined as household pets or regulated elsewhere in this Ordinance.  A domestic livestock use shall not include breeding, raising, caring for, housing and hobby/personal use of wild or dangerous animals which are regulated by federal or state law.  A domestic livestock use shall be accessory to a single family detached dwelling located on the same lot. This definition excludes all commercial animal operations such as, but not limited to, livestock production for wholesale and retail markets, boarding and riding stables, kennels and liveries. 
Drive-Through Establishment:  A permitted commercial use, where the patrons have the option to be provided services without leaving their vehicle, as per the provisions of Section 815 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Driveway: A privately owned and improved access drive, which provides vehicular access between a public road or an approved private road into the lot or parcel of land. 
Dry Cleaners:  A commercial use and facility where clothing or fabrics are cleaned and pressed utilizing non-aqueous solvents, solutions or other accepted practices. 
Dwelling: A building or structure or portion thereof arranged, intended, designed or used as the living quarters for one 
(1) or more families living independently of each other.  Such buildings as hospitals, hotels, boarding, rooming, lodging houses, nursing homes, motels and institutional residences are not included in the definition of dwelling. The following dwelling types are further defined as follows: 
Single-Family Detached Dwelling:  A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied exclusively as a residence for one (1) family and having no common wall with an adjacent building. 
Single-Family Semi-Detached Dwelling: A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied exclusively as a residence for two (2) families, one (1) family living on each side of a vertical common wall. 
Multi-Family Dwelling: A building arranged, designed and intended to be occupied exclusively as a residence for three (3) or more families.  Individual dwelling units may share up to three (3) common or party walls with other units and either have a common outside access areas or have individual outside access areas.  Types of such buildings shall include townhouses, apartments and/or condominiums. 
Townhouse: A building arranged, designed and intended to be occupied exclusively as a residence for one (1) family, which is one (1) of a group of three (3) or more such buildings, placed side by side and separated by unpierced vertical common walls, each dwelling having at least one (1) separate entrance from the outside. 
Apartment Building: A building on a single lot arranged, designed and intended to be occupied as a residence for two (2) or more families, and in which the dwelling units may be separated horizontally and/or vertically. 
Condominium:  Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common open space solely for the owners of those portions, created under either the Pennsylvania Unit Property Act, as amended, or the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, as amended. 
Manufactured Home: A structure that is transportable in one or more sections built on a permanent chassis, designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities, and constructed to the Federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards and rules and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. The term also includes mobile homes, park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures that are place on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer. 
Modular Home: A structure designed primarily for residential occupancy, which is wholly or partially made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly on the building site.   
Accessory Apartment for Relatives: An attached component or living area of a permitted single-family dwelling, located on a conforming lot, which is occupied by a relative of the occupants of the single-family dwelling. 
Dwelling Unit: A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Earth Disturbance Activity:  A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, building construction and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials. 
Easement: A defined parcel area of land or right-of-way, which is granted or conveyed for the limited use of land for public, quasi-public or private purposes. 
Educational Use: A use having one or more of the following purposes: to educate or instruct individuals in a school setting with instruction directed towards academic, moral, intellectual, mental, physical and vocational instruction. Excepted from this definition are uses devoted to driver training schools, heavy equipment training schools, riding schools, private recreational uses, day-care centers, and other uses that are not considered academic in character. 
Egress: A point of exit from a property. 
Electric Substation: An assemblage of equipment for purposes other than generation or utilization through which electric energy in bulk is passed for the purpose of switching or modifying its characteristics to meet the need of the general public. 
Elevation: The horizontal alignment of a surface above mean sea level, as it exists in pre-development conditions or as it is proposed in post development conditions. 
Centerline Elevation:  The elevation of the street at the midpoint of the street. 
First Floor Elevation:  The elevation of the level of living space at the main entrance of the building. 
Garage Elevation:  The elevation of the garage floor at the center of the garage door. 
Emergency Services Operation:  A use that is principally devoted to emergency response or emergency management services, including structures and facilities for fire departments, police stations, ambulance stations, emergency management operations and community response networks. 
Employees: The total number of workers (including both part-time and full-time) present on a parcel of land at any given time, other than temporary or occasional construction workers. 
Engineer: A professional engineer, licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Environmental Impact Assessment Report: A detailed written report that provides discussion of significant environmental impacts and provides reasonable alternatives, which would avoid or minimize adverse impacts or enhance the quality of the environment. 
Erosion:  The removal of soil, rock or surface particles by the action of water, wind, ice or other agents. 
Essential Services: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by a public utility, municipality or governmental agency for general utility services, including gas, electric, steam, water, sewage disposal, telephone and similar utility services, excluding telecommunication and wireless communication providers. 
Exotic Animal: Any animal or species prohibited by Title 50, Code of Federal Regulations, or otherwise controlled by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.  The term includes any animal which is wild, fierce, dangerous, noxious or naturally inclined to do harm.  “Wild animals” however domesticated, shall also include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Dog family (Canidae): all except domesticated dogs, including wolf, fox, coyote, dingo, wolf hybrids, etc.  
(2)  Cat family (Felidae): all except commonly accepted domestic cats, including lions, pumas, panthers,  
mountain lions, leopards, jaguars, ocelots, margays, tigers, wild cats, etc.  
(3)  Bears (Ursidae): all bears, including grizzly bears, brown bears, black bears, etc.  
(4)  Raccoons (Procyonidae): all raccoons and civets.  
(5)  Porcupine (Erethizontidae): all porcupines.  
(6)  Skunks.  
(7)  Snakes: all venomous and constricting snakes.   

(8) 
Venomous lizards.  

(9) 
Crocodilians: all alligators, caimans, crocodiles, gavials, etc. 

(10) 
Venomous fish and piranha. 

(11) 
Venomous invertebrates. 


Fabrication and Finishing Use: An industrial facility and use in which woods, metals and other materials are joined, assembled, welded, brazed, soldered, coated, wrapped, blended and/or converted utilizing machines, equipment, chemicals, heat, water, lasers, plasma and/or other accepted techniques.  
Facade: The front of a building facing a public or private street or any other building face that is given special architectural treatment. 
Family: A family, which may include: one (1) person occupying a single dwelling; two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together in single dwelling and maintaining it as a functional common household; and/or a group of not more than four (4) persons unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption, living together in single dwelling and maintaining it as a functional common household.  The term “family” shall be deemed to include any domestic employees or gratuitous guests but shall not include any roomer, boarder, lodger or persons residing in a group home. 
Farm: An area of land, including all buildings, accessory buildings, farm buildings and permitted residential use(s), which are utilized as part of an agricultural operation. 
Farm Animals: The raising and ownership of poultry, sheep, goats, swine, cattle, horses, and other similar animals, which are common to a farm or an agricultural use, as specified by this Zoning Ordinance.  This term shall not be construed to be synonymous with the term “domestic livestock use”. 
Farm Building: A barn, silo or any building used for the storage of agricultural equipment or farm produce, or housing livestock or poultry.  The term "farm building" shall not include dwellings. 
Farm-Related Business: A business substantially devoted to serving an agricultural operation on a farm, as further regulated by this Zoning Ordinance. 
Farm-Support Business: An accessory business that is not substantially devoted to serving an agricultural operation on a farm, which is intended to provide supplemental income, as further regulated by this Zoning Ordinance. 
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States of America. 
Fence: A manmade barrier placed or arranged as a line of demarcation between lots or to enclose a lot or portion thereof.  The term "fence" shall be deemed to include a wall. 
Financial Institution: A bank, savings and loan association, savings bank, investment company, philanthropic foundation, credit union, or the office of an investment manager, investment banker, or securities broker or dealer.  This term shall exclude pawn shops and non-bank operations that provide check-cashing services and advances on pay checks. 
Fire Apparatus Access Road: A road that provides fire apparatus access from the fire station to a facility, building, land area, or portion thereof in accordance with the provisions of the International Fire Code.  This is a general term inclusive of all other terms such as fire lane, public street, private street, parking lot lane and access roadway. 
Flagpole: A flagstaff designed and solely intended for the patriotic display of the flag of the United States of America, or its armed forces, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any political subdivision thereof, or the flag of a group or organization, or combination thereof, and for no other purpose. A flagpole shall not include a standard antenna, a standard antenna support structure, a commercial communications antenna support structure, tower, antenna or any other structure designed, intended or capable of supporting any other use or purpose. 
Flood Hazard Overlay District:  A conservation overlay of land and water, which have been defined within the Flood Insurance Study, as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which principally include areas located along the major creeks and waterways.  The Flood Hazard Overlay District including all subordinate definitions are further defined and regulated under Section 502 of this Zoning Ordinance.  For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, the term “Flood Hazard Overlay District” shall also be referenced as the “Flood Hazard District”. 
Floor Area (Gross Floor Area). The gross floor space of the building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of wall separating buildings.  In particular, the floor area of a building or buildings shall include: basement space; all spaces other than cellar space with structural headroom of seven feet, six inches (7'6") or more; interior balconies and mezzanines; enclosed porches, terraces or other space which are attached to the principal structure on at least one (1) side; attic spaces (with or without a finished floor) providing structural headroom of seven feet, six inches (7'6") or more is available over fifty percent (50%) of such attic space.  However, the "floor area" shall not include: cellar space, except that cellar space used for retailing; elevator shafts, stairwells, bulkhead, accessory water tanks or cooling towers; terraces; breezeways; uncovered steps; open space; and/or accessory buildings. 
Floor Area Ratio: The floor area in square feet of all buildings on a lot divided by the gross area of such lot in square feet. 
Food Processing Facility: The assembling, mixing, treating, preserving and packaging of food or beverage substances within an enclosed building for distribution to other retail or wholesale establishments. 
Forestry: The management of forests and timberlands when practiced in accordance with accepted woodland management and conservation principles in accordance with the provisions specified under Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The following definitions shall specifically apply to “forestry’’. 
Felling: The act of cutting a standing tree so it falls to the ground. 
Landing: A place or area where logs, pulpwood or firewood are assembled for transportation to processing facilities. 
Lop: To cut tops and slash into smaller pieces to allow the material to settle close to the ground. 
Operator: An individual, partnership, company, firm, association, or corporation, which is engaged in timber harvesting or forestry operations, including the agents, subcontractors and employees thereof. 
Skidding: Dragging trees on the ground from the stump to the landing area by any means. 
Slash: Woody debris left in the woods after logging, including logs, chunks, bark, branches, uprooted stumps, broken or uprooted vegetation, or similar items. 
Stand: Any area of the forest vegetation whose site conditions, past history and current species composition are sufficiently uniform to be managed as a unit. 
Timber Harvesting, Tree Harvesting, or Logging:  The process of cutting down trees and removing logs from the forest for the primary purpose of sale or commercial processing into wood products. 
Top: The upper portion of a tree that has little or no commercial resale value because of its small size, taper or defect. 
Fuel:  Solid, liquid or gaseous materials that can be utilized to produce heat or energy. 
Funeral Home: A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial, including the viewing of the deceased and any lawful rituals connected therewith before burial or cremation.  
Game Preserve:  A public or private area utilized for raising, protecting, breeding and/or hunting wildlife within a natural environment. 
Garage, Private Residential: An accessory building or a part of a principal building used for the storage of motor vehicles owned and used by the landowners or tenants of the premises for the storage of not more than three (3) motor vehicles. 
Garage, Public or Repair: A building, other than a private or storage garage, one (1) or more stories in height, used solely for commercial storage service or repair of motor vehicles. 
Garage, Storage: A building, not a private residential or a public garage, one (1) story in height, used solely for the storage of motor vehicles used in conjunction with a business or industry, but not for the sale, service or repair thereof nor for the sale of fuel, accessories or supplies. 
Golf Course: A public or private course with a minimum of nine (9) holes and a length of more than 2,000 yards. 
Governing Body: The West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors, Chester County., Pennsylvania. 
Government Use: Any activities, services or uses conducted by any agency or department of local, county, state or federal government, which are not related to municipal uses owned or operated by West Nantmeal Township. 
Grade Plane: A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at the exterior walls.  Where the finished ground levels slope away from the exterior walls, the referenced plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six (6) feet from the building, between the building and a point six (6) feet from the building. 
Greenhouse: An enclosed building that is specifically designed and utilized to grow, raise, cultivate and/or sell plants, shrubs, flowers, trees private or similar products as part of a public, private or commercial use. 
Group Home: A residential facility used as a living quarters by a maximum of five (5) unrelated persons who require special training, care, supervision, treatment and/or rehabilitation because of their age, disability, conviction of crimes or physical addictions.  This term does not include family child daycare homes, group child daycare homes or child daycare centers, foster homes, schools, hospitals, jails, or prisons. A group home is specifically designed to create a single-family residential setting and must be licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare. 
Health and Recreation Club: A commercial recreation use that is typically contained within a facility utilized for health, fitness and/or recreational activities.  All activities relating to an adult business use shall be prohibited within a health and recreation club. 
Health Care Clinic: A building or group of buildings occupied by medical or licensed practitioners for the purpose of providing health and related services to people on an outpatient basis 
Height: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the ground or finished grade to the highest point of a structure, other than a building (refer to building height).  
Heliport: A defined area to accommodate all phases of operation of rotor-wing aircraft or helicopters, with sufficient space for all required safety controls and maneuvers in accordance with all state and federal requirements, as well as to allow for the provision of service facilities. 
Helistop:  A defined area on a roof or on the ground to accommodate touch down and lift-off of rotor-wing aircraft or helicopters.  All such areas shall have sufficient space to accommodate all required safety controls and maneuvers in accordance with all state and federal requirements, but in no case shall such area provide service facilities.  
High Water Table Soils: Surface soils, which are within three (3) feet of the seasonal high water table, as defined by the Soil Survey of Chester County. 
Highway Access Point:  A place of ingress/egress from or access to a street or highway created by a driveway or another street or highway.  Measurement between them shall be from the centerline of one (1) such point to the centerline of another such point. 
Historical Preservation Overlay District: A special overlay district established to provide provisions for subdivision, land development, aesthetics, architectural appearance, landscaping, signs and streetscape design, as further specified in Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Historical Resource or Historical Site: A place, building, structure or site, whereas because of its local, state or national significance is considered as a historical site or resource.  All such historical resources and sites are identified as follows: by the National Register of Historical Places; by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission; and the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan.  
Home Center:  A retail business establishment occupying a single permitted retail use, which sells a variety of home, construction, and building products or supplies. 
Home Occupation: An accessory use, which is customarily conducted within a residential use or a structure accessory thereto, which is clearly secondary and incidental to the residential use in which the practitioner resides.  The following categories of home occupation are hereby defined: 
Category 1 Home Occupations: A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an accessory use, which is clearly secondary to the residential use and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic (whether vehicular or pedestrian), pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated with a residential use.  A “Category 1 Home Occupation” shall be synonymous with “No Impact Home-Based Business”, as defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 
Category 2 Home Occupations: A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an accessory use, which is clearly secondary to the residential use, which may involve some employee(s), customer, client or patient traffic (whether vehicular or pedestrian), pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated with a residential use. 
Horseback Riding School: A facility utilized to educate riders on equestrian skills in accordance with the provisions specified under Section 726.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Horseback Riding Stable: A facility utilized to board horses within a humane environment in accordance with the provisions specified under Section 726.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Horticulture:  The cultivation of fruits, vegetables, flowers and ornamental plants. 
Hospital or Medical Center: An institution, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which renders inpatient and outpatient medical care on a twenty-four (24) hours per day basis, and provides primary health services and medical/surgical care to persons suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other abnormal physical or mental conditions.  A hospital or medical center can also include attached and detached accessory uses, provided that all accessory uses are contained upon the hospital property. 
Hotel:  A building or group of buildings containing individual rooms for rental, primarily for transients, with common hallways for all rooms on the same floor, and where no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or suite. A "Hotel" does not include incarceration, institutional, religious or educational uses. 
Hydric Soil: A soil that is saturated, flooded or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.  Hydric soils are identified within the Soil Survey of Chester County and the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan. 
Impervious Coverage: The percentage of lot area covered by an impervious surface. 
Impervious Surface: A surface, which has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is resistant to infiltration by water.  It includes semi-pervious surfaces such as compacted clayey soils, as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and other similar surfaces.  “Net increase of impervious surface” refers to the difference between the existing impervious coverage and the total impervious surface proposed. 
Impoundment Facility or Yard:  A designated and secured area for the temporary storage of motor vehicles, which have been transported to the facility for a period of time not to exceed 120 days, and as further regulated under the provisions of Section 730 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Improvements: Any type of structure, paved area and/or physical changes to the land, including but not limited to, grading, paving, stormwater management facilities, sidewalks, street signs, traffic control devices, monuments, utilities, water supply facilities and sewage disposal facilities. 
Improvement Setback:  The minimum distance an improvement must be set back from a street right-of-way and/or property line. 
Incarceration Facility: A use or facility designed to detain, confine, reform, educate, treat and/or rehabilitate persons who have been required to be a resident for a specified period of time by an authority with jurisdictional control. 
Incinerator: A facility designed to reduce municipal solid waste, fuel, gas, refuse, or other material by combustion. This use may include heat exchange equipment for energy recovery. 
Industrial Use:  A use or activity that includes, but not limited to, assembling, manufacturing, distributing, processing, storing or warehousing of products and materials, and similar industrial uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Ingress:  A point of entrance to a property. 
Inoperable Vehicle:  A vehicle which can not be driven on public streets for reasons including, being unlicensed, unregistered, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under is own power. 
Institutional Use: A use or activity that includes, educational uses, religious uses, assisted living care facilities, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and other similar uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Junk or Salvage:  Discarded materials, including, but not limited to, waste, paper, rags, glass, containers, fabric, and similar material from vehicles, equipment or machinery. 
Junk Yard or Salvage Yard: A lot, land or structure, or parts thereof, used for the collection, storage, dismantling, salvage, sale, exchange and/or recycling of used and discarded materials, including, but not limited to, waste, paper, rags, glass, containers, fabric, debris, and similar material from vehicles, equipment or machinery. The deposit or storage of two (2) or more unlicensed, non-inspected, abandoned, wrecked or disabled vehicles shall be deemed to be a "junk yard" or “salvage yard”, which as a result of being classified of such use shall conform with the provisions of Section 730 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Jurisdictional Determination (JD) -A site survey and review performed by the United States Army Corps of Engineers to assess and officially determine whether or not a defined parcel of land or water body is subject to wetlands regulations. 
Kennel: Any business or non-profit establishment wherein ten (10) or more customary household pets are kept for the purpose of grooming, breeding, training, research, buying, boarding, sale, show or other similar purpose where the owner of such business or non-profit establishment receives compensation or donations for the services that he or she provides for the animals.  Such term shall include, but not be limited to, a boarding kennel, breeding kennel, nonprofit kennel and pet shop kennel as those terms are defined in the Pennsylvania Dog Law, 3 P.S. Section 459-101 et seq. 
Kitchen Facilities: An enclosed and weatherproofed room consisting of a sink with plumbing facilities, stationary stove/oven and a refrigerator, which complies with all codes adopted by West Nantmeal Township. 
Laboratory: A building or group of buildings in which are located the facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing and experimentation, but not including the manufacture of products for sale.  All such laboratories shall be licensed by the appropriate local, county, state or federal agencies to conduct lawful activities. 
Land Development: Any of the following activities: 
(1) 	
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving: a group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or the division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features. 

(2) 	
A subdivision of land. 

(3) 	
Development in accordance with the provisions established by West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 


Landowner:  The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition).  An equitable owner or lessee who has written authorization of the landowner of record shall be deemed to be a landowner for the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Landscape Architect: A landscape architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Landscaping or Garden Center: A retail facility where plants, vegetables, shrubs, trees, seeds, soil, fertilizer, mulch, stone, masonry products, hardscape products, wood products, water features, exterior lighting, fencing tools, equipment, and other similar products are purchased by consumers in order to enhance the exterior of a building or use.  
Laundromats:  A commercial use within a building intended for patrons to have clothing or fabrics cleaned and dried in coin-operated machines. 
Livestock: Farm animals including chickens, turkey, sheep, goats, hogs, pigs, cattle, horses, and other similar farm animals, which are common to a farm. 
Loading Space: A defined space located within a lot or parcel of land, which has accessibility to a public street, for temporary use of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise and materials to the principal use and building contained on the lot or parcel of land. 
Lot:  A designated parcel, tract, or area of land, established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, regardless of size or ownership, which is occupied or capable of being occupied by buildings, structures and accessory buildings, including such open spaces as are arranged, designed or required.  The term “lot” shall also mean parcel, plot, site or any similar term. 
Corner Lot:  A lot situated at and abutting the intersection of two (2) streets having an interior angle of intersection not greater than one hundred thirty five (135) degrees.  The front yard and lot width requirements shall apply to each street to which the corner lot has frontage.  The other yards shall be designated as side yards. 
Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot, the sides of which do not abut a street. 
Reverse Frontage Lots: Lots that have frontage on two (2) public streets while restricting vehicular access solely from the public street which would front along the commonly identified rear of the lot. 
Through Lot.  An interior lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
Flag Lot or Keyhole Lot: An irregularly shaped lot characterized by an elongated extension from a street to the principal part of the lot.  The flag or keyhole shape of the lot is normally intended to provide for access to an otherwise land locked interior parcel. 
Lot Area (Gross):  The total land area contained within the lot lines. 
Lot Area (Net): The total land area contained within the lot lines, excluding the following land and water areas:  100 percent of all areas exclusively contained within the existing and ultimate limits of street rights-of-way; 100 percent of all areas exclusively designated as an easement to accommodate utilities and/or stormwater improvements; 100 percent of the lands designated as the floodway; 100 percent of the land delineated as wetlands; and 100 percent of lands classified as Category 2 Slopes.  Pursuant to the terms of this definition, the following formula for calculating the net lot area is hereby specified: 
GLA – 100% of ROW – 100% of ESM – 100% of FLD – 100% of WET – 100% of C2S  =  NLA 
GLA = Gross Lot Area 
ROW = Total area exclusively within the limits of the existing, future and ultimate street right-of-way 
ESM = Total area exclusively designated as an easement for utilities and/or stormwater improvements 
FLD = Total area exclusively within the defined limits of the floodway. 
WET = Total area exclusively delineated as wetlands. 
C2S = Total area exclusively classified as Category 2 Slopes. 

NLA = Net Lot Area  The net lot area for all proposed lots shall be no smaller than the required minimum lot size for the zoning district in which the lot is located.  The net lot area calculations shall utilize the order or hierarchy of features specified by the formula, whereas, land and water areas shall not be calculated or classified in more than one (1) category.  If required by West Nantmeal Township, special studies, delineations and/or calculations shall be completed by the applicant in order to accurately verify the limits of the natural features. 
Lot Coverage:  The percentage of the net lot area covered by all impervious surfaces, as determined by the West Nantmeal Township Engineer or Zoning Officer.  Refer to the definition of “impervious surface” for further clarification. 
Lot Depth:  The mean average horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines. 
Lot Frontage:  That portion of a lot, which fronts on a single street. 
Lot Line:  The property line forming the front, rear or side boundary of a lot. 
Front Lot Line: The line separating a lot from the street line.  The front lot line is also the street line. 
Rear Lot Line: The lot line, which is opposite the front lot line. The rear line of any triangularly or irregularly shaped lot shall be established such that it will be at least ten (10) feet long. 
Side Lot Line:  Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
Lot of Record: A lot or parcel recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Chester County, Pennsylvania. 
Lot Width: The width of a lot measured at the street line. 
Manufactured Home Parks:  A parcel or contiguous parcels of land, which has been so developed and improved to contain two (2) or more manufactured home lots for sale, lease or rent. 
Manufacture or Manufacturing Use: The assembling, creating, cleaning, fabricating, processing, testing, recycling, packaging, converting, distributing and/or repairing of raw materials, with the use of labor and machinery, of products that will be made available for sale.  The term “manufacture” shall not include retail sales, personal services, solid waste disposal, truck distribution, mineral extraction, woodland extraction, forestry, exportation of groundwater, warehousing, or similar uses determined by the Zoning Officer.  
Massage Parlor or Therapeutic Massage Facility: A place of business where a person or persons engage in or carry on any method of pressure on, friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of any part of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or spa apparatus.  This particular use shall only include licensed physicians or members of the American Massage Therapist Association. 
Mature Tree: A deciduous tree with a diameter at breast height (DBH) greater than or equal to twelve (12) inches or a coniferous tree at least six (6) feet tall. 
Mean Sea Level: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide, utilizing the most current National Geodetic Vertical Datum. 
Mediation:  A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement which the parties themselves create and consider acceptable. 
Medical, Dental, Vision, Counseling and Health Care Services:  A building or group of buildings occupied by medical or licensed practitioners for the purposes of providing medical, dental, psychological, counseling, rehabilitation, physical therapy and health care related services to their clients on an outpatient basis. 
Medical Research Center:  A public or private facility utilized for medical testing, sampling or research in a controlled laboratory environment. 
Medical Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy: A public or private facility utilized for the treatment, rehabilitation and training of outpatients to regain, develop or enhance their physical skills, condition or stamina, which have been lost or impaired through injury or illness.  
Mineral Extraction: The act or process of mining or extracting minerals by activities conducted in accordance with the provisions of West Nantmeal Township and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Minerals: A solid homogeny aggregate or mass of mineral matter, whether or not coherent. The term includes, but is not limited to, limestone, dolomite, sand, gravel, rock, stone, earth, fill, slag, iron ore, zinc ore, vermiculite, clay, anthracite and bituminous coal, coal refuse, peat, crude oil and natural gas. 
Mini-Malls: The multiple use of a single property for a planned group of non-residential uses, including retail operations, personal services, business offices, banks, financial institutions, medical, dental, vision, counseling, religious, restaurants, taverns, and similar planned uses as determined by the Zoning Officer, where the uses are less than a cumulative total of 30,000 square feet of gross floor area and are owned and maintained by an individual, corporation, partnership or organization. 
Mixed-Use Commercial and Residential Developments:  A combination of uses within a building or group of buildings, which includes a permitted commercial use occupying the first floor and no more than two (2) residential apartment units occupying the second floor, as regulated under Section 616 of this Zoning Ordinance 
Motel:  A building or group of attached or detached buildings containing individual living or sleeping units designed for temporary use by tourists or transients, each of which is provided with an independent exterior entrance and off-street parking space.  The term “motel” includes, auto courts, motor courts, motor inns, motor lodges, roadside hotels, or similar accommodations. 
MPC: The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended and codified. 
Municipality: West Nantmeal Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania. 
Municipal Use:  A use owned and maintained by West Nantmeal Township for public recreation area, park, swimming pool, golf course, spectator sports, municipal offices, emergency services operation, water and sewage facilities, utilities, community centers, solid waste disposal areas, recycling centers, composting facilities, road materials and equipment storage and similar governmental or municipal uses. 
Non-Commercial Animal Composting: A legal method of disposing of dead farm animals. 
Nonconforming Lot: A lot, which does not meet with the minimum lot width or area dimensions specified for the district where such lot is situated, but was lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance or is legally established through the granting of a variance by the Zoning Hearing Board. 
Nonconforming Structure or Building: A structure, building or sign, or part thereof, which does not meet the applicable provisions or requirements of the district in which it is located, either at the time of enactment of this Zoning Ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto, where such building or structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such Zoning Ordinance or amendment. 
Nonconforming Use:  A building, structure, sign or use of land which does not conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, either at the time of the enactment of this Zoning Ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto, but which did not violate any applicable use regulations prior to the enactment of such Zoning Ordinance or amendments. 
Nursery: A commercial retail use involving the raising and selling of plants, shrubs, flowers, trees and other landscaping products.  Refer also to “landscaping center and garden center”. 
Nursing Home or Skilled Nursing Facility: A building or part thereof used for the lodging, boarding, and nursing care on a twenty-four (24) hour basis involving four (4) or more persons who, because of mental or physical incapacity, may be unable to provide for their own needs and safety without the assistance of another person; provides facilities and services primarily for in-patients who require nursing care and related medical services less intense than those given in a general hospital or an extended-care facility. Nursing homes are required to have a licensed registered nurse on duty twenty-four (24) hours a day. 
Obstruction: Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building, structure, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill or other matter, which may impede, retard or change the normal direction or path of air, water or any modes of transportation.  
Occupancy: The possession of any structure, building, land area or water body, with the intent to remain for the purpose of residing, conducting business, or performing social, recreational, cultural, educational, municipal, governmental, institutional, religious, charitable, or similar uses.   
Permanent Occupancy: Occupancy for a period in excess of 180 consecutive days within one (1) calendar year. 
Temporary or Seasonal Occupancy:  Occupancy for a period less than 180 consecutive days within one (1) calendar year. 
Off-Street Loading: A designated area within the lot lines designed to accommodate trucks and commercial vehicles, which require accessibility to the principal use of the property. 
Off-Street Parking: A designated area within the lot lines designed to accommodate automobiles and other motor vehicles, which require accessibility to the principal use of the property. 
Office:  A use that primarily involves professional or non-profit services relating to, but not limited to, administrative, business, clerical, financial, governmental, medical, municipal, political, religious, or similar office uses, as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Official Map:  A legally adopted map that depicts the location of existing and proposed streets, public utilities, public facilities and/or public areas, which may be adopted the by West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors in accordance with the provisions of Article 4 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 
Official Zoning Map:  The Zoning Map of West Nantmeal Township. 
Open Space: Land areas that are not occupied by buildings, structures, parking areas, streets, alleys or required yards. Open space shall be permitted to be devoted to landscaping, preservation of natural features, patios and recreational areas and facilities.  This term shall not be synonymous with the term “common open space”, which is defined within this Zoning Ordinance. 
Ordinance:  The West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 or any provisions or amendments thereof, enacted by the Board of Supervisors, including the Official Zoning Map. 
Outdoor Storage: The external storage of materials, products and accessory components of a use, which conforms to the normal functions and procedures conducted on that use in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance. 
Outside Sales:  All sales conducted outside of a principal building.  Commercial outdoor sales shall comply with the provisions specified under Section 816 of this Zoning Ordinance.  
PA: The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Parent Tract:  A parcel of land or lot of record, which was held by the landowner or his predecessor in title prior to the adoption of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Park:  A tract of land, designed and utilized by the general public for active and/or passive recreation purposes. 
Parking Lot: An off-street area designed solely for the parking of motor vehicles, including driveways, passageways and maneuvering space appurtenant thereto. 
Parking Perimeter: The external limits of the permitted or approved off-street parking area. 
Parking Space: A reasonably level space, available for the parking of one (1) motor vehicle, not less than ten (10) feet wide, twenty (20) feet deep, and having an area of not less than two hundred (200) square feet exclusive of passageways or other means of circulation or access. 
Patio:  An area or courtyard, which is not covered by a roof or permanent awning, and is designed for seasonal outdoor living purposes, as an accessory use to the principal structure or building. 
Paved Area: The percentage of lot area covered by any and all impervious materials, such as buildings, paved parking areas, paved walks, terraces and similar surfaces, which do not normally absorb rainfall.  Refer to the definition of “impervious surface” for further clarification. 
Permit: A document issued by the proper regulatory agency authorizing the applicant to undertake certain activities as specified on the application or permit. 
Building Permit: A permit issued for a specific building, structure or land use, which indicates that the proposed construction, alteration, development, reconstruction, or similar activities are in accordance with the appropriate construction provisions established by West Nantmeal Township, and authorizes an applicant to commence with the activities specified on the application or the provisions of the permit. 
Certificate of Occupancy: A statement issued and enforced by the authorized Zoning Officer and/or Building Code Official, whereas upon the completion, conversion, extension or modification of a new building or existing building, a certificate of compliance is issued and the building can be lawfully occupied for the intended use or activity. 
Demolition Permit:  A permit issued to demolish, remove, destroy and/or eliminate a building or structure. 
Seasonal or Temporary Permit: A permit issued for a specific building, structure or land use, which indicates that the seasonal, special use or temporary activities are in accordance with the appropriate provisions established by West Nantmeal Township, and authorizes an applicant to commence with the seasonal or temporary activities for a defined period of time, not to exceed 180 cumulative days within a calendar year or as specified on the permit. 
Sign Permit: A permit issued for a specific on-premises or off-premises sign. 
Special Permit:  A permit issued for specific use and event on land owned or leased by the applicant for a defined period of time, not to exceed 180 cumulative days within a calendar year and as specified on the permit.  Such permitted uses may include carnivals, circuses, bazaars, fairs, seasonal sales or other non-profit fund raisers. 
Permitted Use: A use permitted in a particular district to occupy or use land for a specific purpose in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance, when such use is permitted by right, special exception or conditional use. 
Person: The term shall be construed to include an individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, limited liability company, firm, trust, business trust, estate, foundation, municipality, governmental entity, public utility, other association or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. 
Personal Care Home: Residences that provide shelter, meals, supervision and assistance with personal care tasks, which are typically intended for older people, people with physical, behavioral health and/or cognitive disabilities. Personal Care Homes shall be licensed and inspected by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare. 
Personal Service Establishment: A building or portion of a building in which the services of a person permitted to practice a specified profession are offered to the general public.  Examples of such professions may include, accountants, agents, architects, barbers, beauticians, lawyers, planners, therapists, optometrists, photographers, tailors, therapeutic massage, electronic repair technicians, or other similar personal service establishments as determined by the Zoning Officer.  
Places of Worship:  Land areas occupied by buildings, churches, synagogues, retreat centers, monasteries, seminaries, convents, shrines, cemeteries, and other similar non-profit facilities, as further defined under Section 739 of this Zoning Ordinance, which are primarily used for religious or spiritual worship. 
Plan: A proposal for development, subdivision or land development, including all covenants, grants or easements and other conditions relating to use, location and bulk of buildings, density of development, common open space and public facilities, which complies with the provisions established by West Nantmeal Township. 
Planning Commission: The West Nantmeal Township Planning Commission, Chester County, Pennsylvania. 
Pole Building or Pole Barn: An accessory building that is generally utilized for storage that is typically built from treated poles that are anchored into the ground with the metal or aluminum sides attached in accordance with the specifications of the manufacturer. All such accessory buildings are not intended for human habitation. 
Porch: A roofed or unroofed structure attached and projecting from the front, side or rear wall of a building, which is typically opened on three (3) sides. 
Portable Storage Facilities and Units: A building or group of buildings capable of accommodating individual compartmental storage units, which are available to rent or lease to the public for the self-storage of tangible personal property in accordance with the provisions specified under Section 747 of this Zoning Ordinance.  
Preservation or Protection: When used in connection with natural and historic resources, shall include means to conserve and safeguard these resources from wasteful or destructive use, but shall not be interpreted to authorize the unreasonable restriction of forestry, mining or other lawful uses of natural resources. 
Prime Agricultural Land or Resources: Prime agricultural soils or land areas as identified within the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan. 
Principal Building: A building in which a principal use on a lot is carried on. 
Principal Use:  The main or primary purpose for which any land, structure or building is designed, arranged or intended, and for which they may be occupied or maintained under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance. Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, only one (1) principal use shall be permitted on a lot. 
Printing or Publishing Establishment: A commercial, industrial or institutional use where documents, newspapers, magazines, books, literature, reference materials, periodicals, manuals, maps, music, advertisements, signs and other materials are proofed, evaluated, critiqued and reproduced. 
Professional: An occupation practiced or performed by an individual who has been formally educated or trained for such occupation and who is typically, but not necessarily, licensed or certified in such occupation. 
Public Grounds or Land Areas:  All such areas including: parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other public areas; sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly owned or operated facilities; and publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites. 
Public Hearing: A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by West Nantmeal Township, which is intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 
Public Meeting: A forum held pursuant to notice under the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and the “Pennsylvania Sunshine Law”. 
Public Notice: Notice published once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within West Nantmeal Township.  Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than thirty (30) days and the second publication shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing, or as otherwise specified by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 
Quarrying and Mining Operations: The removal or extraction of minerals, rock, natural resources, or other products of earth, either on the surface or below the surface, in accordance with the provisions of West Nantmeal Township and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Quarry Support Operations: Those activities or subordinate uses to a quarry operation, which may include a bituminous asphalt plant, concrete manufacturing facility, concrete plant, concrete and asphalt recycling facility, demolition/recycling facility, manufacturing facility and/or similar quarry support uses that are intended to complement or support quarrying or mining activities. 
Recreation Area (Active): Land area containing recreational facilities, which may require visitors or participants to become involved in physical or energetic functions, primarily group functions.  Active recreation areas may include, but are not limited to: athletic fields; basketball courts; baseball fields; softball fields; football fields; soccer fields; tennis courts; playgrounds; tot lots; community centers; golf courses; hockey rinks; skateboard parks, swimming pools; and volleyball courts, and other similar active recreation areas as determined by the Zoning Officer.  
Recreation Area (Passive):  Land area containing recreation facilities, which may require visitors or participants to become involved in quiet functions that do not require physical or energetic functions.  Passive recreation areas may include, but are not limited to: open space: trails for walking or bicycling; surface water for canoeing or fishing; land preserve areas for hunting; pavilions; picnic areas; cultural centers; scenic vistas; and amphitheaters.  
Recreation Facilities:  Land, water, buildings, structures, apparatuses and/or equipment, which are required to accommodate recreational uses. 
Recreational Uses: An active or passive recreational use designed to accommodate physical, leisure, sporting or relaxation activities on land or water.  Recreational uses may include, basketball, baseball, football, bicycling, walking, jogging, running, golfing, fishing, boating, hunting, hockey, skating, skateboarding, soccer, softball, swimming, tennis, volleyball, racquetball, exercise/fitness, bowling, billiards, bird watching, picnicking, equestrian events, rodeos, automobile racing events, demolition derby events, motorcycle exhibitions, shooting ranges, or any other similar recreational uses, as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Commercial Recreational Use: A use or activity operated as a business that is open to the public for the purpose of recreation and entertainment, including but not limited to, bowling alleys, health or fitness clubs, swimming pools, miniature golf courses, family entertainment complex, recreation club, sports arena, community centers, museums, theaters, amusement arcades, and other similar commercial recreational uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Non-Commercial Recreation Use: A recreational use in which members of the community may congregate, where no fee or a nominal fee is paid in order to occupy or utilize the recreation facilities. 
Recreational Vehicles:  A vehicle of any size, which is designed as a temporary dwelling or living unit for travel, recreation and vacation uses.  Recreation vehicles may include motorized vehicles designed to be self-propelled or non-motorized vehicles designed to be towed or carried by another vehicle including campers, pickup coaches, travel trailer, all-terrain vehicles, motorcycles, dirt bikes, snowmobiles, and similar vehicles. 
Recycling Facility: A business that accumulates material such as paper, glass, aluminum, plastic, stone, natural materials and/or building products, which are no longer useful for their original purpose.  The materials may be sold to another business as a raw material, which can be used to manufacture a new product. 
Religious Use: Land areas occupied by buildings, churches, synagogues, retreat centers, monasteries, seminaries, convents, shrines, cemeteries, and other similar non-profit facilities, as further defined under Section 739 of this Zoning Ordinance, which are primarily used for religious or spiritual worship. 
Renewable Energy System:  Equipment and devices utilized to store, convert, process and/or transmit a natural source of energy (solar, wind, rain, surface water, ground water, geothermal and other similar sources) into a primary or alternative energy supply source, which provides service to a permitted use on an approved lot.  
Rental Business: A commercial use in which machinery, equipment and goods, but not motor vehicles, are rented to customers for temporary use pursuant to a short-term rental contract, including the sale of machinery, equipment and goods as an accessory use.  For the purposes of this definition: “machinery” means equipment, which requires a motor to operate; “equipment” means any non-motorized device permanently attached to and movable on wheels; and “goods” means any other rental items. 
Rental Unit: A defined area within a building or structure, which is rented or leased to accommodate residential or non-residential uses, as permitted by West Nantmeal Township. 
Research Facility: A commercial, industrial or institutional facility utilized for testing, sampling or research in a controlled laboratory environment. 
Residential Cluster Design for the R-2 District:  A conservation zoning and development technique utilized to preserve open space, protect natural features, and encourage a form of cluster design involving low density single-family detached dwellings within the R-2 Zoning District, as specified under Section 607 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Residential Cluster Design for the R-3 District: A conservation zoning and development technique utilized to integrate open space, protect natural features, and encourage a form of cluster design involving medium density single-family dwellings and townhouse dwellings within the R-3 Zoning District, as specified under Section 608 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Residential Lot Averaging Design for the R-1 District:  A land preservation zoning and development technique utilized to preserve farmland, open space, natural features, and agricultural resources by encouraging a form of cluster design involving low density single-family detached dwellings within the R-1 Zoning District, as further specified under Section 606 of this Zoning Ordinance 
Residential Use: A use within a permitted dwelling unit, designed and utilized as the living quarters for one (1) or more families living independently of each other.  Residential uses may be permitted within single family detached units, single family semi-detached units, two family attached units, mobile homes, apartment units, townhouse units, and secondary housing units, provided the type of dwelling unit is a permitted use within the zoning district to which it is located, and provided that the dwelling unit is designed to comply with the standards and specifications referenced by this Zoning Ordinance. 
Restaurant:  A commercial establishment devoted to the sale and consumption of food and beverages to patrons within an enclosed building, while the patrons are seated at counters, booths, or tables.  A restaurant may contain an accessory area or use devoted to outdoor eating, retail sales, social quarters, meeting rooms, bars, taverns, taprooms, and similar uses, provided the cumulative total area of the accessory use does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of the restaurant. 
Restaurant, Fast Food or Drive-Through:  A restaurant devoted to the sale of food and beverages to patrons either within an enclosed building, at a pick-up counter, through a drive-through service lane, and/or through a delivery service. 
Retail Use: A commercial establishment devoted to the sale of products and services to patrons within an enclosed building.  Retail uses may include establishments selling food, groceries, beverages, clothing, business or office supplies, entertainment items, furniture, home improvement supplies, household products, personal care supplies, building supplies, sporting goods, equipment, machines, computers, electronics, pet supplies, medical supplies, agricultural supplies, automobile supplies, firearms, and other similar retail uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Right-Of-Way: The width or area of land, which is dedicated or reserved to accommodate streets, utilities, stormwater management facilities, traffic control facilities, curbs, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, street lights, and other public improvements. 
Legal Right-Of-Way: The existing width or area of land, which is currently owned and maintained by West Nantmeal Township, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and/or other public agency or authority. 
Ultimate or Required Right-Of-Way: The width or area of land, which is determined necessary to  reserve and/or dedicate  in order to accommodate future public improvements. 
Rooming House:  A single-family dwelling containing not more than three (3) guest rooms or suites, including common cooking and sanitary facilities, for compensation over a period of time exceeding one (1) week. 
Sanitary Facilities: The required plumbing fixtures within a permitted use including a sink, toilet, bathtub or shower, which are functioning and compliant with the provisions of West Nantmeal Township.  
Sanitary Sewage Disposal System:  A system designed to collect, convey, treat and dispose of sewage from users in compliance with local, county, state and federal regulations. 
On-Lot System:  A sewage disposal system which collects, conveys, treats and disposes of sewage or holds sewage from only one (1) dwelling, principal use or lot. 
Community System: A sewage disposal system which collects, conveys, treats and disposes of sewage from more than one (1) source by a system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant, generally serving a neighborhood area. 
Public or Municipal System: A sewage disposal system which collects, conveys, treats and disposes of sewage from more than one (1) source by a system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant. 
Optional System Requirement:  A special or unique use of land, which because of its wastewater disposal requirements may have the option to utilize on-lot sewage disposal methods or connect to a private, community, public or municipal treatment system.  The selected method for wastewater collection, conveyance and treatment shall be consistent with the West Nantmeal Township Act 537 Plan, the West Nantmeal Township Sewer Use Ordinance, and Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act. 
Satellite Dish Antenna: A device incorporating a reflective solid surface in the shape of a dish, cone or horn, which is used to transmit and/or receive signals. 
School: A building or group of buildings intended to provide or facilitate an educational use including pre-schools, nursery schools, kindergartens, elementary schools, secondary schools, trade schools, vocational schools, colleges and/or universities, which are licensed and accredited as an education facility. 
Screen or Screening: An assemblage of permissible materials, which are strategically arranged so as to effectively block or obstruct the views between adjacent or adjoining properties from ground level to a height of six (6) feet above grade level, or as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Seasonal Pool: An essential and unique wetland habitat, which is typically small, shallow, ephemeral water bodies, and have no permanent inlet or outlet.  Seasonal pools are filled by rain and snow melt, which typically dry-up for a period of time during the summer season.  They are considered essential since they support a number of species that require temporary wetland habitats for survival.  
Self-Storage Facility:  A building or group of buildings that are divided into individual units, each of which unit is available for rent or lease to the public for the self-storage of tangible personal property. 
Setback Requirements: The setback requirements as established for any building or structure within the applicable Zoning District for which it is located. 
Sewage Facilities Plan: The West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted by West Nantmeal Township in accordance with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537), as amended from time to time. 
Shade Tree: A deciduous tree, which normally grows with a single trunk and has a canopy which screens and filters sunshine during specific seasons during the year. 
Shed: A small utility or storage building, which is classified as an accessory structure to a principal use in accordance with the provisions of Section 803 of this Zoning Ordinance.   
Sidewalk Sale: A seasonal or occasional sale conducted on the sidewalk or outside of the front or side of the principal building or establishment, where goods are offered for sale to the public. 
Sign: Any structure, building, wall, or other outdoor surface, or any device or part thereof, which displays or includes any letter, word, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or other representations utilized for announcement, direction, identification or advertisement.  The word "sign" includes the word "billboard", but does not include the flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, state, city or other political unit, nor public traffic or directional signs.  The following definitions shall apply to this Zoning Ordinance: 
Accessory Sign: A subordinate sign located on the same property of the principal use, which is erected to further describe the products or services available to the general public. 
Animated Sign: A sign or any device designed to attract attention by visual means through the movement or semblance of movement by mechanical, electrical or natural means.  
Banner:  A promotional sign for special community events including, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, cultural, municipal, fraternal, religious, or similar community events as determined by the Zoning Officer, whereas the promotional sign or banner shall be considered as temporary for a period of time not to exceed 30 cumulative days in a calendar year.  All such signs or banners shall be made of nylon, canvas, or similar all-weather material.  
Billboard:  An off-premises sign erected by a professional sign company or by the outdoor advertising industry, on which advertisement space is leased for a fixed period of time. 
Business or Non-Residential Sign:  An on-premises sign designated for a permitted business or non-residential use, which identifies the printed name, type of business, commodity sold, services, trademark and/or symbol. 
Canopy Sign: A non-illuminated sign made of cloth, canvas, aluminum, metal, wood, or similar materials, which is affixed to a building and projects outward, whereas the sign or message is painted on, printed, sewed, fastened or applied.  All such signs may or may not be fixed or equipped with a mechanism for raising or holding the canopy or awning in a retracted position against the building. 
Charitable or Community Service Sign:  An on-premises sign identifying the charitable or community service organization, including religious facilities, volunteer fire companies, or other non-profit organization.  All such signs may include supplemental information concerning hours, events, activities or messages.  
Development Sign: An on-premises sign indicating that the property is actively in the process of subdivision or land development for residential or non-residential uses. 
Directional Sign:  An informational or functional on-premises sign, containing only information pertaining to direction, entrance, exit, off-street loading spaces, service areas, service lanes, fire lanes, handicapped parking spaces, and off-street parking areas.  All such directional signs shall contain no advertisement messages. 
Double-Faced Sign: A sign with two (2) faces that are parallel, facing opposite directions, and matching in size and shape. 
Flashing Sign: A type of sign in which the illumination is not kept constant in intensity at all times of use, and which exhibits sudden, timed or marked changes in lighting effects.  Unless otherwise permitted by this Zoning Ordinance, flashing signs shall be prohibited. 
Freestanding Sign: An on-premises sign displaying information pertaining to the use on the lot on which it is located, and is supported by, or suspended from a freestanding column or other support(s) located in or upon the ground surface.   
Ground Sign: An on-premises sign displaying information pertaining to the use on the lot on which it is located, and is placed upon, supported by, and anchored to the ground.  A ground sign shall not be considered as a freestanding sign or portable sign. 
Illuminated Sign:  A sign designed to project or reflect artificial light from an internal or external source, which may be directly, indirectly illuminated, or through transparent or translucent material.  Illuminated signs may include, billboards, freestanding signs, ground signs, or signs affixed to a building or structure.   
Marquee Sign: An on-premises sign attached to a building façade, which may include changeable letters, messages or displays. 
Municipal or Official Sign:  A sign erected by West Nantmeal Township, Chester County, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or other governmental organization.  
Off-Premises Sign: A permitted sign, which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, institution, or other use, which is offered elsewhere other than upon the premises where the sign is located. 
On-Premises Sign: A permitted sign, which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, institution, or other permitted use, which is offered on the same property or tract of land where the sign is located. 
Portable Sign: A temporary sign designed to be moved from place to place, which is not affixed or anchored to the ground, structure or building.  Portable signs shall not be utilized or displayed for more than 48 cumulative hours over any 30 consecutive day period of time on the same property. 
Projecting Sign: An on-premises sign mounted upon a building so that its principal face is a right angle or perpendicular to the wall of the building.  All such projecting signs shall extend at least one (1) foot from the building but no more than six (6) feet from the building. 
Real Estate Sign: An on-premises sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises on which the sign is located. 
Roof Sign: An on-premises sign, which is erected or displayed upon the roof of a building or exceeds the height of the building.  Roof signs shall be prohibited. 
Sign Area: The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording, border trim or framing, and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing which are incidental to the display itself. Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to a surface, building, wall or window, the area shall be determined by calculating the smallest rectangle, which encompasses all of the letters and symbols used for the sign, regardless of the actual shape created by the letters and symbols. 
Sign Height:  The height of the sign, as measured at the location of the sign from the ground elevation to the highest and lowest parts of the sign. 
Special Event or Seasonal:  A temporary sign that is anchored or mounted to the ground that displays periodical advertisement of specials during certain periods of time during the year. 
Special Use or Temporary Sign:  A permitted on-premises sign erected for a special use over a temporary period of time. 
Sports Facilities Business Sign: A business sign, erected and maintained only for a non-profit organization or entity organized to promote youth sports teams, advertising a business, service, product, or organization. 
Vehicle Sign: A sign affixed or painted on a vehicle, trailer or similar device. 
Wall Sign or Parallel Sign:  An on-premises sign posted on, suspended from, or otherwise affixed to the wall, facade, or vertical surface of a building, which does not project or extend more than twelve (12) inches from the wall, facade, or vertical surface of the building to which it is attached.   
Window Sign:  A temporary or permanent on-premises sign, affixed to or visible through a window of a building. 
Silo: A tall cylindrical structure that is typically located on a farm for non-residential uses. 
Single and Separate Ownership:  The ownership of a lot by one or more persons, whereas the ownership is separate and distinct from that of any adjoining land areas. 
Slope: Topographic conditions in which the percentage of vertical to horizontal relief is computed utilizing standard rise over run calculations. 
Solicitor:  The legal consultant or attorney appointed by the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors. 
Solid Waste: Waste, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous materials. 
Solid Waste Disposal and Reduction Facilities: A site in which engineering principles are utilized to bury, dispose, reduce, recycle, eliminate and/or incinerate deposits of solid waste without creating public health or safety hazards, nuisances, pollution or environmental degradation. All such facilities may include sanitary landfills, solid waste landfills, low level radioactive waste disposal facilities, resource recovery facilities, recycling centers and/or transfer stations. 
Special Exception:  A use by which the Zoning Hearing Board may grant permission to an applicant within a particular zoning district for the occupancy or use of land or water for a specific purpose. 
Stable:  A building or structure in which horses, llamas, donkeys, and other similar animals are kept for personal and lawful uses. 
State: The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and its designated agencies. 
Steep Slopes: Areas of land in which the topographical conditions exceed a certain slope in pre-development conditions, as further defined under Section 504 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The following slope categories are hereby defined as part of the Steep Slope Overlay District: 
Category 1 Slopes: All land areas in which the topographical conditions have a range of slope between 15 and 25 percent in slope in pre-development conditions, as measured 100 feet in any straight-line direction. 
Category 2 Slopes:  All land areas in which the topographical conditions exceed a slope of 25 percent in pre­development conditions, as measured 100 feet in any straight-line direction. 
Steep Slope Overlay District: A conservation overlay of land, which has been defined by Section 504 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Steeple: A tall tapering architectural feature of a structure that is located on the roof of or is part of the superstructure of a permitted non-residential use. 
Stormwater: Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation in the form of rain, snow, sleet, hail or ice. 
Stormwater Management:  A program of controls and measures designed to regulate the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff from a defined area or development, while promoting the protection and conservation of surface water, groundwater and groundwater recharge. 
Stormwater Management Facilities: Those controls and measures including, by not limited to, berms, terraces, bridges, dams, storm sewers, basins, infiltration systems, swales, watercourses, and floodplains, used to implement the storm water management regulations of West Nantmeal Township. 
Story:  That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above, including basements and mezzanines, and as further defined by the appropriate building codes adopted by West Nantmeal Township. 
Street: A public or private right-of-way, excluding driveways, intended as a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel, furnishing access to abutting properties.  The word "street" includes thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, court, drive, expressway, highway and similar terms.  The functional classification of existing streets has been defined as follows: 
Expressways:  Routes providing for corridor movements that represent substantial statewide, interstate, or regional travel and movements between major urban areas. Expressways contain the most heavily traveled routes (10,000 to 100,000 trips per day) including multi-lane roadways.  This system provides links between developed areas and adjacent towns and cities.  The system is designed for relatively high speeds (50 to 65 MPH) with a minimum of interference to through traffic.  Expressways facilitate truck transport by providing optimum conditions.  Mobility is the principal function and accessibility should be limited to carefully planned interchanges to preserve the functional classification of expressways. 
Arterials (Minor and Major Arterial):  Routes providing for corridor movements that represent substantial statewide or regional travel and movements between major urban areas.  Arterial routes contain heavily traveled routes (5,000 to 25,000) including multi-lane roadways.   This system provides links between developed areas and adjacent towns and cities. The system is designed for relatively high speeds (35 to 55 MPH) with a minor interference to through traffic. Arterial routes facilitate truck transport by providing favorable conditions. Mobility is the major function and accessibility should be limited to preserve the functional classification. 
Collectors (Minor and Major Collector):  Routes that serve primarily regional or intra-county trips and represents those routes with shorter travel distances than arterial routes.  Collector roads contain well-traveled roads (500 to 10,000 trips per day) leading to specific destinations or to expressways and arterial routes.  The system is designed for moderate speeds (25 to 45 MPH) with some interference with designed intersections to permit through traffic.  Depending upon its structural integrity and design, collector routes can facilitate lightweight truck transport. Mobility is a significant function and accessibility should be limited to street intersections and driveways in order to preserve the functional classification of collector roads. 
Minor Streets or Local Access Streets: Roads that primarily serve local trips and represent those routes with shorter travel distances than collector routes.  Local roads contain low volume to moderately traveled roads (less than 500 trips per day) leading to collector and arterial routes.  The system is designed for lower speeds (25 to 35 MPH) with interference with a number of designed intersections.  Local roads are typically designed to facilitate lightweight truck transport for local deliveries.  Mobility is a minor function and accessibility to street intersections, driveways and adjacent land areas is significant for local roads. 
Marginal Access Roads: Roads that serve specific land uses, which are parallel or adjacent to an expressway, arterial or major collector roads.  Marginal access roads are typically designed to accommodate the use(s) they directly serve.  Accessibility between selective points is an essential design element with control at the point of destination. Many marginal access roads are privately owned and maintained. 
Cul-De-Sac Street: A minor street intersecting another street at one end, and terminating in a vehicular turnaround at the other end. 
Internal Street: A minor street used for circulation and access within a development involving multi-residential, commercial and/or industrial land uses. 
Service Street (Alley): A minor right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to the side or rear of two (2) or more properties. 
Public Street:  A dedicated right-of-way that is owned and maintained by West Nantmeal Township or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Private Street:  A defined right-of-way that is not owned and maintained by West Nantmeal Township or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Pedestrian Path: An improved lane, sidewalk, trail or path, which is specifically designated for pedestrian use either along a street or contained within a park, common open space area, off-street parking area and/or other areas approved for community use.  
Bicycle Lane:  An improved travel lane, trail or path, which is specifically designated for persons riding bicycles and other permitted non-motorized vehicles. 
Street Frontage: The lot dimension measured along the street line or right-of-way line of any one street or highway abutting a lot. 
Street Line: The limits established by the legal right-of-way line. 
Structure: Any manmade object having an ascertainable stationary location on land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.  The term structure shall include, but not be limited to, buildings, stormwater management facilities, signs, fences, walls, towers, swimming pools, porches, garages, flagpoles, windmills, water towers, silos, solar energy collectors, and similar structures as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Permanent Structure:  A structure to be utilized for a specific purpose for more than 180 days. 
Temporary Structure: A structure to be utilized for a specific purpose for less than 180 days. 
Subdivision: The division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development.  The subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten (10) acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted. 
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance: The West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as adopted by the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors. 
Substantial Damage:  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its previous condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value before the damage occurred. 
Substantial Improvement: Any repair, addition, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. 
Subterranean Buildings: A building covered by land on at least fifty (50) percent of the combined surface of its walls and roof. 
Surface Mining:  The extraction of minerals, rock and other products of the earth by activities conducted upon the surface of the land which require the removal of the overburden, strata or material overlying, above or between the minerals, rock and other products of the earth, or by otherwise exposing and retrieving the minerals from the surface. Mining activities carried out beneath the surface by means of shafts, tunnels or other underground mine openings are not included in this definition. 
Surveyor: An individual registered with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as authorized to measure the boundaries of tracts of land, establish locations, and perform the requirements of a survey. 
Swimming Pool: Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over twenty-four 
(24) inches deep, including in-ground swimming pools, above-ground swimming pools, on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs, and similar structures, which are further defined and regulated by West Nantmeal Township. 
Tavern or Taproom: An establishment where alcoholic beverages are served to the general public as the primary portion of the trade in accordance with local and state laws. 
Terrace: A hard-surfaced area of ground that is generally contiguous to a dwelling and utilized for outdoor living. 
Therapeutic Massage: A legal method of applying pressure on, friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of any part of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or spa apparatus. 
Therapeutic Spa or Hot Tub:  Any structure intended for relaxation, physical therapy, bathing or wading containing over a depth exceeding twenty-four (24) inches as further regulated within Section 818 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Tourist Home: The temporary use and occupancy of a single-family detached dwelling for the purpose of accommodating transient guests for rent. 
Township: West Nantmeal Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania. 
Township Engineer: The West Nantmeal Township Engineer appointed by the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors. 
Tract: One or more lots assembled for the purposes of subdivision or land development. 
Transient: The temporary passing or crossing from one thing or person to another, or from place to place, provided the passing or crossing is temporary and not permanent.  
Truck Service and Maintenance Establishment: A commercial service establishment to clean, service, repair and maintain trucks, tractor trailers and other commercial vehicles. 
Use:  The specific purpose for which land, water, signage, structures, or buildings are designed, arranged or intended, to be utilized, occupied or maintained, or any activity, occupation, residence, business or operation, which may be carried on thereon or therein. 
Permanent Use:  A permitted use conducted on a lot for more than 180 days. 
Seasonal Use: A permitted use conducted on a lot during certain defined segments of the year. 
Temporary Use:  A permitted use conducted on a lot for less than 180 days. 
Utility: A service, facility, apparatus or use, which provides electric, telephone, cable, sewer, water, natural gas, and similar utility services, to customers within a defined service area, grid, neighborhood region, or municipality.  
Community Utility: A utility, which is owned, operated or maintained by a municipality, municipal authority, homeowners association, or private agency for the purposes of providing sanitary sewage disposal, water supply, energy, telephone, or other utility services within a defined service area. 
Private Energy and Utility:  A utility, which is owned, operated and/or maintained by a private or independent utility company for the purposes of providing energy within a defined service area or grid system in accordance with the provisions established by the Public Utility Commission and the Public Utility Code. 
Public Utility:  A utility, which is owned, operated or maintained by a public utility provider for the purposes of providing sanitary sewage disposal, water supply, energy, telephone, or other utility services within a defined service area in accordance with the provisions established by the Public Utility Commission and the Public Utility Code. 
Variance. Relief granted by the Zoning Hearing Board from the terms and conditions of this Zoning Ordinance where literal enforcement would create unnecessary hardship and when granting of the relief would not be contrary to the public interest. 
Vehicle: Any motor vehicle utilized for any lawful use, which is properly licensed and inspected in accordance with all local, state and federal laws. 
Veterinary Hospital: A professional use operated by a doctor of veterinary medicine used for the diagnosis, care and treatment of domesticated animals, including dogs, cats, reptiles and birds, which may include the provision for a medical laboratory and overnight boarding accommodations. 
Warehouse or Freight Terminal: A building or group of buildings primarily utilized for storage, transfer, loading and unloading of certain products or commodities, but shall not include retail uses or trucking establishment, unless such use is specifically permitted in that district.   
Waste:  A material whose original purpose has been completed and which is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed.  The term waste shall also include and apply to waste that may be considered as either hazardous, contaminated, toxic, residual, municipal or recyclable, as further defined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, and/or other agency having jurisdiction. 
Water Supply System: A system designed to transmit water from the source to users, in compliance with the requirements of the appropriate state agencies and the Township. 
On-Lot Water Supply System: A water supply system, which transmits water from a source on the lot to one (1) dwelling, principal use or lot. 
Community Water Supply System: A water supply system which transmits from a common source to more than one (1) dwelling, principal use and/or lot within a single neighborhood.  All such community water supply systems shall be designed to provide adequate pressure, distribution and storage for fire protection 
Public or Municipal Water Supply System: A system of water collection, storage, transmission and delivery, which are to service a community, but not confined to a neighborhood.  All such public or municipal water supply systems shall be designed to provide adequate pressure, distribution and storage for fire protection 
Optional System Requirement: A special or unique use of land, which because of its water supply requirements may have the option to utilize on-lot water supply methods or connect to a private, community, public or municipal water supply system.  The selected method for water supply shall be consistent with the provisions of West Nantmeal Township and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Water Tower: A structure owned and operated by a company, which is regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, which is utilized to store water. 
Watercourse – A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, whether natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water. 
Watershed  - Land area that drains to a common water body. As used within this ordinance, refers to the land areas draining to the twenty-one (21) regionally recognized named streams illustrated within the West Nantmeal Township Stormwater Management Ordinance. 
Wetlands - Land areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater with a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions (wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas); or areas that are defined and delineated in accordance with the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, dated January 10, 1989, and as may be amended from time to time; or as further defined and delineated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 
Wetlands and Hydric Soil Overlay District:  A conservation overlay of land and water, which include areas of wetlands, hydric soils and high water table soils with hydric components, as further defined and regulated under Section 503 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Wholesale and Distribution Uses: A commercial or industrial use involving the sale of merchandise in large quantities or transactions of commodities to retailers, contractors, businesses, and their agents, but are not generally sold to the general public. 
Woodlands: An area of land in which one (1) or more contiguous acres are mostly occupied or covered by healthy mature trees (12 inches in caliper).  The area of the woodlands shall be measured from the drip line of the outer trees.  
Woodland Extraction: The clear cutting of healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in caliper) to provide area for development on an individual lot. 
Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District:  A conservation overlay of woodlands and forested areas, which includes separate provisions for the following activities: woodland extraction and replacement; forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting and logging; tree protection and replacement; and other activities, which are further defined and regulated under Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Yard: An open space on the same lot with a structure(s), which lies between the structure(s) and a lot line and which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as herein permitted.  
Front Yard: A yard extending the full width of the lot between the principal building and the front lot line.  On lots abutting more than one public street other than an alley, the front yard requirement shall apply for every public street the lot abuts. 
Rear Yard:  A yard extending the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line. 
Side Yard: A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building and the nearest side lot line. 
Yard Sale: An occasional and temporary use contained on a residential lot, wherein the occupants display and offer personal possessions for sale.  This term includes “garage sale,” “moving sale,” and similar terms and activities. 
Zoning: Division of all of the land of an entire political subdivision into districts having different regulations pertaining to use of land; height, area, bulk and use of buildings; yard requirements; and in some states density of population. Zoning is effected by local ordinance under the police power of the state granted by specific legislation generally termed an "enabling act". 
Zoning Hearing Board:  The West Nantmeal Township Zoning Hearing Board, as established and appointed by the Board of Supervisors to hear matters in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance. 
Zoning Map: The West Nantmeal Township Zoning Map. 
Zoning Officer:  The agent or official designated by the governing body to administer and enforce this Zoning Ordinance, as appointed by the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors. 
Zoning Ordinance: The West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010, as adopted by the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors, as may be amended from time to time. 


Article 3: Zoning Map and Zoning Districts 
Section 301:   Establishment of Zoning Districts and Overlay Districts 
(A) 	For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, West Nantmeal Township is hereby divided into five (5) base zoning districts, which shall be designated as follows: 
R-1: Agricultural Preservation Zoning District 
R-2: Rural Residential Zoning District 
R-3: Suburban Residential Zoning District 
C-1: Village Commercial Zoning District 
I-1: Limited Industrial Zoning District 

(B) 	For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, the following Conservation Overlay Districts shall be established in accordance with the provisions of Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance: 
Flood Hazard Overlay District 
Wetlands and Hydric Soil Overlay District 
Steep Slope Overlay District 
Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District 
Historical Preservation Overlay District 

Section 302:   Official Zoning Map  
(A) 	
The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be depicted on the Zoning Map of West Nantmeal Township.  The Zoning Map and all notations, references and data illustrated thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this Zoning Ordinance.  The official copy of the Zoning Map shall be labeled as the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Map and shall identify the signatures of the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors, attested by the Secretary of said Board of Supervisors, and bear the seal West Nantmeal Township under the following words: 

"This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania, as adopted by the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors on August 17, 2010, as part of the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010”. 

(B) 	
If changes are made to district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be made in accordance with the provisions of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, and the changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Board of Supervisors.  No changes of any nature shall be made to the Official Zoning Map, or matter thereon shown, except in conformity with the applicable procedures established in this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The Official Zoning Map shall be located in a place designated by the Board of Supervisors, and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water area in West Nantmeal Township regardless of unofficial copies, which may have been made or published from time to time. 

(D) 	
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the Board of Supervisors may, by ordinance, adopt a new Official Zoning Map.  The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official 


Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof.  The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Board of Supervisors, attested by the Secretary, and bear the seal of West Nantmeal Township under the following words: 
"This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map of the Township of West Nantmeal supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted as part of Ordinance No._______ of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania". 
(E) 	Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost or has been destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved together with all applicable records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
Section 303:   Interpretation of District Boundaries 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the base districts as indicated on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules and guidelines, as provided within this section shall be applicable. 
(A) 	
Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding with the centerlines of streets, highways, lanes, alleys, railroad tracks, rivers or creeks, such centerline shall be construed to be such boundaries. 

(B) 	
Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding with lot lines or deed lines, which were in effect at the date of this Zoning Ordinance, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 

(C) 	
Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding or municipal boundary lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 

(D) 	
Where district boundaries are indicated as being approximately parallel to the center or right-of-way lines of streets or highways, lanes, alleys, railroad tracks, rivers or creeks, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel to the center or right-of-way lines at such distance as is indicated on the Official Zoning Map. 

(E) 	
Where district boundaries are indicated as being approximately perpendicular to the right-of-way lines of streets or highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being perpendicular to the right-of-way lines. 

(F) 	
Where district boundaries are referenced by a distance or measurement from a specific feature, such distance shall be measured in feet and the district boundaries shall follow the specified setback.  Where distances or measurements are not specifically referenced on the Official Zoning Map, the scale of the Official Zoning Map shall determine the unspecified setback. 

(G) 	
Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the effective date of this Ordinance, at the election of the property owner, the regulations of either zoning district may be extended a distance of not more than fifty (50) feet beyond the district boundary line onto the remaining portion of the lot. 

(H) 	
Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are inconsistent with those indicated on the Official Zoning Map, or when circumstances not covered within the context of this section apply, the Zoning Hearing Board shall interpret the district boundaries. 


Section 304: Application of District Boundaries 
The following standards indicated within this section shall be utilized for the generalized application of the base district regulations in association with this Zoning Ordinance. 
(A) 	
Unless otherwise provided by law or the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, no building, structure or land area shall be used or occupied except for a permitted use in the zoning district within which the building, structure or land area is located. 

(B) 	
Any legally established use of a building, structure, lot, land area, or part thereof, which constitutes a conforming use under the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, may be continued. 

(C) 	
Any legally established use which occupies a building, structure, lot or land area prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance or amendment thereto, but does not comply with the use regulations of the district in which it is situated after the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance or any amendment thereto, may be continued as a nonconforming use in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
The regulations established within this Zoning Ordinance shall apply uniformly to buildings, structures or uses, unless otherwise specified by other codes or ordinances, as adopted by West Nantmeal Township. 

(E) 	
All uses shall adhere to the dimensional requirements for lot area, lot width, yard, height and coverage as specified for the zoning district to which the use is located, unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(F) 	
No building or structure shall be occupied without the issuance of a Certificate of Use and Occupancy by the Zoning Officer or other code official designated by West Nantmeal Township. 

(G) 	
No part of a yard, common open space, other open space, off-street parking area, or loading space required in connection with any structure, building or use of the land shall be included as part of a yard, common open space, open space, off-street parking area, or loading space similarly required for any other structure, building or use of the land, except as permitted or required by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(H) 	
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Zoning Ordinance, which meets the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this Zoning Ordinance.  A yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Zoning Ordinance shall not be further reduced below the minimum requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Where district regulations specify a minimum lot width at the street line, the minimum lot width shall be provided contiguous along the street line of one (1) street.  It is prohibited, when calculating the width of a lot, to add widths along the street lines of two (2) or more streets.  In the case of a corner lot, the minimum lot width must be provided along each street on which the lot fronts. 

(J) 	
In the case of a lot of irregular shape, the Zoning Officer shall designate or assign the front, side and rear yards, as considered appropriate for the configuration and conditions. 

(K) 	
All territory or land area, which may be annexed to West Nantmeal Township shall be considered to be zoned in the same manner as the contiguous territory inside the previous municipal limits until otherwise classified. 



Article 4: Zoning District Regulations 
Section 401: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	
The intent of Article 4 of this Zoning Ordinance is to assign a list of uses, which are permitted by right, special exception and conditional use for each Zoning District, as well as establish the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for each permitted use.  Where appropriate, special provisions shall be designated for the permitted uses by reference to other sections of this Zoning Ordinance 

(B) 	
The provisions of Article 4 are intended to be generally consistent with the West Nantmeal Comprehensive Plan, as may be revised or amended. 

(C) 	
The uses permitted within each Zoning District shall be subject to the interpretation of the Zoning Officer.  Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of the uses, procedural requirements, utility provisions and/or dimensional requirements, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Zoning Hearing Board.  In all cases, the burden of proof and submission of technical evidence shall be the responsibility of the person appealing the interpretation of the Zoning Officer. 


Section 402: Agricultural Preservation (R-1) Zoning District 
(A) 	
Purpose:  The R-1 Zoning District generally contains areas with existing agricultural, woodlands, stream valleys and residential uses.    The presence of active and productive agricultural lands is a significant land resource within West Nantmeal Township.  The purpose of the R-1 Zoning District is as follows: 

(1) 	
To accommodate the continuation of agriculture as a land use within West Nantmeal Township. 

(2) 	
To accommodate agricultural development and other development of a type and density that will have the least possible conflict with existing and potential agricultural areas. 

(3) 	
To encourage the appropriate utilization of lands characterized by prime agricultural soils, recognizing that such soils are a precious, irreplaceable natural resource. 

(4) 	
To provide for residential uses in a rural setting. 



(B) 	
Uses by Right: The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by right within the R-1 Zoning District: 

(1) 	
Conservation Uses, subject to Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Forestry, subject to Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Single Family Detached Dwelling Units, subject to the Residential Lot Averaging Design provisions specified under Section 606 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Boarding or Rooming House, subject to Section 613 of the Zoning Ordinance 

(5) 	
Accessory Apartment for Relatives, subject to Section 614 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation, subject to Section 615.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Category 2 Home Occupation, subject to Section 615.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
General Agricultural Uses, subject to Section 703.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Intensive Agricultural Uses, subject to Section 703.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Farm-Related Business, subject to Section 703.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Farm-Support Business, subject to Section 703.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Commercial Greenhouse and Tree Farm, subject to Section 713 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
Horseback Riding School, subject to Section 726.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
Horseback Riding Stables, subject to Section 726.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(15) 	
Municipal Uses, subject to Section 736.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(16) 	
Nursery or Landscape Center, subject to Section 737 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(17) 	
Non-Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 742.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(18) 	
Public Utilities, subject to Section 750.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Uses by Conditional Use. The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by conditional use within the R-1 Zoning District: 

(1) 	Bed and Breakfast Establishments, subject to Section 612 of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
Uses by Special Exception:  The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by special exception within the R-1 Zoning District: 

(1) 	
Group Home, subject to Section 609 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Airport, Heliports and Helistops, subject to Section 704 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Commercial Communication Towers and Facilities, subject to Section 711 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Commercial Mushroom Production, subject to Section 712.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Family Child Daycare Home, subject to Section 718.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Educational Uses, subject to Section 719 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Kennel or Animal Shelter, subject to the provisions of Section 731 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Places of Worship, subject to Section 739 of this Zoning Ordinance 

(9) 	
Veterinary Hospitals, subject to Section 751 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(E) 	
Utility and Dimensional Requirements: Matrix Chart 1 provides the basic utility and dimensional requirements for all uses within the R-1 Zoning District.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 1, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. 

(F) 	
Accessory Uses and Structures: Accessory uses and/or structures shall be permitted provided: they are located on the same lot as the principal use; they are clearly subordinate to the principal use; they have been properly addressed as part of the application for a permit, subdivision, land development, special exception, conditional use, or other approval requirements; and/or they comply with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by West Nantmeal Township. 

(G) 	
Off-Street Parking and Loading: Where applicable, all uses within the R-1 Zoning District shall comply with the off-street parking and loading requirements specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(H) 	
Signs: Where applicable, all uses within the R-1 District shall comply with the requirements for signs, as specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Supplemental Regulations: Where applicable, all sections of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply as supplementary regulations and specifications for uses within the R-1 Zoning District. 

(J) 	
Nonconforming Uses: Uses that are classified as nonconforming uses shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In cases where the dimensional provisions of a nonconforming use are not specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall assign the most restrictive requirements for lot area, building setback, yard setback, building height, building coverage, lot coverage, and other dimensional criteria of a similar permitted use by right within the R-1 Zoning District. 


Matrix Chart  1: R-1 Zoning  District:  Utility and Dimensional Requirements  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Conservation Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  Refer to Article 5 for additional requirements  
Forestry  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 505 for additional requirements  
SF Detached Units Lot Averaging Design  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 606 for additional requirements  
Boarding House or Rooming House  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  10 %  20 %  
Accessory Apartment for Relatives  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  Refer to Section 614 for additional requirements  
Category 1 Home Occupation  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  Variable  Refer to Section 615.1 for additional requirements  
Category 2 Home Occupation  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  Variable  Refer to Section 615.2 for additional requirements  
General Agricultural  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  Refer to Section 703.1 for additional requirements  
Intensive Agricultural  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  20 acres  Refer to Section 703.2 for additional requirements  
Farm-Related Business  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  Refer to Section 703.3 for additional requirements  
Farm-Support Business  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  5 acres  Refer to Section 703.4 for additional requirements  
Comm. Greenhouse and Tree Farm  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  5 acres  Refer to Section 713 for additional requirements  
Horseback Riding School  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  5 acres  Refer to Section 726.1 for additional requirements  
Horseback Riding Stable  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  5 acres  Refer to Section 726.2 for additional requirements  
Municipal Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 736.1 for additional requirements  
Nursery or Landscaping Center  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Non-Commercial Recreational Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  Refer to Section 742.1 for additional requirements  
Public Utilities  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 750.3 for additional requirements  

West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Page: 42 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Matrix Chart  1: R-1 Zoning  District:  Utility and Dimensional Requirements  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Bed and Breakfast, Tourist Est.  Conditional Use  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  10 %  20 %  
Group Home  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  Refer to Section 609 for additional requirements  
Airport, Heliports and Helistops  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  20 acres  Refer to Section 704 for additional requirements  
Communication Towers/Facilities  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 711 for additional requirements  
Comm. Mushroom Production  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  20 acres  Refer to Section 712.2 for additional requirements  
Family Child Daycare Home  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  Variable  Refer to Section 718.1 for additional requirements  
Educational Use  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Kennels and Animal Shelters  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  5 acres  Refer to Section 731 for additional requirements  
Places of Worship Religious Uses  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  3 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Veterinary Hospitals  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  

West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Page: 43 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Section 403: Rural Residential (R-2) Zoning District 
(A) 	
Purpose:  The R-2 Zoning District generally contains areas with existing agricultural, woodlands, stream valleys and rural residential uses.    The purpose of the R-2 Zoning District is as follows: 

(1) 	
To accommodate the continuation of agriculture as a land use within West Nantmeal Township. 

(2) 	
To preserve and enhance ecologically fragile and aesthetically valuable environments of West Nantmeal Township.  Specific environmental features to be preserved and enhanced include, but are not necessarily limited to streams, stream valleys, watercourses, floodplains, wetlands, groundwater, steep slopes, woodlands, scenic vistas, and scenic corridors. 

(3) 	
To permit development of a type and density, which will have minimal adverse impacts upon the natural features and the surrounding properties. 

(4) 	
To provide a clearly defined limit between residential uses, densities and developments within West Nantmeal Township. 



(B) 	
Uses by Right: The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by right within the R-2 Zoning District: 

(1) 	
Conservation Uses, subject to Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Forestry, subject to Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Single Family Detached Dwelling Units containing less than twenty (20) gross acres of land, as deeded, described and contained as part of the parent tract after the enactment date of this Zoning Ordinance, subject to the conventional development requirements specified under Sections 403 and 602 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Boarding or Rooming House, subject to Section 613 of the Zoning Ordinance 

(5) 	
Accessory Apartment for Relatives, subject to Section 614 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation, subject to Section 615.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Category 2 Home Occupation, subject to Section 615.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
General Agricultural Uses, subject to Section 703.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Farm-Related Business, subject to Section 703.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Farm-Support Business, subject to Section 703.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Emergency Services Operation, subject to Section 720 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Horseback Riding School, subject to Section 726.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
Horseback Riding Stable, subject to Section 726.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
Municipal Uses, subject to Section 736.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(15) 	
Nursery or Landscape Center, subject to Section 737 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(16) 	
Non-Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 742.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(17) 	
Public Utilities, subject to Section 750.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Uses Permitted by Conditional Use: The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by conditional use within the R-2 Zoning District: 

(1) 	
Residential Cluster Developments containing twenty (20) or more gross acres of land, as deeded, described and contained as part of the parent tract after the enactment date of this Zoning Ordinance, subject to the provisions specified under Section 607 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Bed and Breakfast, subject to Section 612 of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Golf Course, subject to the provisions of Section 724 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(D) 	
Uses by Special Exception:  The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by special exception within the R-2 Zoning District: 

(1) 	
Group Home, subject to Section 609 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Family Child Daycare Home, subject to Section 718.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Educational Use, subject to Section 719 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Places of Worship and Religious Uses, subject to Section 739 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Veterinary Hospitals, subject to Section 751 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(E) 	
Utility and Dimensional Requirements: Matrix Chart 2 provides the basic utility and dimensional requirements for all uses within the R-2 Zoning District.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 2, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. 

(F) 	
Accessory Uses and Structures: Accessory uses and/or structures to the uses shall be permitted provided: they are located on the same lot as the principal use; they are clearly subordinate to the principal use; they have been properly addressed as part of the application for a permit, subdivision, land development, special exception, conditional use, or other approval requirements; and/or they comply with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by West Nantmeal Township. 

(G) 	
Off-Street Parking and Loading: Where applicable, all uses within the R-2 Zoning District shall comply with the off-street parking and loading requirements specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(H) 	
Signs: Where applicable, all uses within the R-2 District shall comply with the requirements for signs, as specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Supplemental Regulations: Where applicable, all sections of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply as supplementary regulations and specifications for uses within the R-2 Zoning District. 

(J) 	
Nonconforming Uses: Uses that are classified as nonconforming uses shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In cases where the dimensional provisions of a nonconforming use are not specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall assign the most restrictive requirements for lot area, building setback, yard setback, building height, building coverage, lot coverage, and other dimensional criteria of a similar permitted use by right within the R-2 Zoning District. 


Matrix Chart  2: R-2 Zoning  District:  Utility and Dimensional Requirements  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Conservation Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  Refer to Article 5 for additional requirements  
Forestry  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 505 for additional requirements  
SF Detached Units less than 20 acres  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  10 %  20 %  
Boarding House or Rooming House  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  10 %  20 %  
Accessory Apartment for Relatives  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  Refer to Section 614 for additional requirements  
Category 1 Home Occupation  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  Variable  Refer to Section 615.1 for additional requirements  
Category 2 Home Occupation  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  Variable  Refer to Section 615.2 for additional requirements  
General Agricultural  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  Refer to Section 703.1 for additional requirements  
Farm-Related Business  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  Refer to Section 703.3 for additional requirements  
Farm-Support Business  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  5 acres  Refer to Section 703.4 for additional requirements  
Emergency Services Operation  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Horseback Riding School  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  5 acres  Refer to Section 726.1 for additional requirements  
Horseback Riding Stable  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  5 acres  Refer to Section 726.2 for additional requirements  
Municipal Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 736.1 for additional requirements  
Nursery or Landscaping Center  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Non-Commercial Recreational Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  Refer to Section 742.1 for additional requirements  
Public Utilities  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 750.3 for additional requirements  

West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Page: 46 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Matrix Chart  2: R-2 Zoning  District:  Utility and Dimensional Requirements  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Residential Cluster 20 acres or more  Conditional Use  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 607 for additional requirements  
Bed and Breakfast, Tourist Est.  Conditional Use  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  10 %  20 %  
Golf Course 9 Holes  Conditional Use  Optional  Optional  50 acres  Refer to Section 724 for additional requirements  
Golf Course 18 Holes  Conditional Use  Optional  Optional  100 acres  Refer to Section 724 for additional requirements  
Group Home  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  Refer to Section 709 for additional requirements  
Family Child Daycare Home  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  Variable  Refer to Section 718.1 for additional requirements  
Educational Use  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Places of Worship Religious Uses  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  3 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Veterinary Hospitals  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  

West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Page: 47 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Section 404: Suburban Residential (R-3) Zoning District 
(A) 	
Purpose:  The R-3 Zoning District generally contains areas with developments containing medium density residential uses.    The purpose of the R-3 Zoning District is as follows: 

(1) 	
To accommodate the expansion of suburban development in those areas best-suited for medium density residential development. 

(2) 	
To preserve groundwater quality and quantity by encouraging new development to connect with or extend public or community water supplies and sanitary sewage systems. 



(B) 	
Uses by Right: The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by right within the R-3 Zoning District: 

(1) 	
Conservation Uses, subject to Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Forestry, subject to Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Single Family Detached Dwelling Units, subject to the conventional development requirements specified under Sections 404 and 602 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Single Family Semi-Detached Dwelling Units, subject to Sections 404 and 603 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Boarding or Rooming House, subject to Section 613 of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation, subject to Section 615.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Category 2 Home Occupation, subject to Section 615.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
General Agricultural Uses, subject to Section 703.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Farm-Related Business, subject to Section 703.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Community Center, subject to Section 715 of this Zoning Ordinance 

(11) 	
Emergency Services Operations, subject to Section 720 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Municipal Uses, subject to Section 736.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
Non-Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 742.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
Public Utilities, subject to Section 750.3 of this Zoning Ordinance 



(C) 	
Uses Permitted by Conditional Use: The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by conditional use within the R-3 Zoning District: 

(1) 	
Townhouses, subject to Section 604 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Apartments, subject to Section 605 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Residential Cluster Developments containing twenty (20) or more gross acres of land, as deeded, described and contained as part of the parent tract after the enactment date of this Zoning Ordinance, subject to the provisions specified under Section 608 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Assisted Living Care, Convalescent Home or Nursing Home, subject to Section 610 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Commercial Campgrounds, subject to Section 710 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 742.2 of this Zoning Ordinance 



(D) 	
Uses by Special Exception:  The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by special exception within the R-3 Zoning District: 

(1) 	
Group Home, subject to Section 609 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Family Child Daycare Home, subject to Section 718.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Educational Use, subject to Section 719 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Places of Worship and Religious Uses, subject to Section 739 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(E) 	
Utility and Dimensional Requirements: Matrix Chart 3 provides the basic utility and dimensional requirements for all uses within the R-3 Zoning District.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 3, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. 

(F) 	
Accessory Uses and Structures: Accessory uses and/or structures shall be permitted provided: they are located on the same lot as the principal use; they are clearly subordinate to the principal use; they have been properly addressed as part of the application for a permit, subdivision, land development, special exception, conditional use, or other approval requirements; and/or they comply with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by West Nantmeal Township. 

(G) 	
Off-Street Parking and Loading: Where applicable, all uses within the R-3 Zoning District shall comply with the off-street parking and loading requirements specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(H) 	
Signs: Where applicable, all uses within the R-3 District shall comply with the requirements for signs, as specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Supplemental Regulations: Where applicable, all sections of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply as supplementary regulations and specifications for uses within the R-3 Zoning District. 

(J) 	
Nonconforming Uses: Uses that are classified as nonconforming uses shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In cases where the dimensional provisions of a nonconforming use are not specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall assign the most restrictive requirements for lot area, building setback, yard setback, building height, building coverage, lot coverage, and other dimensional criteria of a similar permitted use by right within the R-3 Zoning District. 


Matrix Chart  3: R-3 Zoning  District:  Utility and Dimensional Requirements  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Conservation Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  Refer to Article 5 for additional requirements  
Forestry  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 505 for additional requirements  
Single Family Detached Units  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  20 feet  30 feet  35 feet  15 %  25 %  
On-Lot  Public  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  20 feet  30 feet  35 feet  15 %  25 %  
Public  On-Lot  30,000 sq.feet  125 feet  40 feet  20 feet  30 feet  35 feet  20 %  30 %  
Public  Public  18,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  15 feet  20 feet  35 feet  30 %  40 %  
Single Family Semi-Detached Units  By Right  Public  Public  10,000 sq.feet  60 feet  40 feet  15 feet  20 feet  35 feet  40 %  50 %  
Boarding House or Rooming House  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  20 feet  30 feet  35 feet  15 %  25 %  
Category 1 Home Occupation  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 615.1 for additional requirements  
Category 2 Home Occupation  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 615.2 for additional requirements  
General Agricultural  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  Refer to Section 703.1 for additional requirements  
Farm-Related Business  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  Refer to Section 703.3 for additional requirements  
Community Center  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Emergency Services Operation  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Municipal Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 736.1 for additional requirements  
Non-Commercial Recreational Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  Refer to Section 742.1 for additional requirements  
Public Utilities  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 750.3 for additional requirements  
Townhouses  Conditional Use  Public  Public  10 acres  Refer to Section 604 for additional requirements  

West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Page: 50 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Matrix Chart  3: R-3 Zoning  District:  Utility and Dimensional Requirements  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Apartments  Conditional Use  Public  Public  10 acres  Refer to Section 605 for additional requirements  
Residential Cluster Development  Conditional Use  Public  Public  20 acres  Refer to Section 608 for additional requirements  
Assisted Living Care, Convalescent Home  Conditional Use  Public  Public  5 acres  Refer to Section 610 for additional requirements  
Commercial Campgrounds  Conditional Use  Optional  Optional  20 acres  Refer to Section 710 for additional requirements  
Commercial Recreation Use  Conditional Use  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Group Home  Special Exception  Public  Public  Variable  Refer to Section 609 for additional requirements  
Family Child Daycare Home  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 718.1 for additional requirements  
Educational Use  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Places of Worship Religious Uses  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  3 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  

West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Page: 51 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Section 405: Village Commercial (C-1) Zoning District 
(A) 	
Purpose:  The C-1 Zoning District generally contains areas with a mixture of residential, commercial and institutional uses in a village setting.   The purpose of the C-1 Zoning District is as follows: 

(1) 	
To provide for village commercial uses containing retail shops, personal service establishments, recreational facilities, institutional uses, residential uses and similar uses to accommodate the day-to-day needs of the residents of the community. 

(2) 	
To provide a variety of commercial services to the residents of the community with optimum convenience within commercial nodes along arterial and collector roads. 



(B) 	
Uses by Right: The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by right within the C-1 Zoning District: 

(1) 	
Conservation Uses, subject to Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Forestry, subject to Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Boarding or Rooming House, subject to Section 613 of the Zoning Ordinance 

(4) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation, subject to Section 615.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Category 2 Home Occupation, subject to Section 615.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Mixed Use containing a permitted commercial use and apartments, subject to Section 616 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
General Agricultural Uses, subject to Section 703.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Farm-Related Business, subject to Section 703.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Banks and Financial Institutions, subject to Section 706 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Business and Professional Office, subject to Section 707 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Club, Lodge or Social Quarters, subject to Section 709 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Commercial Greenhouses and Tree Farms, subject to Section 713 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
Community Center, subject to Section 715 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
Construction Services, subject to Section 716 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(15) 	
Emergency Services Operation, subject to Section 720 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(16) 	
Fabrication and Finishing, subject to Section 721 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(17) 	
Funeral Home, subject to Section 723 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(18) 	
Home Center, subject to Section 725 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(19) 	
Laundromats and Dry Cleaners, subject to Section 732 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(20) 	
Manufacturing, subject to Section 733 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(21) 	
Medical, Dental, Vision, Counseling and Health Care Services, subject to Section 734 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(22) 	
Municipal Uses, subject to Section 736.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(23) 	
Governmental Uses, subject to Section 736.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(24) 	
Nursery or Landscape Center, subject to Section 737 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(25) 	
Personal Service Establishment, subject to Section 738 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(26) 	
Printing and Publishing Facilities, subject to Section 740 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(27) 	
Non-Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 742.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(28) 	
Restaurants, subject to Section 745 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(29) 	
Retail Business Uses, subject to Section 746 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(30) 	
Public Utilities, subject to Section 750.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Uses Permitted by Conditional Use: The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by conditional use within the C-1 Zoning District: 

(1) 	
Townhouses, subject to Section 604 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Apartments, subject to Section 605 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Assisted Living Care, Convalescent Home or Nursing Home, subject to Section 610 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Manufactured Home Parks, subject to Section 611 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Bed and Breakfast Establishments, subject to Section 612 of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Convenience Stores, subject to Section 717 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Mini-Malls, subject to Section 735 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 742.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(D) 	
Uses by Special Exception:  The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by special exception within the C-1 Zoning District: 

(1) 	
Single Family Detached Dwelling Units, subject to Sections 405 and 602 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Automobile Sales, subject to Section 705.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Automobile Service Establishments, subject to Section 705.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Car Washing Facilities, subject to Section 705.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Group Child Daycare Home, subject to section 718.2 of this Zoning Ordinance 

(6) 	
Child Daycare Center, subject to section 718.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Adult Care Facility, subject to section 718.4 of this Zoning Ordinance 

(8) 	
Educational uses, subject to Section 719 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Hotel or Motel, subject to Section 728 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Places of Worship and Religious Uses, subject to Section 739 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Truck Service and Maintenance Establishment, subject to Section 749 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Veterinary Hospitals, subject to Section 751 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(E) 	
Utility and Dimensional Requirements: Matrix Chart 4 provides the basic utility and dimensional requirements for all uses within the C-1 Zoning District.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 4, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. 

(F) 	
Accessory Uses and Structures: Accessory uses and/or structures shall be permitted provided: they are located on the same lot as the principal use; they are clearly subordinate to the principal use; they have been properly addressed as part of the application for a permit, subdivision, land development, special exception, conditional use, or other approval requirements; and/or they comply with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by West Nantmeal Township. 

(G) 	
Off-Street Parking and Loading: Where applicable, all uses within the C-1 Zoning District shall comply with the off-street parking and loading requirements specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(H) 	
Signs: Where applicable, all uses within the C-1 District shall comply with the requirements for signs, as specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Supplemental Regulations: Where applicable, all sections of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply as supplementary regulations and specifications for uses within the C-1 Zoning District. 

(J) 	
Nonconforming Uses: Uses that are classified as nonconforming uses shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In cases where the dimensional provisions of a nonconforming use are not specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall assign the most restrictive requirements for lot area, building setback, yard setback, building height, building coverage, lot coverage, and other dimensional criteria of a similar permitted use by right within the C-1 Zoning District. 


Matrix Chart  4: C-1 Zoning  District:  Utility and Dimensional Requirements  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Conservation Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  Refer to Article 5 for additional requirements  
Forestry  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 505 for additional requirements  
Boarding House Rooming House  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  20 %  30 %  
Category 1 Home Occupation  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 615.1 for additional requirements  
Category 2 Home Occupation  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 615.2 for additional requirements  
Mixed Use  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
General Agricultural  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  Refer to Section 703.1 for additional requirements  
Farm-Related Business  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  Refer to Section 703.3 for additional requirements  
Banks /Financial Institutions  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Business and Professional Offices  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Club, Lodge or Social Quarters  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Comm. Greenhouse and Tree Farm  By Right  Optional  Optional  10 acres  Refer to Section 713 for additional requirements  
Community Center  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Construction Services  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Emergency Services Operation  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Fabrication and Finishing  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Funeral Home  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  

West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Page: 55 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Matrix Chart  4: C-1 Zoning  District:  Utility and Dimensional Requirements  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Home Center  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Laundromats and Dry Cleaners  By Right  Public  Public  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Manufacturing  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Medical, Dental, Vision, Counseling, Health Care Service  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Municipal Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 736.1 for additional requirements  
Governmental Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Nursery or Landscape Center  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Personal Services Establishment  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Printing / Publishing Facility  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Non-Commercial Recreation Use  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  Refer to Section 742.1 for additional requirements  
Restaurants   By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Retail Business Use  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  

West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Page: 56 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Matrix Chart  4: C-1 Zoning  District:  Utility and Dimensional Requirements  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Public Utilities  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 750.3 for additional requirements  
Townhouses  Conditional Use  Public  Public  5 acres  Refer to Section 604 for additional requirements  
Apartments  Conditional Use  Public  Public  5 acres  Refer to Section 605 for additional requirements  
Assisted Living Care, Convalescent Home  Conditional Use  Public  Public  5 acres  Refer to Section 610 for additional requirements  
Manufactured Home Park  Conditional Use  Public  Public  10 acres  Refer to Section 611 for additional requirements  
Bed and Breakfast, Tourist Est.  Conditional Use  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  20 %  30 %  
Convenience Stores  Conditional Use  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Mini-Malls  Conditional Use  Optional  Optional  3 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Commercial Recreation Use  Conditional Use  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Single Family Detached Units  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  20 feet  30 feet  35 feet  15 %  25 %  
On-Lot  Public  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  20 feet  30 feet  35 feet  15 %  25 %  
Public  On-Lot  30,000 sq.feet  125 feet  40 feet  20 feet  30 feet  35 feet  20 %  30 %  
Public  Public  18,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  15 feet  20 feet  35 feet  30 %  40 %  
Automobile Sales  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Automobile Service Station  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Car Washing Facility  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Group Child Daycare Home  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 718.2 for additional requirements  
Child Daycare Center  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  

West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Page: 57 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Matrix Chart  4: C-1 Zoning  District:  Utility and Dimensional Requirements  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Adult Care Facility  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Educational Use  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Hotel or Motel  Special Exception  Public  Public  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Places of Worship Religious Uses  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  3 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Truck Service and Maintenance Facility  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Veterinary Hospital  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  

West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Page: 58 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Section 406: Limited Industrial (I-1) Zoning District 
(A) 	
Purpose:  The I-1 Zoning District generally contains areas with a mixture of commercial and industrial uses located within close proximity of highways. The purpose of the I-1 Zoning District is as follows: 

(1) 	
To accommodate commercial and industrial uses, which may be conducted on individual lots with sufficient infrastructure. 

(2) 	
To protect the residents within the community from excessive traffic volume on local roads by locating these uses in close proximity to expressways and arterial roads. 

(3) 	
To locate and cluster certain non-residential uses that may be considered offensive to residential uses. 



(B) 	
Uses by Right: The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by right within the I-1 Zoning District: 

(1) 	
Conservation Uses, subject to Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Forestry, subject to Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation, subject to Section 615.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Category 2 Home Occupation, subject to Section 615.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
General Agricultural Uses, subject to Section 703.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Intensive Agricultural Uses, subject to Section 703.2 of this Zoning Ordinance 

(7) 	
Farm-Related Business, subject to Section 703.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Farm-Support Business, subject to Section 703.4 of this Zoning Ordinance 

(9) 	
Business and Professional Offices, subject to Section 707 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Commercial Greenhouse and Tree Farm, subject to Section 713 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Construction Services, subject to Section 716 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Emergency Services Operation, subject to Section 720 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
Fabrication and Finishing Uses, subject to Section 721 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
Food Processing Facilities, subject to Section 722 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(15) 	
Home Center, subject to Section 725 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(16) 	
Manufacturing Uses, subject to Section 733 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(17) 	
Medical, Dental, Vision, Counseling and Health Care Services, subject to Section 734 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(18) 	
Municipal Uses, subject to Section 736.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(19) 	
Governmental Uses, subject to Section 736.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(20) 	
Nursery or Landscape Center, subject to Section 737 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(21) 	
Personal Service Establishment, subject to Section 738 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(22) 	
Printing or Publishing Establishment, subject to Section 740 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(23) 	
Non-Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 742.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(24) 	
Retail Business Uses, subject to Section 746 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(25) 	
Self-Storage and Portable Storage Facilities, subject to Section 747 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(26) 	
Public Utilities, subject to Section 750.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(27) 	
Warehousing and Freight Terminal Uses, subject to Section 752 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(28) 	
Wholesale and Distribution, subject to Section 753 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Uses Permitted by Conditional Use: The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by conditional use within the I-1 Zoning District: 

(1) 	
Business, Professional Office and Industrial Parks, subject to Section 708 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Hospitals, Medical Centers, Ambulatory Care Centers and Health Clinics, subject to Section 727 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Incarceration Facility, subject to Section 729 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Junkyards, Salvage Yards and Impoundment Facilities, subject to Section 730 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Quarry and Mining Operations, subject to Section 741 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Quarry Support Operations, subject to Section 741 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 742.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Research Facility, subject to Section 744 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(D) 	
Uses by Special Exception:  The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by special exception within the I-1 Zoning District: 

(1) 	
Single-Family Detached Dwellings, subject to Section 602 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Adult Business and Entertainment Uses, subject to Section 702 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Airport, Heliports and Helistops, subject to Section 704 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Car Washing Facilities, subject to Section 705.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Commercial Composting and Mulch Production, subject to Section 712.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Commercial Mushroom Production, subject to Section 712.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Commercial Water Resource Use, subject to Section 714 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Group Child Daycare Home, subject to section 718.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Child Daycare Center, subject to section 718.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Adult Care Facility, subject to section 718.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Hotel or Motel, subject to Section 728 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Solid Waste Disposal and Reduction Facilities, subject to Section 748 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
Truck Service and Maintenance Establishment, subject to Section 749 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
Private Utilities, subject to Section 750.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(15) 	
Undefined Uses, subject to Section 754 of this Zoning Ordinance 



(E) 	
Utility and Dimensional Requirements: Matrix Chart 5 provides the basic utility and dimensional requirements for all uses within the I-1 Zoning District.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 5, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. 

(F) 	
Accessory Uses and Structures: Accessory uses and/or structures shall be permitted provided: they are located on the same lot as the principal use; they are clearly subordinate to the principal use; they have been properly addressed as part of the application for a permit, subdivision, land development, special exception, conditional use, or other approval requirements; and/or they comply with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by West Nantmeal Township. 

(G) 	
Off-Street Parking and Loading: Where applicable, all uses within the I-1 Zoning District shall comply with the off-street parking and loading requirements specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(H) 	
Signs: Where applicable, all uses within the I-1 District shall comply with the requirements for signs, as specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Supplemental Regulations: Where applicable, all sections of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply as supplementary regulations and specifications for uses within the I-1 Zoning District. 

(J) 	
Nonconforming Uses: Uses that are classified as nonconforming uses shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In cases where the dimensional provisions of a nonconforming use are not specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall assign the most restrictive requirements for lot area, building setback, yard setback, building height, building coverage, lot coverage, and other dimensional criteria of a similar permitted use by right within the I-1 Zoning District 


Matrix Chart  5: I-1 Zoning  District:  Utility  and Dimensional Requirements  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Conservation Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  Refer to Article 5 and Section 804.7 for additional requirements  
Forestry  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 505 for additional requirements  
Category 1 Home Occupation  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 615.1 for additional requirements  
Category 2 Home Occupation  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 615.2 for additional requirements  
General Agricultural  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  Refer to Section 703.1 for additional requirements  
Intensive Agricultural  By Right  Optional  Optional  20 acres  Refer to Section 703.2 for additional requirements  
Farm-Related Business  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  Refer to Section 703.3 for additional requirements  
Farm-Support Business  By Right  Optional  Optional  5 acres  Refer to Section 703.4 for additional requirements  
Business and Professional Offices  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Comm. Greenhouse and Tree Farm  By Right  Optional  Optional  5 acres  Refer to Section 713 for additional requirements  
Construction Services  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Emergency Services Operation  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Fabrication and Finishing  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Food Processing Facility  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Home Center  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Manufacturing  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Medical, Dental, Vision, Counseling, Health Care Service  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Municipal Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 736.1 for additional requirements  

West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Page: 62 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Matrix Chart  5: I-1 Zoning  District:  Utility  and Dimensional Requirements  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Governmental Use  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  40 feet  40 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Nursery or Landscaping Center  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Personal Services Establishment  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Printing or Publishing Establishment  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  40 feet  40 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Non-Commercial Recreation Use  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  Refer to Section 742.1 for additional requirements  
Retail Business Use  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Self-Storage or POD Facilities  By Right  Optional  Optional  5 acres  Refer to Section 747 for additional requirements  
Public Utilities  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 750.3 for additional requirements  
Warehouse and Freight Terminal  By Right  Optional  Optional  5 acres  300 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Wholesale and Distribution  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Business, Office or Industrial Parks  Conditional Use  Public  Public  10 acres  Refer to Section 708 for additional requirements  
Hospitals, Medical Centers, Amb. Care  Conditional Use  Public  Public  5 acres  300 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Incarceration Facility  Conditional Use  Public  Public  20 acres  Refer to Section 729 for additional requirements  
Junkyard or Salvage Yard  Conditional Use  Optional  Optional  20 acres  Refer to Section 730 for additional requirements  
Quarry and Mining Activities  Conditional Use  Optional  Optional  20 acres  Refer to Section 741 for additional requirements  
Quarry Support Activities  Conditional Use  Optional  Optional  20 acres  Refer to Section 741 for additional requirements  

West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Page: 63 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Matrix Chart  5: I-1 Zoning  District:  Utility  and Dimensional Requirements  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Commercial Recreation Use  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Research Facility  Conditional Use  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Single-Family Detached Dwelling  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  35 feet  10 %  20 %  
Public  Public  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Adult Business and Entertainment Use  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  40 feet  40 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Airport, Heliports and Helistops  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  20 acres  Refer to Section 704 for additional requirements  
Car Washing Facility  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Comm. Composting Mulch Production  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  20 acres  Refer to Section 712.1 for additional requirements  
Comm. Mushroom Production  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  20 acres  Refer to Section 812.2 for additional requirements  
Commercial Water Resource Use  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  20 acres  Refer to Section 714 for additional requirements  
Group Child Daycare Home  Special Exception  Public  Public  Variable  Refer to Section 718.2 for additional requirements  
Child Daycare Center  Special Exception  Public  Public  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Adult Care Facility  Special Exception  Public  Public  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Hotel or Motel  Special Exception  Public  Public  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Solid Waste Disposal and Reduction  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  20 acres  Refer to Section 748 for additional requirements  
Truck Service and Washing Facility  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  40 feet  50 feet  35 feet  30 %  50 %  
Private Utilities  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  20 acres  Refer to Section 750.2 for additional requirements  
Undefined Uses  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 754 for additional requirements  

West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Page: 64 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 

Article 5: Conservation Overlay Districts 
Section 501: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	The purpose and objective of the Conservation Overlay Districts is to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan and the Chester County Vision Partnership Program, which pertain to conservation management, environmental resource protection, natural resources, historical preservation, and open space preservation.  In order to strategically implement theses goals, objectives and policies, the following Conservation Overlay Districts are hereby established: 
Flood Hazard Overlay District 
Wetlands and Hydric Soil Overlay District 
Steep Slope Overlay District 
Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District 

Historical Preservation Overlay District 
(B) 	
The Conservation Overlay Districts incorporated under this Article include provisions to supplement and enhance the existing underlying district regulations for certain land areas and water features.  These supplemental regulations should not replace the existing underlying zoning district regulations.  In cases where the Conservation Overlay Districts should overlap, the more restrictive standards and specifications shall apply. 

(C) 	
The land and water areas encompassed by the Conservation Overlay Districts shall be subject to the interpretation of the Zoning Officer.  Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of the boundaries or limits of those land or water areas encompassed by the Conservation Overlay Districts, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Zoning Hearing Board.  In all cases, the burden of proof and submission of technical evidence shall be the responsibility of the person appealing the interpretation of the Zoning Officer. 



Section 502: Flood Hazard Overlay District 
(A) 	
Purpose:  The purpose of this section is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize losses due to flooding.  In pursuit of this purpose, the regulations herein shall: 

(1) 	
Discourage the erection of buildings and other structures in areas unfit for development by reason of periodic flooding, unsanitary drainage conditions, or related hazards. 

(2) 	
Protect the public health by preventing the pollution of surface and subsurface water supplies and providing surface area to absorb water for maintenance of subsurface water supply. 

(3) 	
Protect the public safety by preserving natural floodplains and valley flats which may be subject to periodic flooding by: 

(a) 	
Regulating impervious coverage and construction of natural drainage channels to prevent increases in flood volume and rate of flow. 

(b) 	
Providing areas for the deposition of sediment. 



(4) 	
Prevent downstream damage due to increased flood volume and rate of flow, while permitting uses of the floodplain compatible with the preservation of natural conditions and the maintenance of the stream flow throughout the year. 

(5) 	
To minimize the financial burden imposed on the community, its governmental bodies, and individuals by floods. 

(6) 	
To promote responsible floodproofing measures within the Flood Hazard District. 

(7) 	
To meet all requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program and the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978 (Act No. 166) 



(B) 	
Scope of Flood Hazard District: All areas meeting any of the following conditions shall be deemed included in the Flood Hazard District: 

(1) 	
Any water or drainage course or body of water and the lowland adjoining, which may be subject to periodic flooding or overflow. The district shall include all lands covered by the following soil types: Chewacla silt loam (Ch); Wehadkee silt loam (We); Worsham silt loam (WoA, WoB, WoC); and other flood prone soils identified by the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. 

(2) 	
All areas which have flooded within the last 100 years as recorded or indicated by written or other objective records, such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Survey. 

(3) 	
All areas subject to inundation by the waters of the one-hundred year flood.  The source of this delineation shall be the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated September 29, 2006 and the accompanying maps as prepared by FEMA or the most recent revisions thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study.  The area so delineated on such maps shall be an overlay to the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Map.  This area shall be construed as the minimum area subject to regulation by the provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance.  However, where other provisions of this ordinance impose greater restrictions, those greater restrictions shall prevail. 

(4) 	
All areas which by hydrological stream profile analysis conducted by a registered professional engineer qualified in hydrology are calculated to be inundated during a nominal one-hundred-year frequency flood. 

(5) 	
The Flood Hazard District of West Nantmeal Township is comprised of: the Floodway Hazard District (FW); Flood Fringe Hazard District (FF); General Flood Hazard District (FA). 



(C) 	
Definitions:  The following words and phrases when used within Section 502 of this Zoning Ordinance shall have the meanings indicated for the “Flood Hazard Overlay District”.  In the event there is a conflict between the definitions contained within Section 502 and the definitions contained under Section 202, the definitions contained under Section 502 shall govern.  In the event a term is used in Section 502 and is not defined, the definition used in Section 202 shall apply. 


Accessory use or structure:  a use or structure on the same lot with, and is of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. 
Basement: any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides. 
Building: a combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof.  Included shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation. 
Completely dry space:  a space which will remain totally dry during flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent the passage of water and water vapor. 
Development:  any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land. 
Essentially dry space: a space which will remain dry during flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage; the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water. 
FEMA:  the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  
FIRM:  the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by FEMA, as effective on September 29, 2006, or as amended by West Nantmeal Township in accordance with state and federal regulations.  
Flood:  a temporary inundation of normally dry land areas. 
Floodplain area:  a relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any source. 
Floodproofing:  any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway: the designated area of a floodplain required to carry and discharge flood waters of a given magnitude.  For the purposes of this Ordinance, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the one hundred (100) year magnitude. 
Historic structure: any structure that is: 
(1) 
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 

(2) 
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 

(3) 
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 

(4) 
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:  by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 


Identified floodplain area:  the floodplain area specifically identified in this Ordinance as being inundated by the one hundred (100) year flood. 
Land Development: Any of the following activities: 
(1) 	
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving: 

(i) 
a group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or 

(ii) 
the division or allocation of land or space, whether  initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features. 



  (2)	
 A subdivision of land. 


Lowest floor:  the lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished, flood resistant partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance. 
Manufactured home:  a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.  The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days. 
Manufactured home park:  a parcel of land under single ownership, which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more manufactured homes for non-transient use. 
Minor repair: the replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. 
New construction: structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after May 22, 1972 and includes any subsequent improvements thereto. 
One hundred year flood:  a flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every one hundred (100) years 
(i.e. that has one (1) percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year). 
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code (UCC): The model codes adopted statewide by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in Act 45 of 1999 which is applicable to all construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality, a third party agency, or the Department of Labor and Industry. The UCC specifically adopted the International Codes Council Building, Residential, Mechanical, Plumbing and Energy Conservation Codes by name and the Fire, Fuel Gas and Existing Building Codes by reference as the construction standards applicable to construction in the Commonwealth, including construction within the floodplain.  The Township opted to enforce the UCC on June 14, 2004 in Ordinance Nos. 86 and 87 thereby adopting the current edition (which at the time was the 2003 edition) of the required codes.  For coordination purposes, references to the UCC are made specifically to various sections of the International Building Code (“IBC”) and the International Residential Code (“IRC”). 
Person: an individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. 
Recreational vehicle:  a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; (iv) not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory flood elevation: the one hundred (100) year flood elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of one and one-half (1 ½) feet. 
Repetitive Loss:  flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure at the time of each such flood event. 
 Special permit:  a special approval which is required for hospitals, nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such development is located in all, or a designated portion of a floodplain. 
Structure: anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground including, but not limited to buildings, sheds, manufactured homes, and other similar items.  This term includes any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water whether or not affixed to land. 
Subdivision:  the division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs, or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development: Provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted. 
Substantial damage:  damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent or more of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement - Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement.  This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The term does not, however include either: 
(1) 	
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing  violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 

(2) 	
Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure.” 


(D) 	
Exemptions: The provisions of Section 502 shall apply to all land within the Flood Hazard District as herein above defined.  However, it is recognized that certain alluvial soils while not displaying all of the characteristics common to those soils designated in Section 502.B are considered an integral part of the Flood Hazard District. The soils thus designated may be exempted from the provisions of this section where there are no other indications of flood hazard and it is found that such exemption would not have the effect of nullifying the specific intent of this section. Those cases in which silt loams (local alluvium) are involved shall be referred to the Township Engineer who shall examine each case and after consultation with the Planning Commission shall specify either compliance with or exemption from the provisions of this section with respect to a portion or all of the land involved and shall attach any conditions as may be found necessary to achieve the stated purpose of this section. 

(E) 	
Flood Hazard District Maps 

(1) 	
The Flood Hazard District shall include all areas described in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated September 29, 2006 and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by FEMA, or the most recent revisions thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study. 

(2) 	
No areas which by definition of Section 502.C are within the Flood Hazard District shall be required to appear on any Township map and no provision of Section 502 shall be construed to require mapping of such areas.  The Flood Hazard District Map contained within this document is for general reference only and shall not be deemed an authoritative source nor shall it be cited as such under any circumstance. 



(F) 	
Relationship of the Flood Hazard District: The Flood Hazard District shall be deemed an overlay on any zoning district now or hereafter applicable to any lot.  Should the Flood Hazard District be declared inapplicable to any tract by reason of action of the Board of Supervisors by amending this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Hearing Board or any court of competent jurisdiction in interpreting the same or determining the legal effect of the same the zoning applicable to such tract shall be deemed to be the district in which it is located without consideration of this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(G) 	
Compliance Required:  No structure, land, or water shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be erected, located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable Township regulations.  Prior to the issuance of any building permit within the Flood Hazard District, the Zoning Officer shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary government permits required by state and federal laws have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachment Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended); and the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33, USC 1344.  No permit shall be issued until this determination has been made. 

(H) 	
Use Regulations:  

(1) 	
Within the flood way portion of the Flood Hazard District all uses which are not specifically allowed as permitted uses or special exception uses shall be prohibited. 

(2) 	
Within the Flood Hazard District, no construction, use, development, activity, or encroachment shall be permitted which would cause any rise in the level of the one hundred (100) year flood, or retard or change the direction of the flow of water, or catch or collect debris carried by such water, or be placed where the natural flow of the stream or floodwaters would carry the same downstream to the damage or detriment of public or private property.  Wire cattle fences shall be exempted from this section. 

(3) 	
Permitted Uses:  The following uses shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited within the underlying district or by any other section of this ordinance and further provided that they do not require the erection of any building or structure, the placement of fill, or the storage of materials or equipment. 

(a) 	
Customary agricultural operations, including facilities for aquaculture, which shall be conducted according to recognized soil conservation practices and shall in no event cause alluvial deposits to build up in watercourses or cause undue erosion.  Agricultural buildings and structures are prohibited. 

(b) 	
Pasture and grazing land, excluding buildings and structures. 

(c) 	
Outdoor plant nursery or orchard, excluding buildings and structures. 

(d) 	
Forestry, lumbering, and reforestation according to recognized soil conservation practices, excluding buildings and structures. 

(e) 	
Recreational uses, including parks, day camp facilities, picnic grounds (including anchored picnic tables), golf courses, hiking and riding trails, hunting areas, and fishing areas. 

(f) 	
Game farm, excluding structures and buildings. 

(g) 	
Wildlife sanctuary, woodland preserve, nature preserve, and arboretum, excluding buildings and structures. 



(4) 	
Special Exception Uses.  The following uses and activities shall be permitted only when allowed by the underlying district and authorized as a special exception approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance: 

(a) 	
No more than 1/2 of the required minimum lot area for any lot in the R-l, R-2, or R-3 Districts, subject to the further regulation of those districts, and provided that no building or structure and no sanitary drainage field shall be placed within 50 feet of the Flood Hazard District. 

(b) 	
Permeable roads and permeable parking areas to serve permitted uses. 

(c) 	
Utility transmission lines. 

(d) 	
Storm and sanitary sewers and sewage pumping stations, when approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(e) 	
Sealed water supply, wells, and water pipelines, when approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(f) 	
Dams, culverts, bridges, and impoundment basins, where approved by all federal and state regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the watershed in question. 

(g) 	
The expansion, modification, alteration, reconstruction, repair, or improvement of any kind to a nonconforming use or structure. 

(h) 	
Grading or fill, provided that: the effective cross-section profile of the stream basin or floodway at the point of the proposed use shall not be substantially altered; the flood level shall not 






increase more than one foot at any point downstream from said grade or fill. No filling or grading shall be allowed within the flood way portion of the Flood Hazard District if it would cause any increase in the base (one-hundred-year) flood elevation; a detailed engineering study is provided, demonstrating adherence to the above subparagraphs; such use must be approved by all federal and state regulatory agencies having jurisdiction. 
(5) 	Specifically prohibited uses.  The following uses and activities are prohibited within the Flood Hazard District: 
(a) 	
The construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, or commencement of any activities associated with hospitals, nursing homes, jails, or prisons. 

(b) 	
The commencement of, or any construction of or associated with, a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. 

(c) 	
Any new or substantially improved structure that will involve the production, storage, or use of radioactive substances or will be used for the production or storage of any of the following substances: acetone; ammonia; benzene; calcium carbide; carbon disulfide; celluloid; chlorine; hydrochloric acid; hydrocyanic acid; magnesium; nitric acid; oxides of nitrogen; petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, and similar products); phosphorus; potassium; sodium; sulphur and sulphur products; pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides). 


(I) 	
Interpretation of Flood Hazard District Boundaries:  In the case of any dispute concerning the exact location of the boundaries of the Flood Hazard District, the following procedures shall apply: 

(1) 	
The party disputing the presence of a flood hazard shall submit to the Board of Supervisors a detailed hydrologic and hydraulic study, along with supporting data, prepared by a registered professional engineer qualified in such analysis, which shall show in detail the condition of the land in question and indicate those changes which eliminate the subject property or portion thereof from the Flood Hazard District. Such analysis shall specifically designate the high water levels in a one-hundred-year storm. 

(2) 	
Within 5 days of receipt of such hydrologic and hydraulic studies, the Board of Supervisors shall submit copies of such study to the Township Engineer and the Township Planning Commission, either of which may consult such technical experts as each deems necessary for a proper evaluation of the submissions. 

(3) 	
Within 60 days of receipt of a submission, the Board of Supervisors shall make a determination of the Flood Hazard District boundary in question and shall notify the applicant of its decision in writing. 

(4) 	
The Township, or any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Supervisors made pursuant to the provisions of this section, may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board as provided in Article 12 of this Zoning Ordinance.  Upon such appeal, all technical data relating to the disputed decision shall be submitted forthwith to the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(5) 	
No determination upon a change in the boundaries of the Flood Hazard District shall be effective, nor shall building permits be issued as a result thereof, until those changes have been reviewed and approved by FEMA. 



(J) 	
Amendment of the Flood Hazard District 

(1) 	
The Board of Supervisors upon recommendation of the Township Engineer and the Township Planning Commission may change the boundaries of the Flood Hazard District because of natural changes which have occurred.  Made land shall not be considered a natural change. 

(2) 	
The Flood Hazard District shall be amended when necessary consequent to any ruling by the Zoning Officer, the Zoning Hearing Board, or the Board of Supervisors as provided for in this section, which changes the boundaries of the Flood Hazard District. 

(3) 	
The boundaries of the Flood Hazard District as defined in Section 502 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be neither changed nor modified without prior review and approval by FEMA. 



(K) 	
Appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board 

(1) 	
Appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board with respect to the provisions of this section shall be governed by the provisions of Section 502 and Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. In the case of an application for a special exception or variance, the applicant shall also furnish the following materials and information. 

(a) 	
Three copies of a plan drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the lot along with the existing and proposed uses. 

(b) 	
Photographs showing existing uses and vegetation. 

(c) 	
A report detailing the soil type(s) existing on the lot and any pertinent information with respect thereto. 

(d) 	
A series of cross sections, at 25 foot intervals along the flood area center line, showing the stream channel or the lake or pond bottom, the elevation of adjoining land areas to be occupied by the proposed uses, and high water information. 

(e) 	
Profile of the slope of the bottom of the channel, watercourse, lake, or pond. 

(f) 	
Specifications for building materials and construction, floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, storage, water supply, and sanitary facilities. 

(g) 	
Computation of the increase, if any, in the height of flood stages attributable to the proposed use. 



(2) 	
In any instance where the Zoning Hearing Board is required to consider a request for a special exception or variance from the provisions of this section, in addition to those standards for review set forth in Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the following factors, where applicable: 

(a) 	
Whether the proposed change is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and intent of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(b) 	
Whether the proposed use is appropriate to the land use capabilities of the property in question, particularly in regard to water supply, drainage, sewage disposal, topography, soil, and ecological conditions. 

(c) 	
Whether the proposed use will be in the best interests of the Township, the convenience of the community, and the public welfare. 

(d) 	
Any danger of life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. 

(e) 	
Any danger to the safety of others which may be posed by materials swept onto other lands or downstream. 

(f) 	
The suitability of the proposed water supply and sanitation systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions. 

(g) 	
The susceptibility of the proposed use to flood damage and the effect of such damage upon the owners. 

(h) 	
The availability of alternate locations for the proposed use not subject to flooding. 

(i) 	
The need for frontage on a waterway, pond, or lake. 

(j) 	
The compatibility of the proposed use with nearby uses, both existing and potential. 

(k) 	
The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and Flood Plain Management Program for the area. 

(l) 	
The safety of vehicular access to the property in times of flood. 

(m) 	
The heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of floodwaters expected at the site. 

(n) 	
Any other factors which may be relevant to the purposes of this section. 



(3) 	
In granting any special exception or variance, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach reasonable conditions and safeguards in addition to those expressed in this Zoning Ordinance as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following: 

(a) 	
Modification of sewage disposal or water supply systems. 

(b) 	
Limitations on periods of use and operation. 

(c) 	
Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions. 

(d) 	
Floodproofing measures, including the elimination of gravity flow basement drains and the installation of: watertight doors, bulkheads, and shutters; pumps to lower water levels in structures; exterior or interior foundation drainage systems; pumping facilities to relieve water pressure upon subsurface external foundation walls and basement floor; and cutoff valves on sewer lines. 



(4) 	
In any case where new construction, reconstruction, or improvement to existing structures is permitted, such anchorage as dictated by sound engineering practice to resist flotation and lateral movement shall be mandatory.  All construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to a height of 1.5 feet above the one-hundred-year flood elevation. 

(5) 	
For all substantial improvements of existing structures, the following shall be required: 

(a) 	
Where an existing nonresidential structure is subject to a substantial improvement, if the structure cannot be elevated to a point 1.5 feet above the base flood elevation, then reinforcement shall be provided for all walls as required by sound engineering practice to resist water pressures and the structure shall be floodproofed in a completely dry or essentially dry manner. 

(b) 	
Utilization of paints, membranes, or mortars to reduce seepage of water through walls; and 

(c) 	
Addition of such mass or weight to structures as is required by sound engineering practice to resist flotation. 



(6) 	
Where not subject to Section 502.K.5, any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure located in the Flood Hazard District shall be elevated no less than 




1.5 feet above the one-hundred-year flood level and floodproofed.  The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. 
(7) 	
All buildings and structures shall be constructed and located so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to present the minimum obstruction to the flow of floodwater. 

(8) 	
No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life shall be permitted or stored below the one hundred-year flood elevation. 

(9) 	
If any filling or alteration to the elevation of the ground in the Flood Hazard District or any alteration or relocation of any perennial stream is contemplated, the Zoning Hearing Board shall determine that the applicant has submitted certified notice of such proposed filling or alteration, together with plans and specifications related thereto, to all adjacent municipalities, to the Board of Supervisors, to the Federal Insurance Administrator, and to the Department of Community & Economic Development, and has obtained permits from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and/or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as may be required by those agencies. 

(10) 	
In any case where the Zoning Hearing Board shall grant a variance to permit the erection of a structure in the Flood Hazard District, or a special exception or variance to permit a change in a nonconforming use of a structure already existing in the Flood Hazard District, the Board of Supervisors shall require the following: 

(a) 	
The applicant shall advise prospective purchasers or lessees in writing that the lot is located entirely or partially, as applicable, in the Flood Hazard District. 

(b) 	
Before settlement or change in use may take place, the purchaser or lessee shall signify in writing that he has been advised that the lot lies partially or entirely, as applicable, in the Flood Hazard District. A signed copy of such shall be delivered to the Board of Supervisors. 

(c) 	
Where the lot is to be conveyed, the deed shall contain the following provision: 




"This lot is entirely (or "partially," as applicable) within the Flood Hazard District defined by Article 5 of the Zoning Ordinance of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania." 
(11) 	
Further requirements for issuance of variance. 

(a) 	
Variances shall not be issued within the flood way portion of the Flood Hazard District if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 

(b) 	
Variances shall only be issued upon: a showing of good and sufficient cause; a determination that a failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; a determination that the variance to be granted is the minimum necessary to provide relief, considering the hazard of flood; and a determination that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nuisance, fraud upon or victimization of the public, or conflict with any other existing ordinance. 

(c) 	
West Nantmeal Township shall notify the applicant in writing that: the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance; and such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance applications as required herein. 

(d) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board shall maintain a record of all variance applications, including justification for their insurance and report such variances issued in its annual report submitted to FEMA. 



(12) 	
In all proceedings before the Zoning Hearing Board, including variance and special exception applications, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to show that the use proposed will be in general conformity with the objectives of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan, that proper safeguards will be observed, and that the use will not endanger the public health, safety, and general welfare. 

(13) 
No variance shall be granted for any use, structure, or activity listed within Section 502.H.5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


(L) 	
Building Permits: A building permit is required for all permitted construction and development within the Flood Hazard District, including but not limited to permitted buildings and other structures, permeable paving, filling, grading, and excavation. 

(M) 	
Interpretation of Provisions: No provision of this section shall be interpreted to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where the provisions of this section impose greater restrictions, the provisions of this section shall prevail. 

(N) 	
Disclaimer of Municipal Liability:  The granting of a zoning permit, building permit, or approval of a subdivision or land development plan within the Flood Hazard District shall not constitute a representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the Township, or by any official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of any structure, use, or activity proposed. Furthermore, no such granting shall create any liability upon or a cause of action against any public body, official, or employee for any damage that may result pursuant thereto.  This section shall not create any liability on the part of the Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 


Section 503: Wetlands and Hydric Soil Overlay District 
(A) 	
The Wetlands and Hydric Soil Overlay District shall be a conservation overlay to the underlying zoning districts of West Nantmeal Township.  The purpose and objective of the Wetlands and Hydric Soil Overlay District Overlay District is outlined as follows: 

(1) 	
To direct growth, development and revitalization efforts by considering environmentally sensitive land areas and ecological habitats. 

(2) 	
To sustain a high quality natural resource system and to protect a natural diversity of ecosystems. 

(3) 	
To provide aquatic habitats, which are essential breeding, rearing and feeding grounds for many species of fish, plants and other wildlife. 

(4) 	
To develop a protective zone to serve as a natural filter in the removing of pollutants such as bacteria, acid and sediment from groundwater and surface water. 

(5) 	
To implement an effective hydrological and stormwater management program that adequately addresses surface drainage, groundwater recharge and soil erosion control measures 

(6) 	
To implement Best Management Practices. 

(7) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning natural features, conservation management and land use, as outlined within the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan. 



(B) 	
The Wetlands and Hydric Soil Overlay District shall include of the following land and water features: 

(1) 	
All areas delineated as wetlands and/or seasonal pools on the most recent National Wetlands Inventory Maps as prepared by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service. 

(2) 	
All areas delineated as wetlands and/or seasonal pools by a qualified professional or soil scientist with experience in delineating wetlands. 

(3) 	
All areas delineated as wetlands and/or seasonal pools by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, as part of a Jurisdictional Determination. 

(4) 	
All areas encompassed by hydric soils, as defined and mapped by the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. 



(C) 	
For all subdivision or land development applications involving areas with hydric soils and/or areas considered to be wetlands, a qualified professional or soil scientist with experience in delineating wetlands shall conduct a field investigation and delineate the limits of the wetlands on the parcel of land being subdivided or developed.  As part of this requirement, a report containing the field investigation notes, wetland data sheets, summary, conclusions and resume of the person(s) responsible for the field investigation shall be issued to West Nantmeal Township for review and consideration.   Further, the subdivision plan or land development plan shall contain a certification note that has been endorsed by the qualified person(s) responsible for the field investigation and the wetlands delineation, as accurately depicted on the subdivision plan or land development plan. 

(D) 	
For all areas that have been delineated as a wetlands area, the following provisions shall specifically apply: 

(1) 	
No wetland encroachment or earth disturbance activities shall be permitted unless the appropriate permits or approvals have been obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers. 

(2) 	
A fifty (50) foot buffer zone shall be applied to all areas that have been delineated as wetlands, as measured from the perimeter of the wetlands area.  No encroachment or earth disturbance activities shall be permitted within the required buffer zone. 



(E) 	
No on-lot sewage disposal system or on-lot water supply system shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the Wetlands and Hydric Soil Overlay District. 

(F) 	
A wetlands delineation shall be conducted for all areas in which earth disturbance activities or improvements are proposed within the Wetlands and Hydric Soil Overlay District. 


Section 504: Steep Slope Overlay District 
(A) 	
The Steep Slope Overlay District shall be a conservation overlay to the underlying zoning districts of West Nantmeal Township.  The purpose and objective of the Steep Slope Overlay District is outlined as follows: 

(1) 	
To protect certain land areas classified as “steep slopes” from inappropriate subdivision and land development activity, which could result in accelerated erosion, increased volume and velocity of stormwater, and degradation of surface waters. 

(2) 	
To permit only those uses of steep slopes which are compatible with the conservation of the natural conditions, habitats and environment by maintaining existing topographical conditions and minimizing earth disturbance activities. 

(3) 	
To encourage the utilization of appropriate construction and land development practices. 

(4) 	
To direct growth, development and revitalization efforts by considering the protection and preservation of environmentally sensitive land areas. 

(5) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning natural features, conservation management and land use, as outlined within the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan. 



(B) 	
The Steep Slope Overlay District shall include the following two (2) slope categories: 


Category 1 Slopes:  All land areas in which the topographical conditions have a range of slope between 15 and 25 percent in slope in pre-development conditions, as measured 100 feet in any straight-line direction. 
Category 2 Slopes: All land areas in which the topographical conditions exceed a slope of 25 percent in pre­development conditions, as measured 100 feet in any straight-line direction. 
(C) 	
All uses permitted within the underlying zoning districts shall be permitted as part of the Steep Slope Overlay District, provided that the lot or parcel intended to facilitate the proposed use and related site improvements does not conflict with the provisions of the Steep Slope Overlay District. 

(D) 	
The following subdivision and land development provisions shall apply to all lots or parcels, regardless of their size, whereas at least 10 percent of the lot or parcel includes Category 1 Slopes: 

(1) 	
The principal building and use may be located on Category 1 Slopes provided that a professional engineer and architect, licensed within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, submits plans and supporting documentation to West Nantmeal Township as part of the land development plan and/or building permit to demonstrate that the proposed construction methods shall mitigate any adverse impacts associated with steep slopes, hydrology, landscaping, erosion and stabilization. 

(2) 	
Accessory buildings, uses and driveways may be located on or traverse through Category 1 Slopes, provided that it complies with all other provisions specified by West Nantmeal Township. 

(3) 	
The maximum building coverage for the proposed use, as specified by the zoning district requirements, shall be reduced by 15 percent. 

Example:  If the maximum building coverage for a commercial lot is 40 percent and the lot contains Category 1 Slopes as the highest delineated slope category, than the 15 percent reduction would limit the maximum building coverage to 34 percent for that commercial lot. 

(4) 	
The maximum lot coverage for the proposed use, as specified by the zoning district requirements, shall be reduced by 15 percent. 

Example:  If the maximum lot coverage for a commercial lot is 60 percent and the lot contains Category 1 Slopes as the highest delineated slope category, than the 15 percent reduction would limit the maximum lot coverage to 51 percent for that commercial lot 

(5) 	
The maximum disturbance area of lands that have been exclusively identified as Category 1 Slopes shall be limited to 50 percent of the total area of the Category 1 Slopes on the lot or property being developed. 

(6) 	
The final grading on any lot or parcel with Category 1 Slopes shall not exceed a 3 to 1 side slope or horizontal to vertical ratio for any area, which has been disturbed as a result of the improvements.  Grades exceeding a 3 to 1 ratio may be permitted provided the following conditions apply: the grading and earth disturbance impacts will be minimized; the stabilization of adjacent land areas will be enhanced; the stormwater runoff will be sufficiently controlled; the site improvements will be designed, constructed and installed considering best engineering practices that are acceptable to the West Nantmeal Township; and the health, safety and general welfare of the community has been considered. 

(7) 	
Municipal, utility and conservation uses shall be permitted on Category 1 Slopes.  



(E) 	
The following subdivision and land development provisions shall apply to all lots or parcels, regardless of their size, whereas at least 10 percent of the lot or parcel includes Category 2 Slopes: 

(1) 	
The principal building and use shall not be located on Category 2 Slopes. 

(2) 	
All accessory buildings, uses and driveways may be located on or traverse through Category 2 Slopes, provided that it complies with all other provisions specified by West Nantmeal Township. 

(3) 	
The maximum building coverage for the proposed use, as specified by the zoning district requirements, shall be reduced by 20 percent. 

Example:  If the maximum building coverage for a residential lot is 20 percent and the lot contains Category 2 Slopes as the highest delineated slope category, than the 20 percent reduction would limit the maximum building coverage to 16 percent for that residential lot. 

(4) 	
The maximum lot coverage for the proposed use, as specified by the zoning district requirements, shall be reduced by 20 percent. 

Example:  If the maximum lot coverage for a residential lot is 30 percent and the lot contains Category 2 Slopes as the highest delineated slope category, than the 20 percent reduction would limit the maximum lot coverage to 24 percent for that residential lot 

(5) 	
The maximum disturbance area of lands that have been exclusively identified as Category 2 Slopes shall be limited to 10 percent of the total area of the Category 2 Slopes on the lot or property being developed. 

(6) 	
The final grading on any lot or parcel with Category 2 Slopes shall not exceed a 3 to 1 side slope or horizontal to vertical ratio for any area, which has been disturbed as a result of the improvements.  Grades exceeding a 3 to 1 ratio may be permitted, provided the following conditions apply: the grading and earth disturbance impacts will be minimized; the stabilization of adjacent land areas will be enhanced; the stormwater runoff will be sufficiently controlled; the site improvements will be designed, constructed and installed considering best engineering practices that are acceptable to the West Nantmeal Township; and the health, safety and general welfare of the community has been considered. 

(7) 	
Municipal, utility and conservation uses shall be permitted on Category 2 Slopes. 



(F) 	
All applications involving a building permit, subdivision and/or land development plan shall include a detailed topographical analysis, which includes a depiction of the slope categories at a scale of one (1) inch equaling fifty 

(50) feet. The West Nantmeal Township Engineer and/or Zoning Officer shall review the accuracy of the topographical analysis.  Where determined necessary by the West Nantmeal Township Engineer and/or Zoning Officer, field verification should be conducted by the applicant to verify the accuracy of the topographical analysis. 

(G) 	
All slopes considered to be man-made slopes by the West Nantmeal Township Engineer shall not be subject to the provisions specified by the Steep Slope Overlay District. 


Section 505: Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District 
(A) 	
The Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District shall be a conservation overlay to the underlying zoning districts of West Nantmeal Township.  The purpose and objective of the Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District is outlined as follows: 

(1) 	
To protect areas classified as woodlands from inappropriate subdivision, land development and conservation management activities. 

(2) 	
To acknowledge that woodlands are a vital resource and provide a number of community benefits including: minimizing erosion on areas of steep slopes and stream banks; improving groundwater quality and quantity by filtering out pollution and sediment; providing wildlife habitats for plants and animals; providing effective stormwater management and erosion control; providing shade from direct sunlight and reduces temperatures; stabilizing adverse climate conditions by providing buffer and wind breaks; providing active and passive recreation opportunities; enhancing the scenic characteristics; and reducing air pollution by absorbing airborne pollutants. 

(3) 	
To establish forestry and timber regulations that will effectively promote good forest stewardship, protect the rights of adjoining property owners, and minimize the potential of adverse environmental impacts created by inappropriate timber harvesting. 

(4) 	
To minimize the clear cutting of woodlands and other earth disturbance activities that may create adverse environmental and ecological impacts. 

(5) 	
To permit the sale of forestry products as an economic value and to appreciate that forestry is a leading industry within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(6) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning natural features, conservation management and land use, as outlined within the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan. 



(B) 	
Forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting and/or logging shall be permitted in all zoning districts provided such uses are conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Section 505. 

(C) 	
A property owner shall be permitted to clear trees on his or her property without obtaining a permit from the Township provided that the area cleared covers no more than 10% of the gross lot area.  If the property owner or successors and assigns in title to the property opt to perform tree clearing over time in various stages or intervals, no permit shall be required until the total area cleared from all stages of tree clearing by all owners of the property exceeds 10% of the gross lot area of the lot or lots to be cleared. 

(D) 	
A timber harvesting permit issued by the Township shall be required prior to performing the following activities: 

(1) 	
Timber harvesting or logging operation on a property with ten (10) or more contiguous acres where twenty (20) or more trees with a minimum caliper of twelve (12) inches are harvested or logged. 

(2) 	
Timber harvesting or logging operation that involves earth disturbance of two (2) or more contiguous acres of land. 

(3) 	
Tree clearing where the total area cleared covers more than ten (10) percent of the gross lot area 



(E) 	
The following provisions shall apply to a timber harvesting plan and permit: 

(1) 	
A landowner who is required to obtain a permit for the activities set forth in Section 505.D shall submit a permit application and pay the applicable filing fee as established by the Board of Supervisors by Resolution.  The application shall contain a timber harvesting plan which is prepared in accordance with the guidelines established by the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, Bureau of Forestry and/or the Penn State Cooperative Extension.  The timber harvesting plan shall contain the following information: 

(a) 	
Purpose of the proposed operation. 

(b) 	
Name, address and telephone number of forestry operator. 

(c) 	
Total land area involved in the proposed timber harvesting operation. 

(d) 	
Total number of trees selected for harvesting. 

(e) 	
Erosion and sedimentation plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the Chester County Conservation District. 

(f) 	
Reforestation narrative outlining the re-vegetation of the land area, skid trails and harvest areas. 

(g) 	
A chart indicating the quantity of trees and the species of trees selected for harvesting. 

(h) 	
Site location and boundaries of both the entirety of the property upon which the timber harvesting operation shall occur and the specific area proposed for timber harvesting. 

(i) 	
The general location of the proposed operation in relation to municipal and state roads and any proposed accesses to those roads. 

(j) 	
Existing watercourses, floodplains and wetlands. 

(k) 	
The required fifty (50) foot buffer along any harvesting area, landing area, public road, watercourse or wetland as specified in Section 505.F of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(l) 	
Topography of the property, including all slopes of twenty-five (25) percent or greater. 

(m) 	
Earth disturbance locations, including skid trails and landing areas. 

(n) 	
Design, construction, maintenance and retirement of the access system, including haul roads, skid roads, skid trails and landings. 

(o) 	
Design, construction and maintenance of water control measures and structures. 

(p) 	
Design, construction and maintenance of proposed stream and wetland crossings. 

(q) 	
A copy of any other permits or licenses as may be required by federal, state or county laws or regulations. 



(2) 	
West Nantmeal Township and its professional consultants shall review the permit application and timber harvesting plan to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Section.  If necessary, the Township may consult with qualified professionals to review the application and plan.  All costs incurred by the Township to review the application and plans shall be reimbursed by the applicant prior to the issuance of the timber harvesting permit 



(F) 	
The following provisions shall apply to a tree harvesting regulations: 

(1) 	
A fifty (50) foot buffer zone, within no timber harvesting shall occur, shall be required between the boundary of any timber harvesting area and any public street, road, or watercourse or wetland.  

(2) 	
Timber harvesting is prohibited within a floodplain and wetlands. 

(3) 	
Clear-cutting is permitted on slopes of fifteen (15) percent but less than twenty-five (25) percent where it is done for the purpose of managing or improving the natural habitat.  Clear-cutting is prohibited on areas with slopes of twenty-five (25) percent or greater. 

(4) 	
If trees fall on adjacent properties as a result of a timber harvesting operation, the forestry operator shall remove such trees and be responsible for any damage, cost or restoration to the affected adjacent property. 

(5) 	
Felling or skidding on or across any public road or right-of-way is prohibited without the express written consent of West Nantmeal Township or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, whichever is responsible for maintenance of such public road or right-of-way. 

(6) 	
No treetops or slash shall be left: 

(a) 	
Within fifty (50) feet of any public road. 

(b) 	
On or across the boundary of any property adjoining the timber harvesting operation without the written consent of the owner thereof. 

(c) 	
In a floodplain or wetland. 



(7) 	
All tree tops, limbs and slash shall be permitted to remain for soil stabilization provided that they extend no more than four (4) feet above grade. 

(8) 	
The stumps of all felled trees shall be permitted to remain for soil stabilization provided that they extend no more than four (4) feet above grade. 

(9) 	
Littering is prohibited and litter resulting from a timber harvesting operation shall be removed from the site on a daily basis. 

(10) 	
During the periods of abnormal forest fire danger, as determined by the Fire Company that serves the site of the timber harvest, West Nantmeal Township shall have the authority to order the suspension of timber harvesting operations until the danger subsides. 

(11) 	
All land areas and property used for the timber harvesting shall be reseeded in compliance with the timber harvesting plan. 

(12) 	
All holes created in the course of tree harvesting shall be filled or regraded.    

(13) 	
The landowner and/or operator shall be responsible for repairing any damage to public or private roads and other infrastructure caused by traffic or equipment utilized for a timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging operation.  At the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, the landowner or operator shall furnish financial security or a bond in an amount determined by the Township Engineer in order to guarantee the repair of such damages in accordance with Title 67 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 189. 

(14) 	
The landowner and/or operator shall clean any mud or debris that is tracked onto public roads and shall be responsible for repairing berms, shoulders, swales and/or stormwater management facilities on public roads, which may be damaged due to the timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging operation.  All soil and debris washed or carried onto public streets during timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging operations shall be cleaned immediately after the occurrence. 

(15) 	
The West Nantmeal Township Engineer and/or Zoning Officer may inspect the property where any forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging operation is occurring to determine if the requirements of this Section and of the permit, including conditions thereof, or to the plans and specifications submitted with the permit application, including modifications thereof, or to the approved runoff and erosion control plan are being followed. 

(16) 	
A timber harvesting permit shall not be required for the following activities:  

(a) 	
Tree clearing that is performed in accordance with an approved land development plan. 

(b) 	
Tree clearing that is performed by the Township or its agent for the creation of roads. 






Section 506: Historical Preservation Overlay District 
(A) 
The Historical Preservation Overlay District shall be a conservation overlay to the underlying zoning district within West Nantmeal Township.  The objectives of this special overlay district are outlined as follows: 

(1) 	
To establish a zone that emphasizes the preservation of selected areas that has historical significance. 

(2) 	
To establish effective historical enhancement provisions, which consider provisions for buffer yards, scenic vistas, landscaping, signs and other visual enhancements. 

(3) 	
To initiate a process of public and technical review prior to the demolition or relocation of historic buildings and structures. 

(4) 	
To promote tourism within this historical region of Chester County. 

(5) 	
To provide for adaptive reuse and redevelopment alternatives as a means of encouraging their preservation and use. 

(6) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning historic preservation, cultural resource recognition, and land use planning, as outlined within the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan 



(B) 	
The Historical Preservation Overlay District shall include all lots upon which an historical resource or historic site is located, as referenced by: the National Register of Historical Places; the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission; and/or by West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan.  Where necessary, the limits of the Historical Preservation Overlay District shall be determined by the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Officer. 

(C) 	
All proposed land uses, developments and/or site improvements within the Historical Preservation Overlay District shall be reviewed by the West Nantmeal Township Historical Commission prior to the issuance of any permits for demolition. 

(D) 	
All permitted land uses within the underlying zoning district to which the historical resource or historically significant structure is located may be permitted by right within the Historic Preservation Overlay District.  All other land uses that are not permitted by right in the underlying zoning district, but are listed as an adaptive reuse and redevelopment of a historical buildings and structure (refer to Section 506.E of this Zoning Ordinance) may be permitted by special exception. 

(E) 	
The following land uses may be permitted as part of the adaptive reuse and redevelopment of historical buildings and structures: 

(1) 	
Banks and financial institutions excluding drive through facilities, subject to Section 706 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Bed and Breakfasts, subject to the provisions of Section 612 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Business and professional offices, subject to Section 707 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Educational uses, subject to the provisions of Section 719 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Medical, dental, vision and counseling clinics, subject to Section 734 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Places of worship or religious uses, subject to the provisions of Section 739 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Restaurants, excluding drive through facilities, subject to Section 745 of this Zoning Ordinance.  

(8) 	
Retail business establishments, subject to Section 746 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
As part of the special exception application, alternative uses permitted by the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Hearing Board, which has been determined to be: compatible with the adjacent land uses; enables the preservation, restoration or rehabilitation of the historical resource or historical structure; and generally consistent with the overall purpose statements and objectives of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(F) 	
As part of all future subdivision and land development applications within the Historical Preservation Overlay District, the following design requirements and site improvements shall be considered: 

(1) 	
All proposed buildings or structures located within the Historical Preservation District shall be reviewed by the West Nantmeal Township Historical Commission. 

(2) 	
All proposed buildings or structures, which are permitted within the Historical Overlay District, shall be designed to consider the architectural characteristics of the existing properties within the Historical Preservation Overlay District.  Where appropriate, the developer shall utilize building materials that are either compatible to these existing properties or will compliment the historical character of West Nantmeal Township. 

(3) 	
Where feasible, street trees and other aesthetic landscaping improvements should be incorporated into the design of the subdivision or land development plan. 

(4) 	
The total number and size of all signs within the Historical Preservation Overlay District should be limited to avoid clutter and to serve the basic needs of the use.  All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions of Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Unless otherwise directed by the utility company providing service, all proposed utilities shall be installed underground and within a utility easement or right-of-way. 

(6) 	
All proposed developments shall be designed with regard to the topographic and natural features of the site. The purpose of this provision is to insure that the natural features of the development are preserved and protected to the extent that it is not necessary to disturb the site in order to implement the criteria and standards of this Zoning Ordinance. All natural features not proposed for disturbance, as otherwise 




permitted by the objective standards and criteria of this Zoning Ordinance shall be preserved and incorporated into the final landscaping and open space design of the development. 
(G) 	The following provisions shall apply to the demolition or relocation of historical resources: 
(1) 	
No historical resource or historically significant structure shall be demolished and/or relocated until it has been reviewed by the West Nantmeal Township Historical Commission. 

(2) 	
The landowner or applicant shall provide documentation or evidence that the historical resource or historically significant structure can not be rehabilitated, revitalized, reused or redeveloped as a viable land use within the community. 

(3) 	
The West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors shall consider all proposals involving the demolition or relocation of historical resources and historically significant structures within the Historical Overlay District. If acceptable, the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors shall authorize the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Officer to issue the appropriate permits. 


Article 6: Residential Land Use and Development  Requirements 
Section 601: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	
The intent of Article 6 is to develop certain land use and development requirements for the residential uses within West Nantmeal Township.  The provisions of Article 6 are intended to supplement and not replace the zoning district regulations, which are further specified under Article 4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The regulations established under Article 6 shall be subject to the interpretation of the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Officer.  Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of these supplementary regulations, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Zoning Hearing Board. 


Section 602 Single Family Detached Residential Dwellings 
(A) 	
Single family detached residential units, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are permitted within West Nantmeal Township as follows: 

(1) 	
By right within the R-1 Zoning District, which shall be subject to the lot averaging design provisions specified under Section 606 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
By right within the R-2 Zoning District, provided that the parent tract of the property being developed contains less than twenty (20) gross acres, which shall be subject to the conventional subdivision and land development requirements specified by West Nantmeal Township. 

(3) 	
By conditional use within the R-2 Zoning District, provided that the parent tract of the property being developed contains twenty (20) gross acres or more, which shall be subject to the residential cluster design requirements for subdivision and land development specified under Section 607 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
By right within the R-3 Zoning District, which shall be subject to the conventional subdivision and land development requirements specified by West Nantmeal Township. 

(5) 	
By conditional use within the R-3 Zoning District, provided that the parent tract of the property being developed contains twenty (20) gross acres or more, which shall be subject to the residential cluster design requirements for subdivision and land development specified under Section 608 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
By special exception within the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts, which shall be subject to the conventional subdivision and land development requirements specified by West Nantmeal Township. 



(B) 	
All single family detached dwelling units shall be located on a conforming lot, which comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions that are specified by the zoning district on which the single family detached residential unit is located or the appropriate development requirements specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The supplemental matrix charts contained within Article 4 of this Zoning Ordinance provide the basic utility requirements (sewer and water facilities) for each permitted use by its assigned zoning district. The following specific provisions shall apply to utility provisions for single-family detached dwelling units: 

(1) 	
Single-family detached dwellings shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
Single family detached dwellings shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving single-family detached dwellings shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 




Section 603: Single Family Semi-Detached Residential Dwellings 
(A) 	
Single family semi-detached residential units, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are permitted by right within the R-3 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
All single family semi-detached dwelling units shall be located on individually approved residential lots, which comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions, which are further specified by the zoning district on which the single family semi-detached residential unit is located. 

(C) 	
The supplemental matrix charts contained within Article 4 of this Zoning Ordinance provide the basic utility requirements (sewer and water facilities) for each permitted use by its assigned zoning district. The following specific provisions shall apply to utility provisions for single-family semi-detached dwelling units: 

(1) 	
Single-family semi-detached dwellings shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
Single-family semi-detached dwellings shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving single-family detached dwellings shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 



(D) 	
Each single family semi-detached unit shall be considered as a principal use and shall comply with the individual dimensional and utility requirements for a semi-detached unit.  Each residential lot shall be accurately described by bearings and distances, which shall be recorded as a separate deed. 

(E) 	
The common wall separating the single family semi-detached units shall be considered the common lot line, as extended from the front property line to the rear property line.  The side yard setback requirement for all accessory detached buildings, structures and/or uses shall be measured at least five (5) feet from the common lot line.  


Section 604: Townhouse Uses and Developments 
(A) 	
Townhouses, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are permitted by conditional use within the R-3 and C-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Townhouse units and developments shall comply with the following general requirements: 

(1) 	
Townhouse developments located within the R-3 Zoning District shall contain a minimum of ten (10) contiguous acres, which shall be defined as a parcel of land that is owned under a single deed or parcels of land that are owned under multiple deeds, provided that the parcels of land are contiguous to each other having common deed boundaries and are not physically separated by parcels of land owned by other individuals or parties. 

(2) 	
Townhouse developments located within the C-1 Zoning District shall contain a minimum of five (5) contiguous acres, which shall be defined as a parcel of land that is owned under a single deed or parcels of land that are owned under multiple deeds, provided that the parcels of land are contiguous to each other having common deed boundaries and are not physically separated by parcels of land owned by other individuals or parties. 

(3) 	
The Board of Supervisors may consider parcels of land to be contiguous that are physically separated by existing public roads, utility easements or rights-of way, streams and/or other natural features, provided that the applicant demonstrates that the townhouse development can be strategically planned and designed as a townhouse community. 

(4) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(6) 	
All other utility provisions serving the development shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(7) 	
The maximum permitted residential density (townhouse units per gross acre) for townhouse unit developments shall not exceed six (6) townhouse units per gross acre. 

(8) 	
A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the gross area of the townhouse unit development shall be set aside as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space.  The area designated as common open space shall comply with all provisions of this Zoning Ordinance 



(C) 	
The townhouse units and development shall be designed to comply with the following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements: 

(1) 	
The minimum width of a townhouse unit shall be twenty (20) feet per unit. 

(2) 	
The minimum building setback lines should be established twenty (20) feet from any street right-of-way line and forty (40) feet from all other external property lines, which are not owned by the applicant in pre­development conditions. 

(3) 	
The number of townhouse units, attached in a common row, shall not exceed eight (8) attached townhouse units.  The front building lines or facades of any two adjoining townhouse units shall be offset or staggered by a minimum of two (2) feet. 

(4) 	
The maximum height of a townhouse unit shall be thirty-five (35) feet or three (3) floors. 

(5) 	
No more than thirty (30) percent of the total area of the development shall be covered by buildings. 

(6) 	
No more than fifty (50) percent of the total area of the development shall be covered by impervious surfaces. 



(D) 	
The minimum building separation from other groups of townhouse units within the development shall be as follows: 

(1) 	
The separation shall be forty (40) feet when the townhouse unit groups are side to side. 

(2) 	
The separation shall be forty (40) when the townhouse unit groups are side to rear. 

(3) 	
The separation shall be sixty (60) feet when the townhouse unit groups are rear to rear. 



(E) 	
The designated points of vehicular ingress and egress to the development shall be designed in accordance with the provisions established within the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(F) 	
The internal access drives and common off-street parking areas and access drives shall be designed considering the provisions of Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance as well as the following requirements: 

(1) 	
The parking areas shall not be designed or located to require cars to back into streets in order to leave the parking areas.  All dead-end parking lots shall provide adequate areas in which emergency and commercial vehicles can safely maneuver. 

(2) 	
Common parking areas and access drives shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from all structures and from the exterior lot lines of the development. Common parking areas shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from all street rights-of-way and exterior lot lines of the development. 

(3) 	
The entrance and exit ways to parking areas shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet for each lane of traffic entering or leaving the areas. 

(4) 	
Parking areas shall be designed to prevent through traffic to other parking areas. No more than sixty (60) off-street parking spaces shall be accommodated in any one (1) parking area. All common parking areas shall be sufficiently screened and landscaped in accordance with the standards specified under Section 914 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
The points of ingress and egress from common parking areas within the development shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the point of a street intersection, as measured from the nearest street curb lines. 



(G) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be completely screened from view on three (3) sides by fencing and/or landscaping.  All trash and rubbish shall be contained in vermin-proof containers. 

(H) 	
The design of the land or water areas designated as common open space shall comply with the following standards and specifications: 

(1) 	
A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the gross area of the townhouse unit development shall be set aside as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space. 

(2) 	
The area designated as common open space shall comply with the following specifications: 

(a) 	
No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the common open space shall be located on lands within areas that are located within the 100-year floodplain, areas delineated as wetlands and/or areas classified as Category 2 Slopes. 

(b) 	
No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the common open space shall include land areas that are burdened by or are proposed to contain utilities easements and/or stormwater management facilities. 

(c) 	
The total land area designated to comply with the minimum open space requirements shall be comprised of areas not less than fifty (50) feet in width and shall not contain less than one (1) contiguous acre of land.  

(d) 	
Pedestrian pathways less than fifty (50) feet in width may be included as part of the common open space calculations provided that the land area occupied by the pedestrian pathways does not account for more that ten (10) percent of the required common open space and that the pedestrian pathways provide a linkage to other areas designated as common open space. 

(e) 	
There shall be at least one (1) designated common area that is contiguous within the development containing no less than twenty-five (25) percent of the required open space. 



(3) 	
As part of the conditional use approval, the Board of Supervisors may modify the standards and specifications for the common open space as contained in Section 604.H of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
For all common open spaces, satisfactory written agreements shall be executed as a declaration of easements, covenants and restrictions in perpetuity for the preservation of the common open spaces, which shall be recorded with the approved plan. 

(5) 	
The applicant shall make arrangements, provisions and/or agreements to insure that the common open space shall continue to be adequately managed and maintained.  The applicant shall have the following options for ownership, management and maintenance of the common open space: 

(a) 	
Retain the ownership, management and maintenance responsibilities. 

(b) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a homeowners association which is comprised of all the residents of the development; 

(c) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to West Nantmeal Township, who shall have the option to accept or refuse the land offered for dedication; or 

(d) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a conservation management group or non-profit organization that has the capacities and resources to adequately maintain the common open space.  



(6) 	
All options involving the ownership, management and maintenance of land and water areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township. 

(7) 	
The provisions specified herein for common open space do not relieve the applicant of other requirements for open space and recreation, as specified by West Nantmeal Township, whereas, the applicant shall be responsible for all requirements for recreation impact fees associated with this development. 



(I) 	
In addition to the townhouse units, the development may contain the following non-residential uses, provided they are considered as part of the conditional use application: 

(1) 	
Office space consisting of no more than 5,000 square feet and utilized for the purposes of conducting customary business, sales, meetings and/or maintenance, which are directly associated with the development and which are owned and operated by the developer or homeowners association. 

(2) 	
Indoor recreation and/or community center consisting of no more than 10,000 square feet and utilized exclusively by the residents of the townhouse unit development. 

(3) 	
Active and passive recreation uses conducted on the areas designated as common open space. 




Section 605: Apartment Uses and Developments 
(A) 	
Apartments, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are permitted by conditional use within the R-3 and C-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Apartment units and developments shall be designed in accordance with the following general requirements: 

(1) 	
Apartments located within the R-3 Zoning District shall contain a minimum of ten (10) contiguous acres, which shall be defined as a parcel of land that is owned under a single deed or parcels of land that are owned under multiple deeds, provided that the parcels of land are contiguous to each other having common deed boundaries and are not physically separated by parcels of land owned by other individuals or parties. 

(2) 	
Apartments located within the C-1 Zoning District shall contain a minimum of five (5) contiguous acres, which shall be defined as a parcel of land that is owned under a single deed or parcels of land that are owned under multiple deeds, provided that the parcels of land are contiguous to each other having common deed boundaries and are not physically separated by parcels of land owned by other individuals or parties. 

(3) 	
The Board of Supervisors may consider parcels of land to be contiguous that are physically separated by existing public roads, utility easements or rights-of way, streams and/or other natural features, provided that the applicant demonstrates that the apartment units can be strategically planned and designed as a apartment complex and community. 

(4) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(6) 	
All other utility provisions serving the development shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(7) 	
The maximum permitted residential density (apartment units per gross acre) for apartment unit developments shall be twelve (12) apartment units per gross acre. 

(8) 	
A minimum of sixty (60) percent of the gross area of the apartment unit development shall be set aside as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space.  The area designated as common open space shall comply with all provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
The apartments shall be designed to comply with the following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements: 

(1) 	
The total number of individual apartment units contained within a single building shall not exceed thirty 

(30) 
apartment units. 

(2) 	
The building setback line should be established fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way line or sixty (60) feet from the curb line. 

(3) 	
The minimum building separation from other groups of apartment units within the development shall be as follows:  

(a) 	
The separation shall be sixty (60) feet when the apartment unit groups are side to side. 

(b) 	
The separation shall be eighty (80) feet when the apartment unit groups are side to rear. 

(c) 	
The separation shall be eighty (80) feet when the apartment unit groups are rear to rear. 



(4) 	
The maximum depth and/or length of any building occupying individual apartment units shall not exceed one hundred and fifty (150) feet. 

(5) 	
The maximum height of the building shall be forty-five (45) feet or four (4) floors. 

(6) 	
All apartments shall be located at least sixty (60) feet from any property line or property, which is not owned by the applicant in pre-development conditions. 

(7) 	
No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the development shall be covered by buildings. 

(8) 	
No more than forty (40) percent of the total area of the development shall be covered by impervious surfaces. 



(D) 	
The designated points of vehicular ingress and egress to the development shall be designed in accordance with the provisions established within the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(E) 	
The access drives and common off-street parking areas shall be designed considering the provisions of Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance as well as the following requirements: 

(1) 	
The parking areas shall not be designed or located to require cars to back into streets in order to leave the parking areas.  All dead-end parking lots shall provide adequate areas in which emergency and commercial vehicles can safely maneuver. 

(2) 	
Common parking areas and access drives shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from all buildings and structures within the development. Common parking areas shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from all street rights-of-way and exterior lot lines of the development. 

(3) 	
The entrance and exit ways to parking areas shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet for each lane of traffic entering or leaving the areas. 

(4) 	
Parking areas shall be designed to prevent through traffic to other parking areas.  No more than sixty (60) off-street parking spaces shall be accommodated in any one (1) parking area.  All common parking areas shall be sufficiently screened and landscaped in accordance with the standards that are specified by West Nantmeal Township. 

(5) 	
Entrances to and exits from common parking areas shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the point of intersection of the nearest street curb lines. 



(F) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be enclosed and screened from view on three (3) sides by fencing and/or landscaping.  All trash and rubbish shall be contained in vermin-proof containers. 

(G) 	
The design of the land or water areas, which are to be designated as common open space shall comply with the following standards and specifications: 

(1) 	
A minimum of sixty (60) percent of the gross area of the development tract shall be set aside as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space. 

(2) 	
The area designated as common open space shall comply with the following specifications: 

(a) 	
No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the common open space shall be located on lands within areas that are located within the 100-year floodplain, areas delineated as wetlands and/or areas classified as Category 2 Slopes. 

(b) 	
No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the common open space shall include land areas that are burdened by or are proposed to contain utilities easements and/or stormwater management facilities. 

(c) 	
The total land area designated to comply with the minimum open space requirements shall be comprised of areas not less than fifty (50) feet in width and shall not contain less than one (1) contiguous acre of land. 

(d) 	
Pedestrian pathways less than fifty (50) feet in width may be included as part of the common open space calculations provided that the land area occupied by the pedestrian pathways does not account for more that ten (10) percent of the required common open space and that the pedestrian pathways provide a linkage to other areas designated as common open space. 

(e) 	
There shall be at least one (1) designated common area that is contiguous within the development containing no less than twenty-five (25) percent of the required open space. 



(3) 	
As part of the conditional use approval, the Board of Supervisors may modify the standards and specifications for the common open space as contained in Section 605.G of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
For all common open spaces, satisfactory written agreements shall be executed as a declaration of easements, covenants and restrictions in perpetuity for the preservation of the common open spaces, which shall be recorded with the approved plan. 

(5) 	
The applicant shall make arrangements, provisions and/or agreements to insure that the common open space shall continue to be adequately managed and maintained.  The applicant shall have the following options for ownership, management and maintenance of the common open space: 

(a) 	
Retain the ownership, management and maintenance responsibilities. 

(b) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a homeowners association which is comprised of all the residents of the development; 

(c) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to West Nantmeal Township, who shall have the option to accept or refuse the land offered for dedication; or 

(d) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a conservation management group or non-profit organization that has the capacities and resources to adequately maintain the common open space. 



(6) 	
All options involving the ownership, management and maintenance of land and water areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township. 

(7) 	
The provisions specified herein for common open space do not relieve the applicant of other requirements for open space and recreation, as specified by West Nantmeal Township, whereas, the applicant shall be responsible for all requirements for recreation impact fees associated with this development. 



(H) 	
In addition to the proposed apartment units, the development may contain the following non-residential uses, provided they are considered as part of the special exception application: 

(1) 	
Office space consisting of no more than 5,000 square feet and utilized for the purposes of conducting customary business, sales, meetings and/or maintenance, which are directly associated with the apartment unit development and which are owned and operated by the developer or homeowners association. 

(2) 	
Indoor recreation and/or community center consisting of no more than 10,000 square feet and utilized exclusively by the residents of the apartment unit development. 

(3) 	
Active and passive recreation uses conducted on the areas designated as common open space. 




Section 606: 	Residential Lot Averaging Design for the R-1 Zoning District 
(A) 	
The purpose of this section of the Zoning Ordinance is to provide design standards for residential development within the R-1 Zoning District.  The objectives of these provisions are outlined as follows:   

(1) 	
To maintain and continue agriculture as a viable business and use within West Nantmeal Township. 

(2) 	
To preserve prime agricultural soils, resources and land areas. 

(3) 	
To encourage innovative residential land development that will conserve open space. 

(4) 	
To preserve scenic vistas and viewsheds. 

(5) 	
To endorse smart growth techniques and conservation design practices. 

(6) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning natural features, development, utilities, transportation, housing, and land use, as outlined within the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan. 



(B) 	
The proposed subdivision of parcels of land, which contain less than twenty (20) gross acres, as of the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, shall comply with the provisions of Section 606.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The proposed subdivision of parcels of land, which contain twenty (20) gross acres to thirty (30) gross acres, as of the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, shall comply with the provisions of Section 606.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
The proposed subdivision of parcels of land, which contain more than thirty (30) gross acres, as of the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, shall comply with the provisions of Section 606.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(E) 	
All proposed subdivision activity within the R-1 Zoning District shall comply with the general provisions specified under Section 606.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 606.1: 	Residential Lot Averaging with less than 20 gross acres 
(A) 	
The proposed subdivision of a parcel of land, which contains less than twenty (20) gross acres, as of the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the R-1 Zoning District provided that the site is developed with lots containing single-family detached residential uses in accordance with the lot averaging provisions specified under Sections 606.1 and 606.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The maximum number of lots containing single-family detached dwellings permitted for subdivision from the original parcel shall be determined by the following formula: 


A / 2 = N: 	“A” represents the total gross acreage of the parcel to be subdivided, as it existed on the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, excluding: public and private rights-of-way and easements; one hundred (100) percent of the area occupied by wetlands; and one hundred (100) percent of the area occupied by the 100-year floodplain. 
“N” represents the maximum number of residential lots, which will be permitted including all residential lots existing at the time of filing for the subdivision plan.  Fractional values of “N” shall be rounded down to the next whole number.  This formula shall not preclude the creation of fewer lots by an increase in lot size. 
The maximum number of residential lots containing single-family detached dwellings specified by this formula shall not be guaranteed or entitled to any landowner in order to achieve the maximum yield.  The total number of permitted residential lots could be reduced in order to comply with other provisions for subdivision and land development. 
(C) 	
The individual lot size for all new single family detached lots shall comply with the following dimensional requirements: 

(1) 	
The minimum lot area for each individual residential lot shall be one (1) net acre. 

(2) 	
The minimum lot width for each individual residential lot shall be one hundred-fifty (150) feet. 

(3) 	
The minimum front yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet, as measured from the street right-of-way line. 

(4) 	
The minimum side yard setback shall be thirty (30) feet, as measured on each side. 

(5) 	
The minimum rear yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet. 

(6) 	
The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 

(7) 	
The maximum building coverage shall be fifteen (15) percent for each lot. 

(8) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be twenty-five (25) percent for each lot. 



(D) 	
The residue portion of the land being developed in accordance with the lot average provisions contained under Section 606.1 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be retained or occupied by a landowner who has a permitted residential or agricultural use on the residue portion.  The residue tract shall be perpetually preserved and deed restricted to prevent further subdivision activity. 

(E) 	
The proposed residential lots and related site improvements shall be developed considering the general subdivision criteria contained under Section 606.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 606.2 	Lot Averaging with 20 gross acres to 30 gross acres 
(A) 	
The proposed subdivision of a parcel of land, which contains twenty (20) gross acres to thirty (30) gross acres, as of the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the R-1 Zoning District provided that the site is developed with lots containing single-family detached residential uses in accordance with the lot averaging provisions specified under Sections 606.2 and 606.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The maximum number of lots containing single-family detached dwellings permitted for subdivision from the original parcel shall be determined by the following formula: 


A / 3 = N: 	“A” represents the total gross acreage of the parcel to be subdivided, as it existed on the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, excluding: public and private rights-of-way and easements; one hundred (100) percent of the area occupied by wetlands; and one hundred (100) percent of the area occupied by the 100-year floodplain. 
“N” represents the maximum number of residential lots, which will be permitted including all residential lots existing at the time of filing for the subdivision plan.  Fractional values of “N” shall be rounded down to the next whole number.  This formula shall not preclude the creation of fewer lots by an increase in lot size. 
The maximum number of residential lots containing single-family detached dwellings specified by this formula shall not be guaranteed or entitled to any landowner in order to achieve the maximum yield.  The total number of permitted residential lots could be reduced in order to comply with other provisions for subdivision and land development. 
(C) 	
The individual lot size for all new single family detached lots shall comply with the dimensional requirements: 

(1) 	
The minimum lot area for each individual residential lot shall be one (1) net acre. 

(2) 	
The minimum lot width for each individual residential lot shall be one hundred-fifty (150) feet. 

(3) 	
The minimum front yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet, as measured from the street right-of-way line. 

(4) 	
The minimum side yard setback shall be thirty (30) feet, as measured on each side. 

(5) 	
The minimum rear yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet. 

(6) 	
The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 

(7) 	
The maximum building coverage shall be fifteen (15) percent for each lot. 

(8) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be twenty-five (25) percent for each lot. 



(D) 	
The residue portion of the land being developed in accordance with the lot average provisions contained under Section 606.2 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be retained or occupied by a landowner who has a permitted residential or agricultural use on the residue portion.  The residue tract shall be perpetually preserved and deed restricted to prevent further subdivision activity. 

(E) 	
The proposed residential lots and related site improvements shall be developed considering the general subdivision criteria contained under Section 606.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 606.3: 	Lot Averaging with 30 gross acres or more 
(A) 	
The proposed subdivision of a parcel of land containing thirty (30) gross acres or more, recorded on or before the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right in the R-1 Zoning District provided that the site is developed with single family-detached dwelling lots or other permitted uses in accordance with the lot averaging ad land preservation provisions specified under Sections 606.3 and 606.4 of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The maximum number of residential dwelling units for subdivision from the original parcel shall be determined by the following formula: 


A / 4 = N: 	“A” represents the total gross acreage of the parcel to be subdivided, as it existed on the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, excluding: public and private rights-of-way and easements; one hundred (100) percent of the area occupied by wetlands; and one hundred (100) percent of the area occupied by the 100-year floodplain. 
“N” represents the maximum number of residential lots, which will be permitted including all residential lots existing at the time of filing for the subdivision plan.  Fractional values of “N” shall be rounded down to the next whole number.  This formula shall not preclude the creation of fewer lots by an increase in lot size. 
The maximum number of residential lots containing single-family detached dwellings specified by this formula shall not be guaranteed or entitled to any landowner in order to achieve the maximum yield.  The total number of permitted residential lots could be reduced in order to comply with other provisions for subdivision and land development. 
(C) 
The individual lot size for all new single family detached lots shall comply with the dimensional requirements specified on Matrix Chart 6. 

(D) 	
As part of the subdivision and land development process, the proposed single family detached lots shall be designed considering the following criteria. 

(1) 	The size of the lot shall be a minimum of 1.00 net acre but less than 2.00 net acres.  The Board of Supervisors may allow lots larger than 2.00 net acres if any of the following conditions apply:  
(a) 	
Additional land area is required to comply with the provisions for on-lot sewage facilities planning and/or permitting. 

(b) 	
The site can not be suitably utilized for agricultural or conservation uses due to topographical or hydrological factors. 

(c) 	
The landowner agrees by deed restriction to reduce the number of permitted residential lots, as specified under Section 606.3(B) of this Zoning Ordinance, whereas, the total number of permitted residential lots are reduced by fifty (50) percent to the lowest divisible value or common denominator. 

(d) 	
The size of the lot exceeds fifty (50) acres of contiguous land area, whereas, the purpose of the subdivision application is to create a smaller farm containing a single-family residential use.  If permitted, the subdivided parcel shall account for two (2) of the permitted lots under the lot averaging formula, as specified under Section 606.3(B) of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(E) 	
The residue or preserved portion of the land being developed in accordance with the lot average provisions contained under Section 606.3 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be retained or occupied by a landowner who has a permitted residential or agricultural use on the residue or preserved portion.  The residue tract shall be perpetually preserved and deed restricted to prevent further subdivision activity. 

(F) 	
The proposed residential lots and related site improvements shall be developed considering the general subdivision criteria contained under Section 606.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Matrix Chart  6:   Dimensional Requirements for Subdivision in the R-1 Zoning  District  
Dimensional Requirement  Minimum Requirements  Maximum Requirements  
Total Net Land Area  1.00 acre  2.00 acre  
Lot Width  100 feet  200 feet  
Front Yard Setback  50 feet  Not Applicable  
Side Yard Setback (each)  20 feet  Not Applicable  
Rear Yard Setback  30 feet  Not Applicable  
Building Height  Not Applicable  35 feet  
Building Coverage  Not Applicable  15 percent  
Lot Coverage  Not Applicable  25 percent  
Note:    The dimensional requirements contained within Matrix Chart 6 shall apply only to new single family detached dwelling lots, which have been subdivided from a tract of land containing twenty (20) or more gross acres in accordance with Section 606.2 of this Zoning Ordinance.  

Section 606.4: General Subdivision Criteria for the R-1 Zoning District 
(A) 	The following general subdivision criteria shall apply to all proposed residential lots within the R-1 Zoning District: 
(1) 	
The permitted uses contained within the residential lot averaging development shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
If on-lot sewage disposal facilities are to be utilized for the residential lot averaging development, a primary and secondary area designated for on-lot sewage shall be provided within the lot for each residential use.  The common open space or residue tract shall be designated as a third option for on-lot sewage disposal should the primary and secondary sites for on-lot sewage fail. 

(3) 	
The permitted uses contained within the residential lot averaging development shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
The proposed residential lots and related site improvements shall be planned and designed to consider the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan and the design criteria specified by the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.  As part of this requirement, the following provisions shall apply: 

(a) 	
The proposed residential lots should be clustered together in a manner that will preserve the functional use and agricultural values of the farm or residue tract. 

(b) 	
The proposed residential lots should be clustered together in a manner that will preserve the functional use and agricultural values of the farm or residue tract. 

(c) 	
The proposed residential lots and related site improvements shall be designed to consider prime agricultural land and soils. 

(d) 	
The proposed residential lots and related site improvements shall be designed to consider adjacent agricultural and conservation land uses. 

(e) 	
The proposed residential lots and related site improvements shall be designed to consider the preservation of scenic roads, vistas and viewsheds. 



(5) 	
The residue or preserved portion of the land being developed in accordance with the lot average provisions shall be retained or occupied by a landowner who has a permitted residential or agricultural use on the residue or preserved portion.  The residue tract shall be perpetually preserved and deed restricted to prevent further subdivision activity. 

(6) 	
The subdivision plan shall contain notes referencing the subdivision and development limitations associated with the R-1 Zoning District as well as the future subdivision or allotment of residential lots that are remaining with the parent tract.  The note should account for all residential lots previously approved by West Nantmeal Township, by referencing the approval date, number of lots, acreage and tax parcel identification number. 

(7) 	
A note shall be applied to all proposed subdivision, land development, and building permit applications for residential uses within the R-1 Zoning District: 


All land and water areas within the R-1 Zoning District are located in an area where land is utilized for agricultural operations and uses.  Owners, residents and other users of this property as well as neighboring properties will be subjected to occasional inconvenience and discomfort arising from normal and accepted local agricultural practices and operations, including but not limited to noise, odors, dust, the operation of machinery, including aircraft, the storage and disposal of manure, the application of fertilizer, soils amendments, herbicides and pesticides.  Owners, occupants and users of this property should be prepared to accept such conditions and inconveniences are hereby put on official notice that the Pennsylvania Right to Farm Law may bar them from obtaining a legal judgment against normal agricultural operations. 
(8) 	In addition to the provisions contained within this Zoning Ordinance, all proposed residential lots shall be designed in accordance with the provisions contained within the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 
(B) 	
In lieu of the lot averaging provisions specified under this section of the Zoning Ordinance, a landowner may consider the option of developing a farm lot with more than (1) single-family detached dwelling provided that the farm lot contains more than twenty (20) gross contiguous acres, which is undivided by public rights-of-way.  In all such cases, the following provisions shall apply: 

(1) 	
The maximum number of residential uses shall be limited to three (3) single-family dwellings on the farm lot. 

(2) 	
The single-family detached dwellings should be clustered together in a manner that will preserve the functional use and agricultural values of the farm lot.  A minimum separation distance of one hundred 


(100) feet from each dwelling shall be required. 
(3) 	
The single-family detached dwellings shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from the street right-of-way and all other property lines. 

(4) 	
The applicant shall demonstrate that the property could be subdivided in the future considering the provisions specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
The single-family detached dwellings shall have separate and independent provisions for sanitary sewage disposal and water supply, which have been approved by the Chester County Health Department and Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(6) 	
If permitted by West Nantmeal Township, the provisions for subdivision and land development may be waived. 



(C) 	
Properties subdivided exclusively for agricultural or conservation uses shall not count towards the number of permitted residential uses or lots specified under this section of the Zoning Ordinance.  All such lots shall contain ten 

(10) acres or more of contiguous land area, which shall be perpetually preserved and deed restricted as an agricultural or conservation use. 

(D) 	
Where a parcel of land has been preserved as an agricultural or conservation easement through a county, state or federal program, the landowner may consider land development options in accordance with the policies of the county, state or federal program to which the same property has been preserved through an easement. 

(E) 	
All non-residential subdivision and land activity within the R-1 Zoning District shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 402 and 603 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 607: Residential Cluster Design for the R-2 Zoning District 
(A) 	
The purpose of this section of the Zoning Ordinance is to provide development and design standards for Residential Cluster Design for the R-2 Zoning District.  The objectives of these provisions are outlined as follows:  

(1) 	
To provide an optional approach to community development with provisions to permit more efficient utilization of land and infrastructure. 

(2) 	
To encourage innovative residential land development that will conserve open space. 

(3) 	
To protect environmentally sensitive areas and ecological habitats. 

(4) 	
To endorse smart growth techniques and conservation design practices. 

(5) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning natural features, development, utilities, transportation, housing, and land use, as outlined within the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan. 



(B) 	
A parcel of land containing twenty (20) or more gross acres of land within the R-2 Zoning District, as deeded, described and contained as part of the parent tract after enactment date of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be developed with single family-detached dwelling units subject to the residential cluster development provisions of Section 607 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
Residential Cluster Developments within the R-2 Zoning District, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by conditional use.  For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, “Residential Cluster Developments within the R-2 Zoning District” shall also be referenced as “R-2 Cluster Developments”. 

(D) 	
R-2 Cluster Developments shall be designed to comply with the following design and eligibility requirements: 

(1) 	
The minimum amount of land in the development shall be twenty (20) contiguous acres of land, which shall be owned under a single deed or parcels of land that are owned under multiple deeds, provided that the parcels of land are contiguous to each other having common deed boundaries and are not physically separated by parcels of land owned by other individuals or parties.  West Nantmeal Township may consider parcels of land to be contiguous that are physically separated by existing public roads, utility easements or rights-of way, streams and/or other natural features, provided that the applicant demonstrates that the R-2 Cluster Development can be strategically designed as a unified community. 

(2) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan as well as any ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
If on-lot sewage disposal facilities are to be utilized for the R-2 Cluster Development, a primary and secondary area designated for on-lot sewage shall be provided within the lot for each residential use. 

(4) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving the development shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(6) 	
A minimum of forty (40) percent of the gross area of the R-2 Cluster Development shall be set aside as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space.  The area designated as common open space shall comply with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.  

(7) 	
The maximum permitted base residential density provision for the R-2 Cluster Development shall be 0.50 dwelling units per gross acre. 



(E) 	
The following land uses shall be permitted uses within the R-2 Cluster Development: 

(1) 	
Single-family detached residential uses shall comply with the following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements: 

(a) 
The minimum net lot area for each individual residential lot shall be one (1) acre. 

(b) 	
The minimum lot width for each individual residential lot shall be one hundred-fifty (150) feet. 

(c) 	
The minimum front yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet. 

(d) 	
The minimum side yard setback shall be thirty (30) feet, as measured on each side. 

(e) 	
The minimum rear yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet. 

(f) 	
The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 

(g) 	
The maximum building coverage shall be fifteen (15) percent for each lot. 

(h) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be twenty-five (25) percent for each lot. 



(2) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation Use, subject to Section 615.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Category 2 Home Occupation Use, subject to Section 615.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Municipal uses, subject to Section 736.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Non-commercial recreation uses, subject to Section 742.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Community utility provisions, subject to the provisions of Section 750.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(F) 	
The R-2 Cluster Development shall be designed in accordance with the following site design, planning and engineering considerations:   

(1) 	
A sketch plan should be designed by the applicant considering all of the goals, objectives and design requirements of Section 607 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The sketch plan should show the tentative location of the lots, streets, stormwater management facilities as they relate to the natural features and environmentally sensitive areas present on the site of the development.  The sketch plan is recommended as a prerequisite to the formal submission of a preliminary subdivision and land development plan. 

(2) 	
The minimum lot area required for each residential use shall not include land areas that are classified as being within the 100-year floodplain, areas delineated as wetlands, areas within utility easements or rights-of-way, and/or areas defined as Category 2 Slopes. 

(3) 	
All land and water areas that are not utilized for lots, streets, utilities, or other permitted uses within the R-2 Cluster Development shall be set aside and maintained as common open space. 

(4) 	
The proposed residential lots and dwelling units within the R-2 Cluster Development shall have suitable access to an existing public street. 

(5) 	
In addition to the interior parking spaces within garages, each single family detached residential lot within the R-2 Cluster Development shall provide a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces contiguous to the garage and located no closer than five feet to the side lot line. The proposed off-street parking spaces shall not exceed a grade of eight (8) percent. 

(6) 	
The design requirements and specifications contained within the West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall be applied to the R-2 Cluster Development. 



(G) 	
The R-2 Cluster Development shall be designed in accordance with following architectural, landscaping and exterior enhancement standards: 

(1) 	
The R-2 Cluster Development shall be designed with regard to the topographic, hydrologic, geologic and natural features of the site.  The purpose of this provision is to insure that the natural features of the development are protected and preserved to the extent that it is required to avoid unnecessary disturbance of land in an effort to implement the planning criteria and site design standards relating to the proposed housing types, street locations and required infrastructure. 

(2) 	
A natural features plan shall be developed to identify the locations of floodplains, surface waters, wetlands, Category 1 and 2 Slopes, woodlands, rock outcroppings, and other significant features.  The natural features plan shall be submitted with the sketch, preliminary and final phases of the subdivision and land development plan application. 

(3) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed to identify the limits of disturbance for all municipal site improvements within the R-2 Cluster Development, depicting the proposed location thereof in relation to lakes, ponds, streams, floodplains, wetlands, woodlands and hedgerows.  Design components shall be implemented to minimize extensive earthmoving, utilizing typical planning and engineering practices. 

(4) 	
A landscaping plan shall be submitted to West Nantmeal Township for consideration as part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application.  The applicant shall provide three (3) new trees for each proposed residential lot within the development.  The proposed trees should be a minimum caliper of two (2) inches and shall be planted either as street trees, as part of the buffer yard, or within the areas designated as common open space. 

(5) 	
The R-2 Cluster Development shall provide a twenty (20) foot wide buffer yard and planting screen along the property lines at the perimeter of the development tract where necessary to enhance the privacy of the adjacent property owners, as determined by the Board of Supervisors. The design of the landscaping, buffer yard and planting screen shall be subject to the reasonable approval of the Board of Supervisors. The use of existing healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in caliber) is encouraged and may be utilized as part of the required buffer yard. 



(H) 	
The design of the land or water areas, which are to be designated as common open space shall comply with the following standards and specifications:  

(1) 	
A minimum of forty (40) percent of the gross area of the development shall be set aside and reserved as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space. 

(2) 	
Land designated as common open space shall not contain areas within the 100-year floodplain, areas delineated as wetlands and/or areas classified as Category 2 Slopes. 

(3) 	
Land designated as common open space shall not include above-ground utilities and/or stormwater management facilities. 

(4) 	
The common open space shall be planned and located as a contiguous accessible area within the development.  Planned linkages to other common open space areas, preserved lands, recreation areas and/or natural features shall be encouraged and considered as part of the plan. 

(5) 	
The total land area designated to comply with the minimum open space requirements shall be comprised of areas not less than one hundred (100) feet in width and shall not contain less than one (1) contiguous acre of land.  In addition, there shall be at least one (1) designated common area that is contiguous within the R-2 Cluster Development containing no less than thirty (30) percent of the required open space. 

(6) 	
For all common open spaces, satisfactory written agreements shall be executed as a declaration of easements, covenants and restrictions in perpetuity for the preservation of the common open spaces, which shall be recorded with the approved plan. 

(7) 	
The applicant shall make arrangements, provisions and/or agreements to insure that the common open space shall continue to be adequately managed and maintained.  The applicant shall have the following options for ownership, management and maintenance of the common open space: 

(a) 	
Retain the ownership, management and maintenance responsibilities; 

(b) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a homeowners association which is comprised of all the residents of the development; 

(c) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to West Nantmeal Township, who shall have the option to accept or refuse the land offered for dedication; or 

(d) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a conservation management group or non-profit organization that has the capacities and resources to adequately maintain the common open space. 



(8) 	
All options involving the ownership, management and maintenance of land and water areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township. 

(9) 	
The provisions specified herein for common open space do not relieve the applicant of other requirements for open space and recreation, as specified by West Nantmeal Township, whereas, the applicant shall be responsible for all requirements for recreation impact fees associated with this development. 

(10) 	
As part of the conditional use approval, the Board of Supervisors may modify the standards and specifications for the common open space as contained in Section 607.H of this Zoning Ordinance. 




Section 608: Residential Cluster Design for the R-3 Zoning District 
(A) 	
The purpose of this section of the Zoning Ordinance is to provide development and design standards for Residential Cluster Design for the R-3 Zoning District.  The objectives of these provisions are outlined as follows:  

(1) 	
To provide an optional approach to community development with provisions to permit more efficient utilization of land and infrastructure; 

(2) 	
To encourage innovative residential land development that will conserve open space as well as protect environmentally sensitive areas and ecological habitats. 

(3) 	
To endorse smart growth techniques and conservation design practices. 

(4) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning natural features, development, utilities, transportation, housing, and land use, as outlined within the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan. 



(B) 	
Residential Cluster Design for the R-3 Zoning District, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by conditional use.  For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, Residential Cluster Developments within the R-3 Zoning District shall also be referenced as “R-3 Cluster Developments”. 

(C) 	
R-3 Cluster Developments shall be designed in accordance with the following general design and eligibility requirements: 

(1) 	
The minimum amount of land in the development shall be twenty (20) contiguous acres of land, which shall be owned under a single deed or parcels of land that are owned under multiple deeds, provided that the parcels of land are contiguous to each other having common deed boundaries and are not physically separated by parcels of land owned by other individuals or parties.  West Nantmeal Township may consider parcels of land to be contiguous that are physically separated by existing public roads, utility easements or rights-of way, streams and/or other natural features, provided that the applicant demonstrates that the R-3 Cluster Development can be strategically designed as a unified community. 

(2) 	
Residential uses containing single-family detached dwellings, single-family semi-detached dwellings, townhouses, and their accessory structures and uses shall be permitted within the R-3 Cluster Development.  Each residential use shall be located on land area that is most suitable for development in an effort to protect significant natural features and environmentally sensitive land areas. The following land use residential land use composition requirements shall be applied to a R-3 Cluster Development: 

(a) 	
A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the residential uses shall be designed on lots containing single-family detached dwelling units. 

(b) 	
A maximum of fifty (50) percent of the residential uses shall be designed on lots containing single-family semi-detached dwelling units. 

(c)	
 A maximum of fifty (50) percent of the residential uses shall be designed as townhouse units. 



(3) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
As part of the conditional use application, the applicant shall provide documentation or evidence that the method of sanitary sewage disposal and water supply shall be sufficient to accommodate the proposed uses within the development without adversely affecting other adjacent land uses. 

(6) 	
All other utility provisions serving the development shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(7) 	
A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the gross area of the R-3 Cluster Development shall be set aside as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space.  The area designated as common open space shall comply with all provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
The maximum permitted base residential density provision for the R-3 Cluster Development shall be six 

(6)
 dwelling units per gross acre. 



(D) 	
The following land uses shall be permitted uses within a R-3 Cluster Development: 

(1) 	
Single family detached residential uses, subject to the following minimum and maximum development requirements: 

(a) 	
The minimum net lot area for each individual residential lot shall be 6,000 square feet. 

(b) 	
The minimum lot width for each individual residential lot shall be sixty (60) feet. 

(c) 	
The minimum front yard setback shall be thirty (30) feet. 

(d) 	
The minimum side yard setback shall be five (5) feet, as measured on each side. 

(e) 	
The minimum rear yard setback shall be ten (10) feet. 

(f) 	
The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 

(g) 	
The maximum building coverage shall be forty (40) percent for each lot. 

(h) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be sixty (60) percent for each lot. 



(2) 	
Single family semi-detached residential uses, subject to the following minimum and maximum development requirements: 

(a) 	
The minimum net lot area for each individual residential lot shall be 4,000 square feet. 

(b) 	
The minimum lot width for each individual residential lot shall be forty (40) feet. 

(c) 	
The minimum front yard setback shall be thirty (30) feet. 

(d) 	
The minimum side yard setback shall be five (5) feet, as measured on each side. 

(e) 	
The minimum rear yard setback shall be ten (10) feet. 

(f) 	
The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 

(g) 	
The maximum building coverage shall be fifty (50) percent for each lot. 

(h) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be seventy (70) percent for each lot. 



(3) 
Townhouse units, subject to the following minimum and maximum development requirements: 

(a) 	
The minimum width of a townhouse unit shall be twenty (20) feet. 

(b) 	
The building setback line should be established twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way line or thirty (30) feet from the curb line. 

(c) 	
The minimum building separation from other groups of townhouse units within the development shall be as follows: the separation shall be twenty (20) feet when the townhouse unit groups are side to side; the separation shall be thirty (30) feet when the townhouse unit groups are side to rear; and the separation shall be forty (40) feet when the townhouse unit groups are rear to rear. 

(d) 	
All townhouse units within the development shall be located at least forty (40) feet from any property line or property, which is not owned by the applicant in pre-development conditions. 

(e) 	
The number of townhouse units, attached in a common row, shall not exceed eight (8) attached townhouse units.  The front building lines or facades of any two adjoining townhouse units shall be offset or staggered by a minimum of two (2) feet. 

(f) 	
The maximum height of a townhouse unit shall be thirty-five (35) feet or three (3) floors. 



(4) 	
Office space consisting of no more than 5,000 square feet and utilized for the purposes of conducting customary business, sales, meetings and/or maintenance, which are directly associated with the R-3 Cluster Development and which are owned and operated by the developer or homeowners association. 

(5) 	
Indoor recreation and/or community center consisting of no more than 10,000 square feet and utilized exclusively by the residents of the R-3 Cluster Development. 

(6) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation Use, subject to Section 615.1 of this Zoning Ordinance  

(7) 	
Municipal uses, subject to Section 736.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Non-commercial recreational uses, subject to Section 742.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Commercial recreation uses, subject to Section 742.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Community utility provisions, subject to Section 750.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(E) 	
The R-3 Cluster Development shall be designed in accordance with the following site design, planning and engineering considerations:   

(1) 	
A sketch plan should be designed by the applicant considering all of the goals, objectives and design requirements of Section 608 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The sketch plan should show the tentative location of the lots, streets, stormwater management facilities as they relate to the natural features and environmentally sensitive areas present on the site of the development.  The sketch plan is recommended as a prerequisite to the formal submission of a preliminary subdivision and land development plan. 

(2) 	
The area occupied by each residential use shall not include land areas that are classified as being within the 100-year floodplain, areas delineated as wetlands, and/or areas defined as Category 1 or 2 Slopes. 

(3) 	
All land and water areas that are not utilized for lots, streets, utilities, or other permitted uses within the R-3 Cluster Development shall be set aside and maintained as common open space. 

(4) 	
The proposed residential lots and dwelling units within the R-3 Cluster Development shall have suitable access to an existing public street. 

(5) 	
In addition to the interior parking spaces within garages, each residential use within the R-3 Cluster Development shall provide a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces. 

(6) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be enclosed and screened from view on three (3) sides by fencing and/or landscaping.  All trash and rubbish shall be contained in vermin-proof containers. 



(F) 	
The R-3 Cluster Development shall be designed in accordance with following architectural, landscaping and exterior enhancement standards: 

(1) 	
The R-3 Cluster Development shall be designed with regard to the topographic, hydrologic, geologic and natural features of the site.  The purpose of this provision is to insure that the natural features of the development are protected and preserved to the extent that it is required to avoid unnecessary disturbance of land in an effort to implement the planning criteria and site design standards relating to the proposed housing types, street locations and required infrastructure. 

(2) 	
A natural features plan shall be developed to identify the locations of floodplains, surface waters, wetlands, Category 1 and 2 Slopes, woodlands, rock outcroppings, and other significant features.  The natural features plan shall be submission requirement for the submission of a sketch plan and a preliminary subdivision and land development plan application. 

(3) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed to identify the limits of disturbance for all municipal site improvements within the R-3 Cluster Development, depicting the proposed location thereof in relation to lakes, ponds, streams, floodplains, wetlands, woodlands and hedgerows.  Design components shall be implemented to minimize extensive earthmoving, utilizing typical planning and engineering practices. 

(4) 	
A landscaping plan shall be submitted to West Nantmeal Township for consideration as part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application.  The applicant shall provide three (3) new trees for each proposed residential lot within the development.  The proposed trees should be a minimum caliper of three (3) inches and shall be planted either as street trees, as part of the buffer yard, or within the areas designated as common open space. 

(5) 	
The R-3 Cluster Development shall provide a twenty (20) foot wide buffer yard and planting screen along the property lines at the perimeter of the development tract where necessary to enhance the privacy of the adjacent property owners, as determined by the Board of Supervisors. The design of the landscaping, buffer yard and planting screen shall be subject to the reasonable approval of the Board of Supervisors. The use of existing healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in caliber) is encouraged and may be utilized as part of the required buffer yard. 



(G) 	
The design of the land or water areas, which are to be designated as common open space shall comply with the following standards and specifications:  

(1) 	
A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the gross area of the development shall be set aside and reserved as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space. 

(2) 	
The area designated as common open space shall comply with the following specifications: 

(a) 	
Land designated as common open space shall not contain areas within the 100-year floodplain, areas delineated as wetlands and/or areas classified as Category 2 Slopes. 

(b) 	
Land designated as common open space shall not include above-ground utilities and/or stormwater management facilities. 

(c) 	
The common open space shall be planned and located as a contiguous accessible area within the development.  Planned linkages to other common open space areas, preserved lands, recreation areas and/or natural features shall be encouraged and considered as part of the plan. 

(d) 
The total land area designated to comply with the minimum open space requirements shall be comprised of areas not less than fifty (50) feet in width and shall not contain less than one (1) contiguous acre of land.  

(e) 	
Pedestrian pathways less than fifty (50) feet in width may be included as part of the common open space calculations provided that land area occupied by the pedestrian pathways does not account for more that ten (10) percent of the required common open space and that the pedestrian pathways provide a linkage to other areas designated as common open space. 

(f) 	
There shall be at least one (1) designated common area that is contiguous within the R-3 Cluster Development containing no less than twenty-five (25) percent of the required open space. 



(3) 	
Non-commercial recreation uses may be incorporated within the areas designated as common open space provided that the non-commercial recreation uses are planned, located and designed in accordance with Section 742.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Commercial recreation uses may be incorporated within the areas designated as common open space provided that the commercial recreation uses principally benefit the residents of the development.  The commercial recreation uses shall be planned, located and designed in accordance with Section 742.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
As part of the conditional use approval, the Board of Supervisors may modify the standards and specifications for the common open space as contained in Section 608.G of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
For all common open spaces, satisfactory written agreements shall be executed as a declaration of easements, covenants and restrictions in perpetuity for the preservation of the common open spaces, which shall be recorded with the approved plan. 

(7) 	
The applicant shall make arrangements, provisions and/or agreements to insure that the common open space shall continue to be adequately managed and maintained.  The applicant shall have the following options for ownership, management and maintenance of the common open space: 

(a) 	
Retain the ownership, management and maintenance responsibilities. 

(b) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a homeowners association which is comprised of all the residents of the development; 

(c) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to West Nantmeal Township, who shall have the option to accept or refuse the land offered for dedication; or 

(d) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a conservation management group or non-profit organization that has the capacities and resources to adequately maintain the common open space. 



(8) 	
All options involving the ownership, management and maintenance of land and water areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township The land areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township. 

(9) 	
The provisions specified herein for common open space do not relieve the applicant of other requirements for open space and recreation, as specified by West Nantmeal Township, whereas, the applicant shall be responsible for all requirements for recreation impact fees associated with this development. 




Section 609: Group Homes 
(A) 	
Group Homes, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are permitted by special exception within the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
All group homes shall be designed and contained within a single-family detached dwelling unit located on a conforming lot that complies with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions specified by the zoning district on which the single-family dwelling and group home is located. 

(C) 	
The supplemental matrix charts contained within Article 4 of this Zoning Ordinance provides the basic utility requirements (sewer and water facilities) for each permitted use by its assigned zoning district. The following specific provisions shall apply to utility provisions for group homes: 

(1) 	
Group homes shall be serviced by public, community, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan as well as any ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
Group homes shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving group homes shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  The applicant shall provide documentation from the utility provider that the services are capable of accommodating the needs of the group home. 



(D) 	
All group homes shall be designed in accordance with the following general standards and requirements: 

(1) 	
No group home shall be located within 500 linear feet of another group home. 

(2) 	
One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided per employee computed on the basis of the estimated maximum number of employees that could be present at any given time, plus one (1) space for each two 

(2) 
persons within the group home.  Garage space shall not be used in calculating off-street parking. 

(3) 	
No more than two (2) live-in supervisors shall reside in a group home. 

(4) 	
The sponsoring social service agency shall provide documentation to West Nantmeal Township that all building, fire, plumbing, heating, electrical and similar facilities meet the standards established by the West Nantmeal Township and by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(5) 	
The sponsoring social service agency shall provide documentation to West Nantmeal Township that the group home has been certified as an approved use within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(6) 	
The sponsoring social service agency shall be responsible for the physical safety and emotional support of the residents within the group home.  A point of contact and/or designated counselor should be available twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week. 

(7) 	
The sponsoring social service agency shall provide West Nantmeal Township with a list of tenants who reside within the group home. 

(8) 	
No group home shall have more than five (5) unrelated residents at any given time period. 

(9) 	
An emergency management plan shall be developed in the event of a catastrophic event resulting from flooding, fire, snow, ice, earthquake, utility outage, or other catastrophic event.  The emergency management plan should be posted and a copy shall be issued to the social workers and tenants. 




Section 610: Assisted Living Care Facilities, Convalescent Homes and Nursing Homes 
(A) 	
Assisted living care facilities, convalescent homes and nursing homes, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by conditional use within the R-3 and C-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Assisted living care facilities, convalescent homes and nursing homes  shall be subject to the following general design and eligibility requirements: 


(1) 	
A minimum of five (5) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the assisted living care facility, convalescent home and/or nursing home, which shall owned under a single deed or parcels of land that are owned under multiple deeds, provided that the parcels of land are contiguous to each other having common deed boundaries and are not physically separated by parcels of land owned by other individuals or parties. 

(2) 	
The assisted living care facility, convalescent home and/or nursing home shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The assisted living care facility, convalescent home and/or nursing home shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. As part of the conditional use application, the applicant shall provide documentation or evidence that the quantity of the water supply source will be sufficient to accommodate the proposed uses within the development without adversely affecting other adjacent land uses. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the development shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
The assisted living care facility, convalescent home and/or nursing home shall be designed to comply with the following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements: 

(a) 	
The minimum building setback line shall be established fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way line or sixty (60) feet from the curb line. 

(b) 	
The maximum depth and/or length of any building shall not exceed one hundred and two hundred (200) feet respectfully. 

(c) 	
The maximum height of the building shall be forty-five (45) feet or four (4) floors. 

(d) 	
All buildings shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any property line or property, which is not owned by the applicant in pre-development conditions. 

(e) 	
The minimum building separation from other groups of internal buildings shall be forty (40) feet. 

(f) 	
No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the development shall be covered by buildings. 

(g) 	
No more than forty (40) percent of the total area of the development shall be covered by impervious surfaces. 



(6) 	
All property lines adjacent to existing residential land uses shall be adequately screened and buffered so as to protect the residential neighborhood from inappropriate noise, light and other disturbances. 

(7) 	
All designated points of ingress and egress for emergency management vehicles shall be designed to consider traffic volumes on existing streets and adjacent uses. 

(8) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least 150 feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or West Nantmeal Township. 

(9) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress.   All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of emergency response vehicles, buses and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(10) 	
All proposed signs for the assisted living care facility, convalescent home and/or nursing home shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line. 

(12) 	
All medical waste, bio-hazardous materials, equipment, red bag waste, and other similar items, which because of its potential health risks, shall be discarded in a manner specified by local, county, state and federal laws. 

(13) 	
An emergency management plan must be developed in the event of a catastrophic event resulting from flooding, fire, snow, ice, earthquake, utility outage, or other catastrophic event.  The emergency management plan should be posted and a copy shall be issued to occupants of the facility. 


Section 611: Manufactured Home Parks 
(A) 	
Manufactured Home Parks, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are permitted by conditional use within the C-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, “Manufactured Home Park” shall be synonymous with “Mobile Home Park” and “Manufactured Home” may be synonymous with “Mobile Home”.  If required, the Zoning Officer shall determine if the terminology are synonymous or if an alternative interpretation should be considered.   

(C) 	
All Manufactured Home Parks shall be designed in accordance with the following general design and eligibility requirements: 

(1) 	
The Manufactured Home Park shall consist of a minimum contiguous land area of ten (10) acres. Contiguous land area shall be defined as a parcel of land that is owned under a single deed or parcels of land that are owned under multiple deeds, provided that the parcels of land are contiguous to each other having common deed boundaries and are not physically separated by parcels of land owned by other individuals or parties.  West Nantmeal Township may consider parcels of land that are physically separated by public roads, utility easements or rights-of way, streams and/or other natural features, provided that the applicant demonstrates that the Manufactured Home Park can be strategically designed as a unified community. 

(2) 	
The Manufactured Home Park shall be served by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection public sanitary sewage disposal facilities. 

(3) 	
The Manufactured Home Park shall be served by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the land area within the Manufactured Home Park shall be set aside as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved and deeded to restrict future residential 

development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space.  The area designated as common open space shall comply with all provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
The Manufactured Home Park shall be designed with regard to the topographic and natural features of the site.  All natural features (lakes, streams, topsoil, knolls, basins, trees and shrubs) should be preserved and incorporated into the final landscaping whenever possible.  The finished topography shall adequately facilitate the Manufactured Home Park without excessive earthmoving and neglect for the natural environmental amenities. 

(6) 	
The Manufactured Home Park shall not exceed four (4) dwelling units per gross acre. 



(D) 	
The Manufactured Homes located within the Manufactured Home Park shall be located on individual lots or lease areas and shall be designed to comply with the following dimensional requirements: 

(1) 	
The minimum net lot area or net lease area for each individual manufactured home shall be 4,000 square feet. 

(2) 	
The minimum lot width for each individual manufactured home lot or lease area shall be sixty (60) feet. 

(3) 	
The minimum front yard setback shall be twenty (20) feet. 

(4) 	
The minimum side yard setback shall be ten (10) feet, as measured on each side. 

(5) 	
The minimum rear yard setback shall be twenty (20) feet. 

(6) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be eighty (80) percent for each lot or lease area. 

(7) 	
All proposed Manufactured Homes within the Manufactured Home Park shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any property line or property, which is not owned by the applicant in pre-development conditions. 

(8) 	
No structure shall be constructed on or within fifty (50) feet of any land or water areas designated as floodplains, wetlands, hydric soils, and slopes exceeding 20 percent in grade. 

(9) 	
No more than one (1) Manufactured Home shall be placed on a Manufactured Home lot or lease area, and such Manufactured Home shall be occupied by not more than one (1) single family. 



(E) 	
All Manufactured Home Parks shall be subject to the following development and procedural requirements: 

(1) 	
The Manufactured Home Park shall provide an evergreen planting screen at least twenty (20) feet in depth along the property line at the periphery of the development. 

(2) 	
No part of the Manufactured Home Park shall be used to accommodate other uses than the uses permitted under this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
There shall be at least one (1) street within the Manufactured Home Park, which serves as an internal collector street from which minor streets shall turn out so as to provide direct access to each Manufactured Home lot or lease area. All streets shall be designed and constructed to comply with all pertinent specification adopted by West Nantmeal Township. 

(4) 	
All entrances shall conform to the standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and West Nantmeal Township.  A Traffic Impact Study should be prepared to assess the needs for on-site and off-site traffic improvements, which may be required to facilitate the Manufactured Home Park.  The Traffic Impact Study shall be submitted to West Nantmeal Township for review and consideration as part of the conditional use application. 

(5) 	
A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces measuring ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet shall be provided for each Manufactured Home lot or lease area.  A common off-street parking area may be designed to accommodate the required off-street parking requirements and/or to provide additional spaces 

for overflow parking spaces.  No on-street parking shall be permitted within the Manufactured Home Park. 

(6) 	
Each Manufactured Home space shall be provided with a concrete pad or basement foundation that shall comply with the specifications of the manufacturer and the building code requirements of West Nantmeal Township. 

(7) 	
All Manufactured Homes shall be located, erected and anchored in accordance with all applicable standards and provisions specified by West Nantmeal Township and/or the manufacturers specifications. 

(8) 	
Each Manufactured Home stand shall be equipped with utility connections.  For reasons of safety, the space between the Manufactured Home stand and the Manufactured Home floor shall be permanently enclosed to prevent unauthorized entry and to conceal all supports and utility connections.  Each stand shall be located at such elevation, distance and angle in relation to the access street and Manufactured Home accessory that the placement and removal of the Manufactured Home is practical. 

(9) 	
The area between the ground level and the perimeter of the Manufactured Home shall be enclosed by means of a suitable skirting. 

(10) 	
Every Manufactured Home and open space areas shall have access to an improved public or private street. 

(11) 	
A subdivision and land development plan shall be submitted to West Nantmeal Township for review and consideration. 

(12) 	
Unless otherwise required by the utility provider, all public utility services shall be underground within the Manufactured Home Park. 

(13) 	
Exterior storage areas for refuse stations shall be properly screened from the view of all Manufactured Homes within the Manufactured Home Park and from adjacent property owners.  All containers shall be air-tight, vermin-proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  The Manufactured Home Park shall have a solid waste management plan. 

(14) 	
All Manufactured Home Parks containing twenty-five (25) or more Manufactured Homes shall employ the services of a qualified manager.   



(F) 	
The design of the land or water areas, which are to be designated as common open space shall comply with the following standards and specifications: 

(1) 	
A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the gross area of the Manufactured Home Park shall be set aside as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved and deeded to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space. 

(2) 	
The area designated as common open space shall comply with the following specifications: 

(a) 	
No more than fifty (50) percent of the common open space shall be located on lands within areas that are located within the 100-year floodplain, areas delineated as wetlands and/or areas exceeding twenty (20) percent in slope. 

(b) 	
No more than fifty (50) percent of the common open space shall include land areas that are burdened by or are proposed to contain utilities easements and/or stormwater management facilities. 

(c) 	
The total land area designated to comply with the minimum open space requirements shall be comprised of areas not less than 50 feet in width and shall not contain less than one (1) contiguous acre of land. 

(d) 	
There shall be at least one (1) designated common area that is contiguous within the development containing no less than twenty-five (25) percent of the required open space. 



(3) 	
The common open space shall be planned and located as a contiguous accessible area within the Manufactured Home Park.  Existing and/or proposed roads may bisect the areas designated as common open space, provided a cross walk at grade is safely designed to link the common open space areas. Planned linkages to other common open space areas, preserved lands, recreation areas and/or natural features shall be encouraged and considered as part of the special exception application. 

(4) 	
A system for pedestrian circulation throughout the development shall be provided by utilizing sidewalks and trails. 

(5) 	
For all common open spaces, satisfactory written agreements approved by the Board of Supervisors shall be executed as a declaration of easements, covenants and restrictions in perpetuity for the preservation of the common open spaces, and shall be recorded with the approved plan. 

(6) 	
The applicant shall make arrangements, provisions and/or agreements to insure that the common open space shall continue to be adequately managed and maintained.  The applicant shall retain ownership of the land encompassing the common open space areas. 

(7) 	
The provisions specified herein for common open space do not relieve the applicant of other requirements for open space and recreation, as specified by West Nantmeal Township. The applicant shall be responsible for all requirements for recreation impact fees associated with this development. 



(G) 	
In addition to the permitted Manufactured Homes, the proposed Manufactured Home Park may contain the following non-residential uses, provided they are considered and approved as part of the conditional use application: 

(1) 	
Office space consisting of no more than 5,000 square feet and utilized for the purposes of conducting customary business, management, sales, meetings, laundry facilities, storage, and/or maintenance, which are directly associated with the Manufactured Home Park. 

(2) 	
Indoor recreation and/or community center consisting of no more than 10,000 square feet and utilized exclusively by the residents of the Manufactured Home Park. 

(3) 	
Category 1 Home Occupations, subject to Section 615.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Municipal uses, subject to Section 736.1.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Non-commercial recreation uses, subject to Section742.1.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Accessory buildings, structures and uses. 



(H) 	
Existing Manufactured Home Parks that do not conform with the provisions specified by this Zoning Ordinance shall be considered nonconforming and subject to the applicable provisions of Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 612: Bed and Breakfast Establishments 
(A) 	
Bed and breakfast establishments, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are permitted by conditional use within the R-1, R-2 and C-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Bed and breakfast establishments shall be designed in accordance with the following general design requirements: 

(1) 
The bed and breakfast establishment shall be contained within a single-family detached, owner-occupied dwelling unit.  The principal use shall remain that of a single-family detached residential dwelling unit. 

(2) 	
All bed and breakfast establishments shall be located on approved lots, which comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions, which are specified by the zoning district on which the bed and breakfast establishment is located. 

(3) 	
The owner of the bed and breakfast establishment shall be a permanent resident of the establishment. 

(4) 	
A bed and breakfast establishment shall not have more than five (5) guest rooms and shall not house more than ten (10) guests. 

(5) 	
The principal residential use or single-family detached dwelling shall contain complete sanitary sewage disposal services, washing and bathing facilities, and a central kitchen with partial or complete cooking facilities to accommodate the occupants plus all of the guests.  No cooking facilities of any kind shall be permitted in any guest rooms. 

(6) 	
A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be required for the owners of the single-family detached dwelling plus one (1) space for each of the guest rooms.  The proposed off-street parking spaces shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines and shall comply with the design requirements specified by this Zoning Ordinance.  The off-street parking spaces shall be screened from the roadways and other adjacent properties with suitable landscaping materials. 

(7) 	
All external amenities provided for the guests, including swimming pools, whirlpool spas, tennis courts, gazebos, entertainment areas, and other common facilities shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines. 

(8)	
 Non-resident employees shall be limited to two (2) employees. 

(9) 	
A single decorative on-site sign, measuring four (4) square feet per side shall be permitted for the bed and breakfast establishment.  The proposed sign shall be subject to all other requirements specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
The length of stay for any guest at a rooming or boarding house establishment shall not exceed fourteen 

(14) 
consecutive days. 



(C) 	
Bed and breakfast establishments shall not be permitted within R-1 Cluster Developments and R-2 Cluster Developments. 


Section 613: Boarding or Rooming House 
(A) 	
Boarding houses or rooming houses, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are permitted by right in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and C-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
All boarding or rooming houses shall be designed in accordance with the following general design requirements: 

(1) 	
A boarding or rooming house shall be contained within a single-family detached, owner-occupied dwelling unit.  The principal use shall remain that of a single-family detached residential dwelling unit. 

(2) 	
The minimum land area required to facilitate a boarding or rooming house shall be located on a conforming lot that equals to or exceeds the lot area and dimensional requirements for a single family dwelling unit for the zoning district on which the boarding or rooming house is located. 

(3) 	
The owner of the boarding house shall be a permanent resident of the establishment. 

(4) 	
The boarding or rooming house shall not have more than three (3) guest rooms and shall not house more than four (4) unrelated occupants. 

(5) 	
The principal residential use or single family dwelling shall contain complete sanitary sewage disposal services, washing and bathing facilities, and a central kitchen with complete cooking facilities to accommodate the occupants.  No cooking facilities of any kind shall be permitted in any guest rooms. 

(6) 	
A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be required for the single family dwelling plus one 

(1)
 space for each of the guest rooms.  The proposed off-street parking spaces shall comply with the design requirements specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 
No signs shall be permitted to advertise or identify the location of the boarding or rooming house. 




Section 614 Accessory Apartments for Relatives 
(A) 	
An accessory apartment for relatives, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts. 

(B)
  An accessory apartment for relatives shall comply with the following general design requirements: 

(1) 	
The accessory apartment for relatives shall be considered an attached component or living area of a permitted single-family dwelling on a conforming lot, which complies with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions, which are further specified by the zoning district on which the accessory apartment for relatives is located. 

(2) 	
An accessory apartment for relatives shall be considered as an accessory use to the single-family dwelling, which shall only be utilized by the relatives of the occupants of the single-family dwelling. 

(3) 	
The accessory apartment for relatives shall be occupied by a maximum of two (2) people. 

(4) 	
The accessory apartment for relatives may not have a gross floor area in excess of 1,000 square feet of living space, which may include a living room, kitchen, bedroom and bathroom. 

(5) 	
All utility provisions, including sewage disposal and water supply that serve the accessory apartment for relatives shall be physically connected to those systems serving the principal dwelling.  No separate utility systems or connections shall be constructed or utilized.  All such utility connections shall comply with the provisions of West Nantmeal Township and/or the public utility provider providing service. 

(6) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence to West Nantmeal Township that existing sewage disposal system and water supply system will have sufficient capacities to accommodate the principal building plus the accessory apartment for relatives.  Where appropriate, West Nantmeal Township and the Chester County Health Department shall review the existing and proposed utility connection. 

(7) 	
The residential uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan as well as any ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(8) 	
The residential uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(9) 	
All other utility provisions serving the residential uses shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(10) 	
The West Nantmeal Township Sewage Enforcement Officer, Zoning Officer and/or Building Code Official shall review the existing and proposed utility connection. 

(11) 	
In addition to the number of off-street parking spaces required to accommodate the principal use, a minimum of one (1) off-street parking space shall be required for the accessory apartment for relatives, which shall be designed with unrestricted access to the public street. 

(12) 	
The entrance and living area associated with the accessory apartment may either be designed with common areas to the principal use or physically separated from the principal use.  



(C) 	
The conversion of the accessory apartment for relatives to a non-family rental unit shall be prohibited. 


Section 615: Home Occupation Regulations 
(A) 	
For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, the term “home occupation”, has been further defined and classified under two (2) separate categories for regulating home occupations as a use within West Nantmeal Township. 

(B) 	
The provisions for a Category 1 Home Occupation are further defined and specified under Section 615.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The provisions for a Category 2 Home Occupation are further defined and specified under Section 615.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 615.1 Category 1 Home Occupation 
(A) 	
Category 1 Home Occupations, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted by right within the R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Category 1 Home Occupations shall comply with the following requirements: 

(1) 	
The home occupation shall be conducted only within the dwelling or an approved accessory structure and may not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the gross floor area of the residential dwelling or no more than 1,000 square feet of an accessory structure. 

(2) 	
The home occupation shall include only lawful uses, which shall be clearly secondary to the residential use and shall be compatible with surrounding residential uses. 

(3) 	
The home occupation shall employ no employees other than family members residing in the dwelling. 

(4) 	
There shall be no visual display or sale of retail goods. 

(5) 	
There shall be no stockpiling, storage or inventory of products of a substantial nature. 

(6) 	
There should be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but not limited to, parking, signs or lights. 

(7) 	
The parking of motor vehicles relating to the Category 1 Home Occupation shall comply with the following requirements: 

(a) 	
For residential lots with less than one (1) acre, no motor vehicles exceeding a gross registered weight of 18,000 pounds shall be utilized to facilitate the Category 1 Home Occupation. 

(b) 	
For residential lots between one (1) and two (2) acres in gross lot area, no more than one (1) motor vehicle with a gross registered weight between 18,000 and 26,000 pounds shall be utilized to facilitate the Category 1 Home Occupation. 

(c) 	
For residential lots exceeding two (2) acres in gross lot area, no more than two (2) motor vehicles with a gross registered weight between 18,000 and 26,000 pounds shall be utilized to facilitate the Category 1 Home Occupation. 



(8) 	
The home occupation may not use any equipment or process, which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, electrical or electronic interference, including interference with radio or television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood. 

(9) 	
The home occupation may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood. 




Section 615.2 Category 2 Home Occupation 
(A) 	
Category 2 Home Occupations, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted as follows: 

(1) 	
By right within the R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(2) 	
Category 2 Home Occupations shall specifically not be permitted within the following residential developments: Townhouses (refer to Section 604); Apartments (refer to Section 605); R-3 Cluster Developments (refer to Section 608); and Manufactured Home Parks (refer to Section 612). 



(B) 	
Category 2 Home Occupations shall comply with the following requirements: 

(1) 	
The home occupation shall be conducted only within the dwelling or an approved accessory structure and may not occupy more than forty (40) percent of the gross floor area of the residential dwelling or no more than 1,500 square feet of an accessory structure. 

(2) 	
The home occupation shall include only lawful uses, which shall be clearly secondary to the residential use and shall be compatible with surrounding residential uses. The exterior appearance shall be maintained as a single-family detached residential use.   

(3) 	
The home occupation shall be limited to the family members residing within the dwelling plus two (2) additional persons to provide support services and assistance. 

(4) 	
There shall be no visual display or sale of retail goods. 

(5) 	
There shall be no stockpiling, storage or inventory of products of a substantial nature. 

(6) 	
The home occupation may not use any equipment or process, which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, electrical or electronic interference, including interference with radio or television reception, which is detectable at the property lines. 

(7) 	
No manufacturing, repairing or other mechanical work shall be performed in any open area.  All such activities shall be conducted in such a manner that they are not detectable or noticeable at or beyond the property line.  All such activities shall comply with the building code. 

(8) 	
The capacities of the public sewage disposal system or on-lot sewage disposal system shall be evaluated in terms of their abilities to serve the residential use along with the home occupation. Where appropriate, the provisions for additional sewage disposal capacities should be reserved, designed, installed and connected to accommodate the projected demand. 

(9) 	
The capacities of the public water supply system or on-lot well shall be evaluated in terms of their abilities to serve the residential use along with the home occupation. Where appropriate, the provisions for additional water supply capacities should be considered in order to provide a dependable supply of water without adversely affecting other uses. 

(10) 	
The home occupation may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood. 

(11) 	
No more than one (1) Category 2 Home Occupation shall be permitted per residential unit. 

(12) 	
An off-street parking area shall be provided to meet the following requirements: two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for the residential use; one (1) parking space shall be provided for each employee not residing within the dwelling; and no more than two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for guests or patrons.  The maximum number of off-street parking spaces shall be limited to six (6) parking spaces, which shall not include any garage spaces and shall be designed to comply with the appropriate provisions of Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
The parking of motor vehicles relating to the Category 2 Home Occupation shall comply with the following requirements: 

(a) 	
For residential lots with less than one (1) acre, no motor vehicles exceeding a gross registered weight of 18,000 pounds shall be utilized to facilitate the Category 2 Home Occupation. 

(b) 	
For residential lots between one (1) and two (2) acres in gross lot area, no more than one (1) motor vehicle with a gross registered weight between 18,000 and 26,000 pounds shall be utilized to facilitate the Category 2 Home Occupation. 

(c) 	
For residential lots exceeding two (2) acres in gross lot area, no more than two (2) motor vehicles with a gross registered weight between 18,000 and 26,000 pounds shall be utilized to facilitate the Category 2 Home Occupation. 

(d) 	
For residential lots exceeding four (4) acres in gross lot area, no more than two (2) motor vehicles exceeding a gross registered weight of 26,000 pounds shall be utilized to facilitate the Category 2 Home Occupation.  All such vehicles shall be parked at least fifty (50) feet from the legal right-of-way line and all other property lines.  The vehicles shall be screened from the view of adjacent residential properties. 



(14) 	
A sign displaying the name and address of the home occupation may be permitted, subject to the following requirements: no more than one (1) such sign shall be erected on the lot; the area of the sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in size; and the sign shall be either fixed flat on the main wall of the building or may be erected in the front yard, but not within ten (10) feet of the cartway. 




Section 616: Mixed-Use Residential and Commercial Uses 
(A) 	
Mixed-uses containing commercial and residential uses, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are permitted by right within the C-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
Mixed-uses containing combined commercial and residential uses shall be designed in accordance with the following general design requirements: 

(1) 	
The mixed-uses shall be limited to commercial uses permitted by right within the C-1 Zoning District combined with residential apartment units. 

(2) 	
The first floor of the mixed-use structure shall be limited to commercial uses. 

(3) 	
The second floor of the mixed-use structure shall contain no more than two (2) residential rental units or apartment units. 

(4) 	
The commercial and residential uses within the mixed-use structure shall have separate utility connections for sanitary sewage disposal, water supply, electric, telephone, natural gas and cable services. 

(5) 	
The minimum net land area required to facilitate a mixed-use structure shall be one (1) net acre.  The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for mixed-use structures are further defined under the provisions of the C-1 Zoning District. 

(6) 	
The residential apartment units shall contain separate sanitary sewage disposal services, washing and bathing facilities, and a kitchen with cooking facilities to accommodate the tenants. 

(7) 	
Parking spaces shall be required to accommodate the commercial or principal use of the mixed-use structure and for each residential rental unit or apartment unit. 




Article 7: Non-Residential  Land Use and Development Requirements 
Section 701: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	
The intent of Article 7 is to develop certain land use and development requirements for the permitted non-residential uses within West Nantmeal Township. The provisions of Article 7 are intended to supplement and not replace the zoning district regulations, which are further specified under Article 4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, “non-residential uses” shall include all commercial, industrial, religious, institutional, educational, medical, agricultural, recreational, and other similar non-residential uses. 

(C) 	
The regulations established under Article 7 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be subject to the interpretation of the Zoning Officer.  Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of these supplementary regulations, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Zoning Hearing Board. 


Section 702: Adult Business and Entertainment Uses 
(A) 	
Adult business and entertainment uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the I-1 Zoning District, subject to the provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The provisions for adult businesses and entertainment uses are hereby incorporated within this Zoning Ordinance in order to accomplish the following objectives: 

(1) 	
Pursuant to the authority of the Second Class Township Code, the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors has the power to prohibit nuisances and to promote the health, cleanliness, comfort and safety of the citizens of West Nantmeal Township. 

(2) 	
After the review of studies conducted by various cities and municipalities in the United States, as well as various court opinions where such studies are referenced and cited, including the United States Supreme Court decision, The City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), and the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit decision, Mitchell v. Commission on Adult Entertainment Establishments of the State of Delaware, 10 F.3d 123 (3rd Cir. 1993), the Board of Supervisors recognizes that adult entertainment uses have the tendency to cause adverse secondary effects that impact on the health, safety and general welfare of West Nantmeal Township; 

(3) 	
The Board of Supervisors desires to restrict the location where adult entertainment uses can locate, to require a reasonable separation distance between such uses and other uses which are not compatible with adult-oriented businesses and to prevent an undue concentration and proliferation of such uses in a close proximity; and 

(4) 	
The Board of Supervisors is fully aware of and fully respects the fundamental constitutional guarantee of freedom of speech and realizes that restrictions on such freedom must be carefully drafted and enforced so that one’s right to speak is not curtailed beyond the point at which it is essential to further West Nantmeal Township's interest in public health, safety and welfare. 



(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall apply to adult businesses and adult entertainment uses: 

(1) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of net land area shall be required to accommodate an adult business and adult entertainment use.  In addition, the use shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements specified for an adult business and adult entertainment use under the I-1 Zoning District. 

(2) 	
Adult businesses and adult entertainment uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Adult businesses and adult entertainment uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township. All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving adult businesses and adult entertainment uses shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
No adult business or entertainment use shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of any residential zoning district, as measured from the property line to the residential zoning district line. 

(6) 	
No adult business or entertainment use shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any religious uses, educational uses, daycare facilities and recreational uses, as measured from the property line. 

(7) 	
No adult business or entertainment use shall be located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of an existing adult business or entertainment use, as measured from the property line. 

(8) 	
All storage and displays shall be located within the building occupying the adult business or entertainment use. 

(9) 	
All applications for adult business and entertainment uses shall include a statement providing specific information on each individual, partner, store manager(s), corporate officer, corporate director or corporate stockholders owning more than three (3) percent of the issued and outstanding stock of a corporate applicant.  At a minimum, the applicant shall identify the complete name, business address and telephone number. 

(10) 	
In the event of the proposed sale, resale or reassignment of interest of an adult business or entertainment use established under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance, the Board of Supervisors and Zoning Officer shall be notified of such proposed change of ownership.  Such notification shall include the documentation required by this section of the Zoning Ordinance.  Failure to notify the Board of Supervisors and Zoning Officer shall constitute a violation of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
The following requirements pertaining to signs and other visual displays shall apply to each adult business or entertainment uses: 

(a) 	
The exterior of the building may include one (1) wall sign or parallel sign identifying the name of the adult business or entertainment use, which shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in size. 

(b) 	
Free standing signs, banners, directional signs, illuminated signs, portable signs, roof signs, seasonal signs and billboards shall be prohibited on the property. 

(c) 	
Window signs shall be limited to twenty-five (25) percent of the total window area and shall not include any graphic or pictorial depiction of material related to specific sexual activities or anatomical areas. 

(d) 	
Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials related to specific sexual activities or anatomical area shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from the exterior of the building. 

(e) 	
All signs and visual displays shall be considered as part of the special exception application. 



(12) 	
The entrance of the adult business should include a sign warning all individuals that the premises are classified as an adult business use and/or adult entertainment use. 




Section 703:  Agricultural Uses 
(A) 	
The term “agricultural operation”, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall include general agricultural uses, intensive agricultural uses, farm-related businesses, farm-support businesses, roadside stands, and all other principal or accessory agricultural uses. 

(B) 	
The provisions for general agricultural uses are further specified under Section 703.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The provisions for intensive agricultural uses are further specified under Section 703.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
The provisions for farm-related business uses are further specified under Section 703.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(E) 	
The provisions for farm-support business uses are further specified under Section 703.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(F) 	
The provisions for roadside stands are further specified under Section 703.5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 703.1: General Agricultural Uses 
(A) 	
General agricultural uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be a permitted use by right within the R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
General agricultural uses may include the following uses: the cultivation of the soil for the raising and harvesting of the produce or crops; nurseries; greenhouses; horticulture operations; the raising of livestock and animal husbandry operations; silvicultural and aquacultural uses; and other general agricultural uses, as determined by the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Officer. 

(C) 	
The number of animals that may be raised or maintained on a parcel or parcels of property shall be limited based on the total number of acres where the animals will be raised or maintained and shall be determined in accordance with Matrix Chart 7.  The number of animal units and weight classification shall be determined using accepted methods set forth in the Pennsylvania Nutrient Management Act, 3 Pa.C.S.A Section 501 et seq. 

(D) 
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to general agricultural uses: 

(1) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required. 

(2) 	
The minimum lot width requirement for general agricultural uses shall be two hundred (200) feet. 

(3) 	
All principal buildings and structures that are utilized for general agricultural uses shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(4) 	
The maximum height of all buildings and structures shall be fifty (50) feet, provided that the buildings and structures comply with the setback requirements. 

(5) 	
The total building coverage for general agricultural shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the lot area.  The total lot coverage for general agricultural uses shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot area. 



(E) 	
All general agricultural uses exceeding the provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance shall be considered as intensive agricultural use, which are further regulated under Sections 703.2 and/or 712 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(F) 	
All general agricultural uses and activities shall comply with all local, state and federal laws concerning manure, management, nutrient management, fertilizer applications, biosolids, water supply, stormwater management, erosion and sedimentation control, and vehicular access. 


Matrix Chart 7:  Maximum Animal Unit Requirements for General Agricultural Uses  
Farm Animal  1.00 to 4.99 acres  5.00 to 9.99 acres  10.00 acres or more  
Poultry, fowl, rabbits and similar animals with weight that is less than 10 pounds per animal.  0.25 animal unit per acre  0.50 animal unit per acre  2.00 animal unit per acre  
Sheep, goats and similar animals with weight between 10 pounds and 200 pounds per animal  0.50 animal unit per acre  1.00 animal unit per acre  2.00 animal unit per acre  
Pigs, hogs, swine and similar animals with a weight between 200 pounds and 500 pounds per animal   0.25 animal unit per acre  0.50 animal unit per acre  2.00 animal unit per acre  
Horses, cattle and similar animals with a weight between 500 pounds and 2,000 pounds per animal  1.00 animal unit per acre  1.00 animal unit per acre  2.00 animal unit per acre  
All other farm animals  0.50 animal unit per acre  1.00 animal unit per acre  2.00 animal unit per acre  

Section 703.2: Intensive Agricultural Uses 
(A) 	
Intensive agricultural uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be a permitted use by right within the R-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Intensive agricultural uses may include the following uses: specialized agricultural activities; mushroom production facilities; intensive livestock operations; intensive produce operations; poultry production facilities; intensive greenhouse operations; concentrated feed operations; concentrated animal operations; and other intensive agricultural uses, as determined by the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Officer. 

(C) 	
The number of animals that may be raised or maintained on a parcel or parcels of property shall be limited based on the total number of acres where the animals will be raised or maintained and shall be determined in accordance with Matrix Chart 8. The number of animal units and weight classification shall be determined using accepted methods set forth in the Pennsylvania Nutrient Management Act, 3 Pa.C.S.A Section 501 et seq. 

(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, West Nantmeal Township may permit a twenty-five (25) percent increase to the maximum animal unit requirements specified under Section 703.2(C) of this Zoning Ordinance, provided that such increase does not impose any adverse effects to the health, safety and general welfare of the community. 

(E) 	
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to intensive agricultural uses: 

(1) 	
A minimum of twenty (20) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate intensive agricultural uses and activities. 

(2) 	
The minimum lot width requirement for intensive agricultural uses shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(3) 	
All buildings and structures utilized for intensive agricultural uses shall be located at least one hundred 


(100) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
(4) 	
All intensive agricultural uses and facilities shall not be located within the floodplain and shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from all perennial streams or surface water. 

(5) 	
The maximum height of all buildings and structures utilized for intensive agricultural uses shall not exceed fifty (50) feet, provided that the buildings and structures comply with the setback requirements. 

(6) 	
The total building coverage for intensive agricultural uses shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the lot area.  The total lot coverage for intensive agricultural uses shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot area. 

(7) 	
The applicant shall consult with a qualified professional, such as Penn State Site Assessment Program, to determine a location on the lot which is most suitable for the intensive agricultural use and which will minimize harmful impacts of such use on surrounding properties.  The applicant shall consider such factors as topography, prevailing winds, setbacks, location of natural features, floodplains, wetlands and the surrounding uses and improvements.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall present to the Zoning Officer the recommendations of the professional concerning the location of all improvements associated with the intensive agricultural use.  The applicant shall build the improvements in the location suggested by the qualified professional.” 



(F) 	
The intensive agricultural use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan. All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(G) 	
The intensive agricultural use shall be serviced by a public, private or on-lot water supply system approved and permitted by West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.  As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall demonstrate that the quantity of the water supply source will be sufficient to accommodate the intensive agricultural use. 

(H) 	
All intensive agricultural uses relating to commercial composting, mulch production and mushroom production uses shall be further regulated under the provisions of Sections 712 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials. All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste. Areas for trash and rubbish shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(J) 	
Solid and liquid waste shall be disposed of in a manner to avoid insect, fly, rodent or pest problems.  All intensive animal operations shall develop an abatement plan to mitigate potential nuisances. 

(K) 	
All intensive agricultural uses and activities shall comply with all local, state and federal laws concerning nutrient management, biosolids, sewage disposal, water supply, stormwater management, erosion and sedimentation control, air quality management, and vehicular access.  Where appropriate, the applicant shall submit plans or other forms of documentation to demonstrate that the intensive agricultural use shall comply with all pertinent local, state and federal laws. 

(L) 	
The applicant shall consult with qualified professionals to assess potential adverse impacts associated with the proposed intensive agricultural use and to provide assistance in the preparation of any assessment studies or plans (refer to Section 703.2.M that should be completed as a prerequisite for submitting a land development plan.  West Nantmeal Township shall consider the recommendations of these qualified professionals as part of the land development plan application. 

(M) 	
If required by West Nantmeal Township, the following assessment studies or plans shall be completed as part of the land development plan: 

(1) 	
A Nutrient Management Plan (NMP) shall be completed for the intensive agricultural use in accordance with local, state and federal requirements.  The NMP should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with the intensive agricultural use will be mitigated. 

(2) 	
A Conservation Plan shall be completed for the intensive agricultural use in accordance with local, state and federal requirements.  The Conservation Plan should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with soil erosion and sedimentation control will be mitigated. 






Matrix Chart 8:  Maximum Animal Unit Requirements for Intensive Agricultural Uses  
Farm Animal  20.00 to 49.99 acres  50.00 to 99.99 acres  100.00 acres or more  
Poultry, fowl, rabbits and similar animals with weight that is less than 10 pounds per animal.  2.00 animal unit per acre  4.00 animal unit per acre  6.00 animal unit per acre  
Sheep, goats and similar animals with weight between 10 pounds and 200 pounds per animal  3.00 animal unit per acre  4.00 animal unit per acre  6.00 animal unit per acre  
Pigs, hogs, swine and similar animals with a weight between 200 pounds and 500 pounds per animal   2.00 animal unit per acre  4.00 animal unit per acre  6.00 animal unit per acre  
Horses, cattle and similar animals with a weight between 500 pounds and 2,000 pounds per animal  3.00 animal unit per acre  4.00 animal unit per acre  6.00 animal unit per acre  
All other farm animals  2.00 animal unit per acre  4.00 animal unit per acre  6.00 animal unit per acre  

Section 703.3: Farm-Related Business Uses 
(A) 	
Farm-related business uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right in the R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Farm-related business uses may include accessory uses and activities, as defined by this section of the Zoning Ordinance, provided that the agricultural use is the primary use and the farm-related business use is a secondary or accessory use, which is compatible to the agricultural use.  The farm-related business use shall be conducted in a manner that the agricultural use retains the visual character of a farm. 

(C) 	
Uses that exceed the provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance may be permitted by special exception under the provisions for farm-support business uses, which are further specified under Section 703.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
All farm-related business uses should be directed at meeting the needs of those engaged in an agricultural operation or use. A farm-related business use may include the following accessory uses: 

(1) 	
Facilities for the manufacturing, warehousing, sales, repair and service of agricultural equipment, vehicles, or supplies; 

(2) 	
Blacksmith shops, farrier and harness making uses; 

(3) 	
Butcher shops and meat packaging uses; 

(4) 	
Processing and distribution of agricultural products; 

(5) 	
Feed supply and fertilizer distributors. 

(6) 	
Other uses of similar character as determined by the Zoning Officer. 



(E) 	
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to an agricultural use with a permitted farm-related business use: 

(1) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the agricultural use and the farm-related business use. 

(2) 	
The maximum land area designated for the farm-related business shall be no more than five (5) acres. 

(3) 	
All building or structures utilized for the farm-related business use shall be located at least one hundred 


(100) feet from any side or property line or street right-of-way line. 
(4) 	
Outdoor storage of supplies, materials, or other products utilized for the farm-related business shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any side or property line or street right-of-way line. 

(5) 	
The maximum height for any building or structure utilized for the farm-related business use shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 

(6) 	
The total combined building coverage for the agricultural uses and farm-related uses shall be ten (10) percent of the lot area.  The total combined lot coverage for the agricultural uses and farm-related uses shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot area. 

(7) 	
The total gross floor area of a building or structure utilized exclusively for a farm-related business use shall not exceed 10,000 square feet. 



(F) 	
Any building constructed for the use of a farm-related business shall be of a type or design that may be converted to an agricultural use in the event the farm-related business is discontinued. 

(G) 	
The farm-related business shall be owned and operated by the farmer in residence on the property.  No more than three (3) full time equivalent employees shall be employed at the farm for the farm-related business. 

(H) 	
No more than two (2) farm-support business uses shall be permitted on the farm.  A zoning or use permit must be acquired by the owner to operate each farm-related business. 

(I) 	
An off-street parking area shall be provided to meet the following requirements: two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for the principal agricultural use; one (1) parking space shall be provided for each employee not residing at the farm; and no more than two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for guests or patrons.  The maximum number of off-street parking spaces shall be limited to eight (8) parking spaces, which shall not include any garage spaces and shall be designed to comply with the appropriate provisions of Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(J) 	
Sufficient vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be designed, located and constructed in a manner considering the size and weight of all delivery vehicles and customer vehicles entering and exiting the property.  All such vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be mud free shall not create a traffic hazard. 

(K) 	
A sign displaying the name and address of the farm-related business is permitted, subject to the following requirements: no more than one (1) such sign shall be erected on the lot; the area of the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size; and the sign shall be either fixed flat on the main wall of the building or may be erected in the front yard, but not within ten (10) feet of the cartway.  All proposed signs shall comply with Article 11 if this Zoning Ordinance. 

(L) 	
The owner of the farm-related business shall conduct and manage all activities that will not create a nuisance in terms of excessive noise, light, dirt, and/or odor. Further, the farm-related business shall not result in the accumulation of trash or debris upon the property. 

(M) 	
Composting or other farm waste storage facilities shall not be permitted within one hundred (100) feet of a property line or street right-of-way. 

(N) 	
The land area of the accessory business operation shall not be subdivided from the farm property or principal agricultural use. 

(O) 	
No construction or other improvements required to support a farm-related business use shall be permitted unless a land development plan has been submitted to West Nantmeal Township for review and consideration. 

(P) 	
As part of the land development plan, West Nantmeal Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate. 


Section 703.4: Farm-Support Business Uses 
(A) 
Farm-support business uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the R-1, R-2 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Farm-support business uses may include accessory uses and activities, as defined by this section of the Zoning Ordinance, provided that the agricultural use is the primary use and the farm-support business use is a secondary or accessory use, which is not necessarily compatible to the agricultural use.  The farm-support business use shall be conducted in a manner that the agricultural use retains the visual character of a farm. 

(C) 	
All farm-support business uses should be directed at meeting the needs of those engaged in an agricultural operation or use. A farm-support business use may include the following accessory uses: 

(1) 	
Facilities for the manufacturing, warehousing, sales, repair and service of equipment, vehicles, or supplies; 

(2) 	
Processing and distribution of products; 

(3) 	
Veterinary offices subject to the provisions of Section 751 of this Zoning Ordinance; 

(4) 	
Uses that exceed the farm-related provisions contained under Section 703.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Uses that exceed the home occupation provisions contained under Section 715 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(D) 	
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to an agricultural use with a permitted farm-support business use: 

(1) 	
A minimum of five (5) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the agricultural use and the farm-support business use. 

(2) 	
The maximum land area designated for the farm-support business shall be no more than ten (10) acres. 

(3) 	
All building or structures utilized for the farm-support business use shall be located at least one hundred 


(100) feet from any side or property line or street right-of-way line. 
(4) 	
Outdoor storage of supplies, materials, or other products utilized for the farm-support business shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any side or property line or street right-of-way line. 

(5) 	
The maximum height for any building or structure utilized for the farm-support business use shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 

(6) 	
The total combined building coverage for the agricultural uses and farm-support uses shall be ten (10) percent of the lot area.  The total combined lot coverage for the agricultural uses and farm-support uses shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot area. 

(7) 	
The total gross floor area of a building or structure utilized exclusively for a farm-support business use shall not exceed 10,000 square feet. 



(E) 	
Any building constructed for the use of a farm-support business shall be of a type or design that may be converted to an agricultural use in the event the farm-support business is discontinued. 

(F) 	
Farm-support uses shall consider the character and appearance of other uses located within 1,000 feet of the property lines.  

(G) 	
The farm-support business shall be owned and operated by the farmer in residence on the property.  No more than five (5) full time equivalent employees shall be employed at the farm for the farm-support business. 

(H) 	
No more than one (1) farm-support business uses shall be permitted on the farm.  A zoning or use permit must be acquired by the owner to operate the farm-support business.  Further, a farm-support business shall not be operated in conjunction with a farm-related business. 

(I) 	
An off-street parking area shall be provided to meet the following requirements: two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for the principal agricultural use; one (1) parking space shall be provided for each employee not residing at the farm; and no more than three (3) parking spaces shall be provided for guests or patrons.  The maximum number of off-street parking spaces shall be limited to ten (10) parking spaces, which shall not include any garage spaces and shall be designed to comply with the appropriate provisions of Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(J) 	
Sufficient vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be designed, located and constructed in a manner considering the size and weight of all delivery vehicles and customer vehicles entering and exiting the property.  All such vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be mud free shall not create a traffic hazard. 

(K) 	
A sign displaying the name and address of the farm-support business may be permitted, subject to the following requirements: no more than one (1) such sign shall be erected on the lot; the area of the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size; and the sign shall be either fixed flat on the main wall of the building or may be erected in the front yard, but not within ten (10) feet of the cartway. 

(L) 	
The owner of the farm-support business shall conduct and manage all activities that will not create a nuisance in terms of excessive noise, light, dirt, and/or odor.  Further, the farm-support business shall not result in the accumulation of trash or debris upon the property. 

(M) 	
Composting or other farm waste storage facilities shall not be permitted within one hundred (100) feet of a property line or street right-of-way. 

(N) 	
The land area of the accessory business operation shall not be subdivided from the farm property or principal agricultural use. 

(O) 	
No construction or other improvements required to support a farm-support business use shall be permitted unless a land development plan has been submitted to West Nantmeal Township for review and consideration. 


Section 703.5 Roadside Stands 
(A) 	Roadside stands, which are considered as an accessory use to a general agricultural use, shall be permitted by right in the R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. All such uses shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1) 	
At least fifty (50) percent of the agricultural products sold at the roadside stand shall be produced from farms within fifty (50) miles of the roadside stand. 

(2) 	
The total display area of the agricultural products sold at the roadside stand shall be limited to six hundred (600) square feet. 

(3) 	
The roadside stand shall be considered as a temporary and portable structure, which shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from the centerline of the cartway and two hundred (200) feet from any street intersection. In no case shall the roadside stand be placed within the street right-of-way. 

(4) 	
The portable roadside stand shall be removed during seasons when agricultural products are not sold or if the roadside stand becomes inactive for 180 consecutive days.    

(5) 	
Sufficient off-street parking areas shall be designed, located and constructed in a manner considering the customer vehicles entering and exiting the property.  All such off-street parking areas shall be maintained as mud-free conditions located outside of the street right-of-way and shall not create a traffic hazard. 

(6) 	
A total of two (2) off-street parking areas shall be provided for the initial one hundred (100) square feet of permitted display area plus one (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each additional one hundred (100) square feet of display area.  The maximum number of off-street parking spaces shall be ten 

(10)
 off-street parking spaces. 

(7) 	
All proposed driveway openings shall be reviewed and permitted by West Nantmeal Township (local roads) and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (state roads). 

(8) 	
A sign displaying the name or products for sale may be permitted, subject to the following requirements: no more than one (1) such sign shall be erected on the lot; the area of the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size; and the sign shall be either fixed flat on the main wall of the building or may be erected in the front yard, but not within ten (10) feet of the cartway. 


Section 704: Airports, Heliports and Helistops 
(A) 	
Airports, heliports and/or helistops, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception in the R-1 and I-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
The following provisions shall apply to airports, heliports and/or helistops facilities: 

(1) 	
A minimum of twenty (20) contiguous acres of land shall be required to accommodate an airport, heliport or helistop facility. 

(2) 	
All proposed airports, heliports and/or helistops shall comply with all local and regional airport overlay districts that may apply to West Nantmeal Township. 

(3) 	
All buildings, runways, landing strips, landing pads and/or other accessory structures related to the airport, heliport or helistop facility shall be located at least three (300) hundred feet from all property lines. 

(4) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan as well as any ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township. All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(6) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(7) 	
All facility operations shall be reviewed and permitted by the Federal Aviation Administration and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. 



(C) 	
No construction or other improvements required to support an airport, heliport or helistop shall be permitted unless a land development plan has been submitted to West Nantmeal Township for review and consideration. 


Section 705: Automobile Sales and Automobile Service Stations 
(A) 	
The provisions for automobile sales are further specified under Section 705.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The provisions for automobile service stations are further specified under Section 705.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The provisions for car washing facilities, as a principal or accessory use are further specified under Section 705.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 705.1 Automobile Sales 
(A) 	
Automobile sales establishments, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the C-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for automobile sales establishments: 

(1) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of net lot area shall be required to accommodate the use.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements of the C-1 Zoning District shall apply to the automobile sales establishment. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
General service, maintenance and repair facilities shall be permitted provided that they are conducted within an enclosed building, which complies with the appropriate building code requirements for a commercial establishment within West Nantmeal Township and they are considered as accessory uses to the automobile sales establishment. 

(6) 	
No outdoor storage of parts, equipment, lubricants, fuel or other materials used or discarded as part of the automobile sales establishment shall be permitted. 

(7) 	
All vehicles stored on the premises for sale shall be located outside of the street right-of-way and no closer than twenty (20) feet to any property line.  All such vehicles shall be in sound running condition meeting the general inspection and licensing requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(8) 	
All vehicles that have been brought in for service, maintenance or repair shall be in a state of active repair and shall not be permitted on the premises for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 

(9) 	
The demolishing of vehicles for salvage shall be prohibited. 

(10) 	
The sale of gasoline or fuel shall be prohibited. 

(11) 	
All vehicles sold on the premises shall be arranged in an orderly manner on an approved off-street parking facility that complies with the design requirements of Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 




Section 705.2 Automobile Service Stations 
(A) 	
Automobile service stations, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the C-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for automobile service station: 

(1) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of net lot area shall be required to accommodate the use.  In addition the appropriate minimum and maximum dimensional requirements of the C-1 Zoning District shall apply. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
General service, maintenance and repair facilities shall be permitted provided that they are conducted within an enclosed building, which complies with the appropriate building code requirements for a commercial establishment within West Nantmeal Township and they are considered as accessory uses to the automobile sales establishment. 

(6) 	
The sale of gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene or other petroleum products shall be permitted, subject to the following criteria. 

(a) 	
The maximum number of fueling pumps shall be limited to twelve (12) fuel pumps or twenty four (24) fueling positions. 

(b) 	
The canopy covering the fuel pumps shall not exceed twenty (20) feet from ground level at its highest point and shall be of a peak-roof design.  As part of the special exception hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board may permit a greater canopy height up to thirty (30) feet, if the design of the canopy is considered as architectural enhancement. 

(c) 	
All proposed fueling positions shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any property line including the legal and ultimate right-of-way line. 

(d) 	
The total area of the canopy shall not exceed 10,000 square feet in total coverage area.  In addition, the canopy shall be considered as part of the building coverage calculations. 

(e) 	
All exterior speaker, microphone or intercom systems shall be designed in a manner so the messages, music or other sounds are not audible at any street line or property line.  All such systems shall not be utilized between the hours of 9:00 pm and 7:00 am. 

(f) 	
During non-daylight hours of operation, overhead lighting under the canopy shall illuminate all fueling positions. The canopy lighting shall be located on the undersurface (ceiling) of the canopy and shall be limited to flush lens fixtures mounted on the canopy ceiling.  Drop lens fixtures shall be prohibited.  Up-lens lighting fixtures mounted on the canopy structure above the level of gas pumps are permitted if they have the effect of reducing glare from the lighting fixtures mounted on the canopy ceiling. All such canopy lighting over fuel dispensing positions shall not exceed an average of 20.0 maintained footcandles, unless a more stringent standard is specified by building code requirements. 

(g) 	
In no case shall illumination exceed 0.5 footcandle measured at the property lines, except at driveway entrances, provided the illumination at the cartway center line of the contiguous street shall not exceed 1.0 footcandle, unless a more stringent standard is specified by building code requirements. 

(h) 	
All gasoline and fuel sales associated with a convenience store or mini-market shall comply with the appropriate provisions of Section 717 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(7) 	
Automobile sales may be permitted as an accessory use in the C-1 District, provided that it is designed and approved in accordance with the provisions specified under Section 705.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Car washing facilities and services may be permitted by special exception as either a principal use or accessory use in the C-1 Zoning District, provided that it is designed and approved in accordance with the requirements specified under Section 705.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
All off-street parking and loading facilities shall be located, designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
No outdoor storage of parts, equipment, lubricants, fuel or other materials used or discarded as part of the automobile service establishment shall be permitted.  All permitted material that are stored outdoors shall be located outside of the street right-of-way and no closer than ten (10) feet to any property line. 

(11) 	
All vehicles that have been brought in for service, maintenance or repair shall be in a state of active repair and shall not be permitted on the premises for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 

(12) 	
The demolishing of vehicles for salvage shall be prohibited. 




Section 705.3: Car Washing Facilities 
(A) 	
Car washing facilities, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for automobile service stations with car washing facilities and services automobile service station: 

(1) 	
Car washing facilities may be permitted as a principal use or as an accessory use to an automobile service station. 

(2) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of contiguous land area shall be required to accommodate the use.  In addition, the appropriate minimum and maximum dimensional requirements of the C-1 Zoning District shall apply. 

(3) 	
All structures housing washing apparatuses shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from any property line including the legal and ultimate right-of-way line. 

(4) 	
The car washing facilities shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from an existing residential use or residential zoning district, as measured from the property line. 

(5) 	
The use shall be serviced by public or private sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(6) 	
The use shall be serviced by public or private water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(7) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(8) 	
Gray water recycling and treatment equipment shall be incorporated as part of the facility operations.  All such equipment shall include provisions for the collection of waste, grease, oil, soap, wax, and other materials that can’t be recycled or utilized as part of the operations. 

(9) 	
A post-washing drying area is provided for two (2) vehicles per car washing bay or unit. 

(10) 	
The side and rear lot lines shall be adequately screened with a twenty (20) foot wide landscaped buffer yard. 

(11) 	
A stacking or pre-service lane, measuring at least ten (10) feet in width and eighty (80) feet in length shall be provided for each service lane or bay for the car washing facility.  Alternative designs may be accepted by the Zoning Hearing Board as part of the special exception application, provided that the design does not interfere with internal or external traffic patterns. 

(12) 	
All designated points of ingress and egress for all vehicles shall be designed to consider traffic volumes on existing streets and adjacent uses. 

(13) 	
All exterior speaker, microphone or intercom systems shall be designed in a manner so the messages, music or other sounds are not audible at any street line or property line.  All such systems shall not be utilized between the hours of 9:00 pm and 7:00 am. 

(14) 	
The lighting facilities shall be designed in a manner so the illumination does not exceed 0.5 footcandle, as measured at the property lines, except at driveway entrances, provided the illumination at the cartway center line of the contiguous street shall not exceed 1.0 footcandle. 

(15) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity 

to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(16) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(17) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 




Section 706: Banks and Financial Institutions  
(A) 	
Banks and financial institutions, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the C-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
The minimum lot area required for banks and financial institutions shall be as follows: 

(1) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of net lot area shall be required when the use is served by on-lot or private sanitary sewage disposal facilities and on-lot or private public water supply facilities. 

(2) 	
A minimum of 20,000 square feet of net lot area shall be required when the use is served by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and public water supply facilities. 

(3) 	
The use shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements of the C-1 Zoning District. 



(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for banks and financial institutions: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(4) 	
Banks and financial institutions with drive-through facilities shall comply with the provisions specified under Section 815 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
The provisions for landscaping, lighting and other supplemental requirements shall be considered and designed to comply with the applicable provisions of Article 8 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
The off-street parking, loading spaces and interior access lanes shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
All proposed signs for the use shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 




Section 707: Business and Professional Offices 
(A) 	
Business and professional offices, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
The minimum lot area required for business and professional offices shall be as follows: 

(1) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of net lot area shall be required when the use is served by on-lot or private sanitary sewage disposal facilities and on-lot or private public water supply facilities. 

(2) 	
A minimum of 20,000 square feet of net lot area shall be required when the use is served by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and public water supply facilities. 

(3) 	
The use shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the zoning district on which the lot is located 



(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for business and professional offices: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(4) 	
The provisions for landscaping, lighting and other supplemental requirements shall be considered and designed to comply with the applicable provisions of Article 8 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
The off-street parking, loading spaces and interior access lanes shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
All proposed signs for the use shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 




Section 708: Business, Professional Office and Industrial Parks 
(A) 	
Business, professional office and/or industrial parks, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by conditional use within the I-1 Zoning District, subject to the appropriate provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of ten (10) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses within a business, professional office and/or industrial park. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to the uses contained within business, professional office and/or industrial parks: 

(1) 	
Each use within the business, professional office and/or industrial park shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
Each use within the business, professional office and/or industrial park shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the business, professional office and/or industrial park shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company providing service, all uses within the office and business park shall have individual utility connections and services that shall be installed underground. 

(5) 	
The permitted uses within a business, professional office and/or industrial park shall be limited to: business or professional offices; banks or financial institutions; fabrication or finishing uses;, food processing facilities; governmental offices; hospitals, medical centers, ambulatory care centers and health care clinics; manufacturing uses; medical, dental, vision, counseling and health care service providers; manufacturing facilities; municipal uses; printing or publishing facilities; research facilities; warehousing facilities; wholesale and distribution facilities; and/or other similar office uses, as determined appropriate by West Nantmeal Township as part of the conditional use hearing. 

(6) 	
Accessory uses within the business, professional office and/or industrial park office shall be limited to: restaurants or cafeterias; retail sales establishments; personal care or service establishments; meeting rooms; daycare facilities; recreational uses; educational uses; and other similar uses that are determined appropriate by West Nantmeal Township as part of the subdivision and land development plan.  The cumulative gross floor area for all such accessory uses shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the cumulative gross floor area of all uses within the business, professional office and/or industrial park. The accessory uses shall be considered accessory uses that directly benefit the principal uses within the business, professional office and/or industrial park. 

(7) 	
All uses shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any street right-of-way line and fifty (50) feet from all other external property lines, which are not owned by the applicant in pre-development conditions. 

(8) 	
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to each principal use within the business, professional office and/or industrial park: 

(a) 	
The minimum net lot area shall be one (1) acre. 

(b) 	
The minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet per lot. 

(c) 	
The front yard setback shall be at least fifty (50) feet, as measured from the right-of-way line. 

(d) 	
The side yard setback shall be at least fifty (50) feet for each side. 

(e) 	
The rear yard setback shall be at least fifty (50) feet. 

(f) 	
The maximum height of the buildings shall be no more than fifty (50) feet. 

(g) 	
The maximum building coverage shall be no more than thirty (30) percent of the approved lot. 

(h) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be no more than fifty (50) percent of the approved lot. 



(9) 	
Office or non-residential condominiums may be permitted on an individual lot within the business, professional office and/or industrial park, provided that each use is a permitted use as described in this Zoning Ordinance.  The permitted uses shall be designed as self-contained structures with common facilities, which comply with all pertinent building code requirements of West Nantmeal Township. 

(10) 	
The architectural features or building facade for the uses within the business, professional office and/or industrial park shall be harmoniously planned as a non-residential community.  As part of the subdivision 

or land development application, the applicant or developer shall identify the non-residential uses and demonstrate how these uses can be amicably planned considering their architectural appearance. 

(11) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
All proposed signs for each use within the business, professional office and/or industrial park shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In addition to these signs, no more than one (1) common on-premises free standing or ground sign shall be permitted along each street in which the office and business park has frontage and shall not exceed one hundred (100) cumulative square feet per side.  No portion of the common on-premises free standing sign shall be less than seven (7) feet or greater than twenty (20) feet, as measured from the mean ground elevation. 

(13) 	
The side and rear lot lines of the development shall be adequately screened with a twenty (20) foot wide landscaped buffer yard.  The design of the buffer yard and the selected landscape materials shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township. 

(14) 	
The primary points of ingress and egress to the business or office park shall be along a collector or arterial street. The applicant shall mitigate all potential traffic impacts. 

(15) 	
Where permitted or required, security gates or security check points shall be located along an internal road within the development at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the right-of-way of an external public road. 

(16) 	
Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress. All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of trucks and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(17) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 




Section 709: Club, Lodge or Social Quarters 
(A) 	
Clubs, lodges and social quarters, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right in the C-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for clubs, lodges and social quarters: 

(1) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of net lot area shall be required to accommodate the use.  In addition the appropriate minimum and maximum dimensional requirements of the C-1 Zoning District shall apply. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
Provisions for recreation facilities and uses shall comply with provisions specified under Section 742 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
The provisions for landscaping, lighting and other supplemental requirements shall be considered and designed to comply with the applicable provisions of Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
The off-street parking, loading spaces and interior access lanes shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 




Section 710: Commercial Campgrounds 
(A) 	
Commercial campgrounds, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by conditional use in the R-3 Zoning District, subject to the appropriate provisions specified in this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to the uses contained within commercial campgrounds: 

(1) 	
A minimum of twenty (20) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses within a commercial campground. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
The permitted uses within the commercial campground shall be limited to: individual campsites; one (1) single family detached unit; one (1) retail store with sales limited to items for the convenience of campers; an office; maintenance and storage buildings; and other similar uses determined appropriate by the Board of Supervisors as part of the conditional use application. 

(5) 	
Accessory uses within the commercial campground shall be limited to: cafeterias; recreational uses; educational uses; and other similar uses that are determined appropriate by the Board of Supervisors as part of the conditional use application.  The accessory uses shall be considered accessory uses that directly benefit the visitors of the commercial campground. 

(6) 	
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to each permanent use within the commercial campground: 

(a) 	
The minimum lot width for the commercial campground shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(b) 	
The front yard setback shall be at least one hundred (100) feet, as measured from the legal right­of-way line. 

(c) 	
The side yard setback shall be at least one hundred (100) feet for each side. 

(d) 	
The rear yard setback shall be at least one hundred (100) feet. 

(e) 	
Common facilities and uses within the commercial campgrounds shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from a lot containing an existing residential use. 

(f) 	
The maximum height of the buildings shall be no more than thirty-five (35) feet. 

(g) 	
The maximum building coverage shall be no more than ten (10) percent of the approved lot. 

(h) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be no more than twenty (20) percent of the approved lot. 



(7) 	
No temporary or permanent campsite shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet from any adjoining property line or street right-of-way line. 

(8) 	
All uses within the commercial campsite shall be harmoniously planned as a community for vacation, retreats and temporary occupancy.  As part of the conditional use application, the applicant or developer shall identify the locations of all permanent and temporary uses and demonstrate how these uses can be amicably planned considering their function and appearance. 

(9) 	
Campsites for tents shall be limited to thirty (30) tents per acre. 

(10) 	
Campsites for recreational vehicles shall be limited to fifteen (15) pads or sites per acre. 

(11) 	
No permanent structures shall be permitted on any campsite lot other than approved utility provisions. 

(12) 	
Except for the landowner and manager, no permanent occupancy shall be permitted on the commercial campgrounds. 

(13) 	
Recreational vehicles shall not be stored on the grounds of the commercial campgrounds for a period of one hundred and eighty (180) cumulative days within a calendar year. 

(14) 	
No part of any campground area shall be used for non-residential purposes, except those purposes required for serving the well-being of the campground customers and for the management and maintenance of the campground. 

(15) 	
Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all uses within the commercial campgrounds shall have individual utility connections and shall be installed underground. 

(16) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The total number of off-street parking spaces shall meet or exceed the cumulative total for all uses within the commercial campground. 

(17) 	
All proposed signs for commercial campgrounds shall comply with the appropriate provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(18) 	
All perimeter boundary lines of the commercial campground shall be adequately screened with a fifty 

(50) 
foot wide landscaped buffer yard.  The use of natural, native and existing vegetation shall be encouraged as part of the design of the landscaped buffer yard. 

(19) 	
Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress. All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of recreation vehicle, camper and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(20) 	
All designated points of ingress and egress for truck traffic shall be designed to consider traffic volumes on existing streets, limitations associated with turning movements and all adjacent residential uses. 

(21) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet from any lot line. 




Section 711: Commercial Communication Towers and Facilities 
(A) 	
Commercial communication towers and facilities, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted by special exception within the R-1 Zoning District, subject to the provisions specified under Section 711 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The following site design criteria shall apply to commercial communication towers and facilities: 

(1) 	
The maximum height of a commercial communication tower and its related structural components shall not exceed 150 feet, unless a zoning variance is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(2) 	
Each commercial communication tower shall be located on a lot having a minimum area of two (2) acres. 

(3) 	
If a flag lot, as defined under Sections 202 and 807 of this Zoning Ordinance is proposed to facilitate the commercial communication tower and facilities, the access portion of the flag lot shall not be counted to meet the minimum lot area. 

(4) 	
The commercial communication tower shall be centrally located on the lot, so that at all points along the perimeter of the lot (property line), the distance from the base of the commercial communication tower to each point along the lot perimeter is at least equal to the height of the tower.  The width and depth of the lot shall in no event be less than two (2) times the height of the commercial communication tower. 

(5) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board grants a zoning variance to authorize a commercial communication tower to exceed a height of 150 feet, as a condition of the approval of the zoning variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall require that the two (2) acre minimum lot area requirement be increased proportionately to the height of the tower, to the extent necessary to insure that the distance from the base of the tower to each boundary line of the lot is at least equal to the height of the commercial communication tower. 

(6) 	
Compliance with the provisions of section 711 of this Zoning Ordinance shall not be achieved by the creation of circular lots. 

(7) 	
The commercial communication tower shall be located a minimum distance of three hundred (300) feet from any residential building, use or property, any occupied building, and any public road. 

(8) 	
The lot on which the commercial communication tower is located shall be served with its own driveway for ingress and egress to a public road.  The driveway shall have a minimum cartway width of twelve (12) feet, which shall be paved. 

(9) 	
Permitted accessory uses to the commercial communication tower shall include a building not exceeding 2,500 square feet in gross floor area, which shall not exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet and shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines.  The accessory uses may be used to house the communication equipment for the tower and two (2) off-street parking spaces. 

(10) 	
A fence with a height of six (6) feet shall be required to secure the immediate acre of the commercial communication tower and accessory buildings and facilities.  The required fencing shall include a gate equipped with a locking mechanism accessible to the owner/operator of the commercial communication tower, the utility provider and the governmental agencies having jurisdiction. 

(11) 	
The perimeter of the exterior of the fenced areas shall be planted with a landscaping buffer of evergreen trees, located six (6) feet on center and having a minimum height of six (6) feet at the time of planting. The evergreen trees shall be maintained by the owner and/or operator of the commercial communication tower.  If necessary, evergreen trees that do not survive shall be replaced by the landowner or operator.  

(12) 	
The commercial communication tower shall be dismantled and removed from the lot at the landowners or operators expense, or at the landowner’s expense should the ownership of the commercial communication tower be transferred in accordance with state and federal laws. 



(C) 	
No new commercial communication tower or facility shall be approved or erected if there is a technically suitable space available on an existing tower within the geographic area that the new tower site is proposed to serve. The burden of proof shall be the applicant seeking approval for the commercial communication tower to prove that there is no availability. 


Section 712: Commercial Composting, Mulch and Mushroom Production Uses 
(A)  The provisions for commercial composting and mulch production uses are further specified under Section 712.1 of  
this Zoning Ordinance.  
(B)  The provisions for commercial mushroom production uses are further specified under Section 712.2 of this Zoning  

Ordinance. 
Section 712.1: Commercial Composting Uses 
(A) 	
Commercial composting uses and mulch production uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the I-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
Commercial composting and mulch production uses may include the accumulation of biodegradable and organic materials from approved uses including landscaping uses, nursery uses, forestry uses, and other similar uses, as determined appropriate by West Nantmeal Township, whereas, the composted materials and residual waste are packaged, processed and/or transported from the commercial composting facility and utilized for other applications. 

(C) 	
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to commercial composting and mulch production uses: 

(1) 	
A minimum of twenty (20) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the commercial composting use. 

(2) 	
The minimum lot width requirement for commercial composting use shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(3) 	
All buildings and structures utilized for commercial composting use shall be located at least one hundred 


(100) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
(4) 	
All commercial composting facilities shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from all perennial streams or surface water. 

(5) 	
The maximum height of all buildings and structures utilized for commercial composting use shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet. 

(6) 	
The total building coverage for this use shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the lot area.  The total lot coverage for this use shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot area. 

(7) 	
The applicant shall consult with a qualified professional, such as Penn State Site Assessment Program to determine a location on the lot which is most suitable for the commercial composting use and which will minimize harmful impacts of such use on surrounding properties.  The applicant shall consider such factors as topography, prevailing winds, setbacks, location of natural features, floodplains, wetlands and the surrounding uses and improvements.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall present to the Zoning Officer the recommendations of the professional concerning the location of all improvements associated with the commercial composting use. The applicant shall build the improvements in the location suggested by the qualified professional. 



(D) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for commercial composting and mulch production uses: 

(1) 	
Commercial composting and mulch production uses use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
Commercial composting and mulch production uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject 

to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(4) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish will be permitted within one hundred (100) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(5) 	
Solid and liquid waste shall be disposed of in a manner to avoid insect, rodent or pest problems.  All commercial composting uses shall develop an abatement plan to mitigate potential nuisances. 

(6) 	
Commercial composting and mulch production uses shall not be permitted as a temporary operation in order to reduce, process and manufacture biodegradable and organic materials into composted materials for use at other locations.  Biodegradable and organic material may be reduced in order to transfer the materials to the permitted location for the commercial composting use.  



(E) 	
All commercial composting and mulch production uses shall comply with all local, state and federal laws concerning nutrient management, biosolids, sewage disposal, water supply, stormwater management, erosion and sedimentation control, air quality management, and vehicular access.  The applicant shall submit plans or other forms of documentation to demonstrate that the use shall comply with all pertinent local, state and federal laws. 

(F) 	
The applicant shall consult with qualified professionals to assess potential adverse impacts associated with the commercial composting use and to provide assistance in the preparation of any assessment studies or plans (refer to Section 712.G) that shall be completed as part of the special exception application.  The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the recommendations of these qualified professionals as part of the special exception application. 

(G) 	
The following assessment studies or plans should be considered as part of the special exception application: 

(1) 	
A Nutrient Management Plan (NMP) shall be completed for the commercial composting use in accordance with local, state and federal requirements.  The NMP should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with the commercial composting use will be mitigated. 

(2) 	
A Conservation Plan shall be completed for the commercial composting use in accordance with local, state and federal requirements.  The Conservation Plan should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with soil erosion and sedimentation control will be mitigated. 

(3) 	
A Traffic Impact Study shall be conducted in order to assess transportation conditions and needs.  The Traffic Impact Study should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with traffic volumes and vehicle weight will be mitigated. 

(4) 	
An Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Environmental Impact Assessment Report should identify how potential environmental or ecological impacts will be mitigated. 

(5) 	
A Landscaping and Buffering Plan shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Landscaping and Buffering Plan should identify how potential visual, sound and odor impacts will be mitigated. 




Section 712.2: Commercial Mushroom Production Uses 
(A) 	
Commercial mushroom production uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the R-1 and I-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
Mushroom production uses may include the accumulation of biodegradable and organic materials from permitted mushroom production uses, as determined appropriate by state and federal guidelines, whereas, the products and 

residual waste are packaged, produced, processed and/or transported from the facility and utilized for other applications. 

(C) 	
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to mushroom production uses: 

(1) 	
A minimum of ten (10) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the mushroom production use. 

(2) 	
The minimum lot width requirement for mushroom production uses shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(3) 	
All mushroom production and facilities shall be located within enclosed buildings and structures, which shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line and one hundred (100) feet from all perennial streams or surface water. 

(4) 	
The maximum height of all buildings and structures utilized for mushroom production uses shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet. 

(5) 	
The total building coverage for the mushroom production use shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the lot area. The total lot coverage for the mushroom production use shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot area. 

(6) 	
The applicant shall consult with a qualified professional, such as Penn State Site Assessment Program to determine a location on the lot which is most suitable for the commercial mushroom production use and which will minimize harmful impacts of such use on surrounding properties.  The applicant shall consider such factors as topography, prevailing winds, setbacks, location of natural features, floodplains, wetlands and the surrounding uses and improvements.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall present to the Zoning Officer the recommendations of the professional concerning the location of all improvements associated with the commercial mushroom production use.  The applicant shall build the improvements in the location suggested by the qualified professional.. 



(D) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for mushroom production uses: 

(1) 	
The mushroom production use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan as well as any ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The mushroom production use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(4) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish will be permitted within one hundred (100) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(5) 	
Solid and liquid waste shall be disposed of in a manner to avoid insect, rodent or pest problems.  All commercial composting uses shall develop an abatement plan to mitigate potential nuisances. 



(E) 	
All mushroom production uses shall comply with all local, state and federal laws concerning nutrient management, biosolids, sewage disposal, water supply, stormwater management, erosion and sedimentation control, air quality management, and vehicular access.  The applicant shall submit plans or other forms of documentation to demonstrate that the intensive agricultural use shall comply with all pertinent local, state and federal laws. 

(F) 	
The applicant shall consult with qualified professionals to assess potential adverse impacts associated with the mushroom production use and to provide assistance in the preparation of any assessment studies or plans (refer to Section 712.2.G) that shall be completed as part of the special exception application.  The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the recommendations of these qualified professionals as part of the special exception application. 

(G) 	
The following assessment studies or plans should be considered as part of the special exception application: 

(1) 	
A Nutrient Management Plan (NMP) shall be completed for the mushroom production use in accordance with local, state and federal requirements.  The NMP should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with the mushroom production use will be mitigated. 

(2) 	
A Conservation Plan shall be completed for the mushroom production use in accordance with local, state and federal requirements.  The Conservation Plan should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with soil erosion and sedimentation control will be mitigated. 

(3) 	
A Traffic Impact Study shall be conducted in order to assess transportation conditions and needs.  The Traffic Impact Study should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with traffic volumes and vehicle weight will be mitigated. 

(4) 	
An Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Environmental Impact Assessment Report should identify how potential environmental or ecological impacts will be mitigated. 

(5) 	
A Landscaping and Buffering Plan shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Landscaping and Buffering Plan should identify how potential visual, sound and odor impacts will be mitigated. 




Section 713: Commercial Greenhouses and Tree Farms 
(A) 	
Commercial greenhouses and tree farms that are intended to raise, grow or produce products for on-site commercial or retail sales as a principal use shall be permitted by right within the R-1, C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B)
  Commercial greenhouses and tree farms shall be subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
A minimum of five (5) contiguous acres of land area shall be required to accommodate any commercial greenhouse or tree farm.  All such uses shall be located on a conforming lot, which shall comply with the following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements: 

(a) 	
The minimum lot width requirement for the use shall be one hundred (100) feet. 

(b) 	
All buildings and structures utilized for the use shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(c) 	
The maximum height of all buildings and structures utilized for the commercial greenhouse uses shall not exceed fifty (50) feet. 

(d) 	
A greenhouse shall be considered as a structure, which should be accounted for as part of the building coverage and lot coverage requirements for the lot.  The total building coverage for commercial greenhouse use shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the lot area.  The total lot coverage for commercial greenhouse use shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the lot area. 



(2) 	
Commercial greenhouses and tree farms shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Commercial greenhouses and tree farms shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township. 

All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving commercial greenhouses shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
The storage of merchandise that is available for retail sales may be permitted outside of the principal building or structure provided that such storage is located at least fifty (50) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(6) 	
No exterior storage of a substance, which has the potential to contaminate groundwater or surface water, shall be permitted unless the owner provides and installs safeguards, which are satisfactory to West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.  All such protective safeguards shall be subject to the review and approval by West Nantmeal Township. 

(7) 	
An off-street parking area consisting of at least one (1) parking space per five (500) square feet of gross floor and surface area of merchandise sale for guests or patrons plus one (1) parking space for each full time equivalent employee. 

(8) 	
At lease one (1) off-street loading space shall be provided for the commercial greenhouse.  The off-street loading space shall be located, designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Sufficient vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be designed, located and constructed in a manner considering the size and weight of all delivery vehicles and customer vehicles entering and exiting the property.  All such vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be mud free shall not create a traffic hazard.  

(10) 	
No more than one (1) common on-premises free standing or ground sign shall be permitted for the commercial greenhouse, which shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet. All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 




Section 714: Commercial Water Resource Use 
(A) 	
Commercial water resource uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the I-1 Zoning District, subject to the specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
Commercial water resource uses shall be limited to: groundwater extraction and exportation operations; surface water extraction and exportation operations; bottling and distribution facilities; and other similar uses, as determined by the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Officer. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to the uses contained within commercial water resource uses: 

(1) 	
A minimum of twenty (20) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate all of the operational facilities within a commercial water resource use. 

(2) 	
Commercial water resource uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Commercial water resource uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and 

approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving commercial water resource use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
The commercial water resource use shall be approved and permitted by the appropriate local, state and federal regulatory agencies. 

(6) 	
The principal and accessory building located on the site of the commercial water resource use shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines.  

(7) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, all facility operations, uses, intake devices, wells, pumps, storage tanks and principal buildings associated with the commercial water resource use shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines. 

(8) 	
All facility operations, uses, intake devices, wells, pumps, storage tanks and principal buildings associated with the commercial water resource use shall be located at least two thousand (2,000) feet from all existing production wells or intake devices utilized for public water supply. 

(9) 	
The perimeter of the property shall be completely enclosed by a security fence, which shall be eight (8) feet in height. 

(10) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or West Nantmeal Township. 

(11) 	
All designated points of ingress and egress for truck traffic shall be designed to consider traffic volumes on existing streets, limitations associated with turning movements and adjacent uses. 

(12) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
All proposed signs for the commercial water resource use shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(15) 	
The landowner or operator shall provide West Nantmeal Township with a schedule of any planned activities relating to the bulk pumping of surface water or groundwater. 



(D) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant or developer shall submit the following information for review and consideration: 

(1) 	
A hydrological report, analysis and impact plan of the surface water and groundwater conditions shall be prepared by a professional hydrogeologist, which meets the following objectives and requirements: 

(a) 	
The professional hydrogeologist preparing the report shall certify that the commercial water resource use shall be supplied by a continuous safe daily yield, which will not adversely affect the quantity or quality of the surface water and groundwater table within two thousand (2,000) feet of the source of extraction. 

(b) 	
A dynamic recovery rate and draw-down tests shall be conducted by the professional hydrogeologist preparing the report to determine the maximum safe daily yield of the commercial water resource operations. 

(c) 	
All such applications for the commercial water resource use shall demonstrate that the adjacent public and private water supply sources will not adversely be affected by discontinued use, contamination, loss of supply, or the ability to properly recharge over time. 

(d) 	
The professional hydrogeologist preparing the report shall consult with the West Nantmeal Township Engineer and Zoning Officer prior to commencement of the background studies to determine if other conditions should be analyzed as part of the report. 

(e) 	
The hydrological report, analysis and impact plan shall be subject to the review of the West Nantmeal Township Engineer, Zoning Officer, or other professional consultant(s) qualified to render an opinion of the information submitted on behalf of the applicant. 



(2) 	
A preliminary utility plan showing how sanitary sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, electric, telephone, natural gas, cable and other utilities will service the site. 

(3) 	
A preliminary landscaping plan showing how the buffer yards and other landscaping enhancements will be incorporated within the site. 

(4) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed to identify the limits of disturbance for all municipal site improvements, the proposed ground elevations, stormwater management facilities, and other natural or man-made features of the site. 



(E) 	
The landowner or operator shall provide West Nantmeal Township with a copy of all permits that have been issued by all county, regional, state or federal agencies with jurisdiction. 


Section 715: Community Center 
(A) 	
Community centers, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the R-3 and C-1 Zoning District, subject to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a community center: 

(1) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses associated with a community center. 

(2) 	
All uses associated with community center shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, which are further specified by the appropriate zoning district on which the community center is located. 

(3) 	
Community centers shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan as well as any ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
Community centers shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, the utility services shall be installed underground. 

(6) 	
The permitted uses within a community center shall be limited to: meeting rooms; professional offices; cafeterias and banquet facilities; social quarters; entertainment facilities; municipal uses; religious uses; recreation uses; institutional uses; daycare uses; health care uses; and/or other similar uses, as determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer. 

(7) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
All signs for the community center shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 




Section 716: Construction Services 
(A) 	
Construction services, as defined under Article 2 may be permitted by right within the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
The following general design standards shall apply to construction services: 

(1) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses associated with construction services. 

(2) 	
All uses shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, which are further specified by the appropriate zoning district on which the construction services use is located. 

(3) 	
Construction services shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan as well as any ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
Construction services shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving the construction services use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(6) 	
Exterior storage areas for construction materials and equipment shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines.  All such areas shall be permanently secured by an eight (8) foot high fence, which shall be properly buffered or screened with landscaping materials.  

(7) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines.  All such uses adjacent to a residential zoning district shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste. 




Section 717: Convenience Stores and Mini-Markets 
(A) 	
Convenience stores or mini-markets, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by conditional use within the C-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
All convenience stores or mini-markets shall be designed in accordance with the following design requirements: 

(1) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses associated with convenience store or mini-markets. 

(2) 	
All uses shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, which are further specified by the appropriate zoning district on which the convenience store is located. 

(3) 	
The gross floor area of the convenience store or mini-market shall not exceed 10,000 square feet, exclusive of any area of such lot being used for gasoline pump dispensers and the canopy over such dispensers. 

(4) 	
The convenience store or mini-market shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
The convenience store or mini-market shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township. All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(6) 	
All other utility provisions serving the convenience store or mini-market shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service 

(7) 	
The maximum number of fueling pumps (one pump shall serve a maximum of two fueling positions only) shall be permitted based upon the gross floor area of the convenience store.  Matrix Chart 9 provides the permissible gross floor area to fuel pump ratio for a convenience store. 

(8) 	
As part of the land development plan application, West Nantmeal Township may require a reduction of the total number of fuel pumps if, in its evaluation of the applicant's traffic study, it determines that safe and convenient vehicular circulation cannot be accommodated on the site. 

(9) 	
The canopy covering the fuel pumps shall not exceed twenty (20) feet from ground level at its highest point and shall be of a peak-roof design.  West Nantmeal Township may permit a greater canopy height up to thirty (30) feet if the design of the canopy is considered as architectural enhancement. 

(10) 	
The total area of the canopy shall not exceed 10,000 square feet in total coverage area.  In addition, the canopy shall be considered as part of the building coverage calculations. 

(11) 	
All exterior speaker, microphone or intercom systems shall be designed in a manner so the messages, music or other sounds are not audible at any street line or property line.  All such systems shall not be utilized between the hours of 9:00 pm and 7:00 am. 

(12) 	
The following provisions for exterior lighting shall apply to convenience stores or mini-markets: 

(a) 	
All gasoline pump dispensers shall be covered by a canopy and shall be illuminated by overhead lighting during non-daylight hours.  Canopy lighting shall be located on the undersurface (ceiling) of the canopy and shall be limited to flush lens fixtures mounted on the canopy ceiling. Drop lens fixtures are prohibited.  Up-lens lighting fixtures mounted on the canopy structure above the level of gas pumps are permitted if they have the effect of reducing glare from the lighting fixtures mounted on the canopy ceiling. Outdoor canopies include, but are not limited to, fuel island canopies associated with service stations and convenience stores and exterior canopies above storefronts.  In no event shall any other lighting fixtures be located on or otherwise attached to or used to light a canopy or any area of the property adjacent to the canopy. Canopy lighting over fuel dispensing positions shall not exceed an average of 20.0 maintained footcandles. 

(b) 	
Lighting for parking areas shall provide an illumination level utilizing currently recommended standards of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, unless a more stringent standard is imposed as a condition of approval granted by the Board of Supervisors under the circumstances of each application.  Exterior lighting of the building is precluded, except as determined necessary for security or for code compliance. 

(c) 	
In no case shall illumination exceed 0.5 footcandle measured at the property lines, except at driveway entrances, provided the illumination at the cartway center line of the contiguous street shall not exceed 1.0 footcandle, unless a more stringent standard is ordered by the Board under the circumstances of each application.  



(13) 	
The internal vehicular circulation pattern of any lot upon which a convenience store with gasoline sales is proposed shall be designed so as to prevent vehicles waiting for such gasoline service from stacking onto public streets. In addition to the required minimum parking spaces, there shall be a minimum of one (1) vehicular stacking space for each fueling position. 

(14) 	
The applicant shall submit a traffic study with the conditional use application demonstrating the adequacy of existing or proposed streets to accommodate any increase in traffic from the proposed use and the adequacy of the proposed vehicular interior circulation on the lot. 

(15) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 




Matrix Chart 9:  Convenience Store Gross Floor Area to Fuel Pump Ratio  
Convenience Store/Mini-Market Gross Floor Area  Maximum Number of Fuel Pumps  Maximum Number of Fueling Positions  
Less than 4,000 square feet  4  8  
4,000 square feet to 5,000 square feet  5  10  
5,000 square feet to 6,000 square feet  6  12  
6,000 square feet to 8,000 square feet  7  14  
8,000 square feet to 10,000 square feet  8  16  
Note: Commercial establishments and uses with accessory fuel pump stations exceeding the square footage specified by Matrix Chart 9 shall not be classified as a “convenience store” or “mini-market”.  

Section 718: Daycare Facilities and Uses 
(A) 	
The term “daycare facilities” shall include “family child daycare home”, “group child daycare home”, “child daycare center”, and “adult care facility”, which are further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The provisions for “family child daycare home” are further specified under Section 718.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The provisions for “group child daycare home” are further specified under Section 718.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
The provisions for “child daycare center” are further specified under Section 718.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(E) 	
The provisions for “adult care facility” are further specified under Section 718.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 718.1: Family Child Daycare Home 
(A) 	
Family child daycare home uses, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted by special exception within the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Family child daycare home uses shall be permitted on a conforming lot with an occupied single family dwelling unit, which meets the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements established for the zoning district on which it is located. 

(C) 	
The number of children to be cared for within a family child daycare home use at any given time may include four 

(4) to six (6) children unrelated to the operator or resident caregiver. 

(D) 	
The use shall be located and conducted within the single family dwelling, which shall meet the following basic requirements: 

(1) 	
The single family dwelling shall be either serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewage disposal facilities with sufficient capacities. 

(2) 	
The single family dwelling shall be either serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities with sufficient capacities. 

(3) 	
The internal and external facilities should be of adequate size to accommodate all of the children receiving care plus the occupants of the single family dwelling. 



(E) 	
At least two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be designated for the single-family detached residential use.  In addition to these spaces, at least one (1) off-street parking space shall be designated and maintained for the pick-up and drop-off areas of the children receiving care. 

(F) 	
The family child daycare home use shall comply with all specifications, standards and licenses, which are required by West Nantmeal Township, Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare, or other agencies having jurisdiction. 

(G) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide the necessary credentials that are required to conduct the home daycare use in accordance with local, state and federal laws. 


Section 718.2: Group Child Daycare Home 
(A) 	
Group child daycare home uses, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Group child daycare home services shall be permitted on a conforming lot with an occupied single family detached dwelling, which meets the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements established for the zoning district on which it is located. 

(C) 	
The number of children to be cared for within a group daycare home use at any given time may include six (6) to thirteen (13) children unrelated to the operator or resident caregiver. 

(D) 	
The use shall be located and conducted within the single family dwelling, which shall meet the following basic requirements: 

(1) 	
The single family dwelling shall be either serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewage disposal facilities with sufficient capacities. 

(2) 	
The single family dwelling shall be either serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities with sufficient capacities. 

(3) 	
The internal and external facilities should be of adequate size to accommodate all of the children receiving care plus the occupants of the single family dwelling. 



(E) 	
At least two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be designated for the single-family detached residential use.  In addition to these spaces, at least two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be designated and maintained for the pick-up and drop-off areas of the children receiving care. 

(F) 	
The group child daycare home use shall comply with all specifications, standards and licenses, which are required by West Nantmeal Township, Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare, or other agencies having jurisdiction. 

(G) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide the necessary credentials that are required to conduct the group daycare home use in accordance with local, state and federal laws. 


Section 718.3: Child Daycare Center 
(A) 	
Child daycare centers, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted by special exception in the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Child daycare centers shall be permitted as a principal use on a conforming commercial lot or as an accessory use within a permitted commercial facility, educational facility, church or religious facility, hospital or medical facility, municipal facility, health care facility, or other institutional use, as further regulated within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
Commercial daycare centers shall be capable of providing supplemental parental care, supervision and/or instruction to seven (7) or more children, who are not related to the caregiver or operator on a daily basis. 

(D) 	
The commercial day care facility shall comply with all specifications, standards and licenses, which are required by West Nantmeal Township, Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare, or other agencies having jurisdiction. 

(E) 	
The use shall be located and conducted within an approved facility, except for a designated outdoor play area meeting the following requirements: 

(1) 	
The facility and use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The facility and use shall be shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the child day care center shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(4) 	
The internal facilities should be of adequate size to accommodate all of the children receiving day care services plus the occupants of the principal or secondary use.  Common areas and facilities should be designated within the approved facility. 

(5) 	
The outdoor recreation area shall be located within the rear yard of the property and have sufficient size to accommodate all of the children or adults receiving care.  The designated outdoor play area shall be planted and maintained in grass, lawn or other pervious materials, which shall be enclosed with a continuous fence with a height four (4) feet and self-latching gate. 

(6) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines.  All such uses adjacent to a residential zoning district shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste. 

(7) 	
The provisions for landscaping, lighting and other supplemental requirements shall be considered and designed to comply with the applicable provisions of Article 8 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(F) 	
In addition to the number of off-street parking spaces required for the principal and secondary use of the facility, an off-street pick-up and drop-off area measuring ten (10) feet in width and sixty (60) feet in length shall be designated and maintained for the discharge and collection of children.  The designated pick-up and drop-off area shall be marked by signs and separated from any required parking area, loading area, fire lane, and all points for vehicular access providing ingress and egress to the facility.  The off-street parking area shall comply with the provisions of Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(G) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 718.4: Adult Care Facilities 
(A) 	
Adult care facilities, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception in the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Adult care facilities shall be permitted as a principal use on a conforming commercial lot or as an accessory use within a permitted commercial facility, educational facility, church or religious facility, hospital or medical facility, municipal facility, health care facility, or other institutional use, as further regulated within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
Adult care facilities shall be capable of providing supplemental parental care, supervision and/or instruction on a daily basis for one (1) or more individuals who have a physical or mental disability who are not related to the care giver or operator, where tuition, fees or other forms of compensation are charged, whether governmental subsidized and/or licensed and whether operated for profit or not for profit. 

(D) 	
The adult care facility shall comply with all specifications, standards and licenses, which are required by West Nantmeal Township and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(E) 	
The use shall be located and conducted within approved facility, except for a designated outdoor play area meeting the following requirements: 

(1) 	
The facility and use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The facility and use shall be shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the adult training center shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(4) 	
The internal facilities should be of adequate size to accommodate all of the adults receiving care or training plus the occupants of the principal or secondary use.  Common areas and facilities should be designated within the approved facility. 

(5) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines.  All such uses adjacent to a residential zoning district shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste. 

(6) 	
The provisions for landscaping, lighting and other supplemental requirements shall be considered and designed to comply with the applicable provisions of Article 8 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(F) 	
In addition to the number of off-street parking spaces required for the principal and secondary use of the facility, an off-street pick-up and drop-off area measuring ten (10) feet in width and sixty (60) feet in length shall be designated and maintained for the discharge and collection of adults.  The designated pick-up and drop-off area shall be marked by signs and physically removed from any required parking area, loading area, fire lane, and all points for vehicular access providing ingress and egress to the facility.  The off-street parking area shall comply with the provisions of Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(G) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 719: Educational Uses 
(A) 	
Educational uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the R-1, R-2, R-3 and C-1 Zoning Districts, subject to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the educational use.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the educational use is located shall apply 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for educational uses: 

(1) 	
The educational facilities and uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.. 

(2) 	
The educational facilities and uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the educational use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground 

(4) 	
Accessory uses within the educational use shall be limited to: cafeterias; administrative and professional offices; recreational uses; daycare facilities; religious uses; and other similar uses that are determined appropriate by the Zoning Hearing Board as part of the special exception application. The cumulative gross floor area for all such accessory uses shall not occupy more than forty (40) percent of the cumulative gross floor area of all uses within the educational facility.  The accessory uses shall be considered accessory uses that directly benefit the educational use. All designated accessory uses and buildings shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(5) 	
All property lines adjacent to existing residential land uses shall be adequately screened and buffered so as to protect the residential neighborhood from inappropriate noise, light and other disturbances. 

(6) 	
A Traffic Impact Study shall be conducted in order to assess transportation conditions and needs.  The Traffic Impact Study shall identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with traffic volumes and vehicle weight will be mitigated.  The Traffic Impact Study should be submitted for review and consideration as part of the special exception application.  

(7) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress.   All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of school buses, emergency response vehicles and/or other commercial vehicles shall be arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities.  

(8) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines.  




Section 720: Emergency Services Operation 
(A) 	
Emergency services operations, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the R-2, R-3, C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts, subject to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the emergency service operations.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the emergency services operations use is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for emergency services operations: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the emergency services operation shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company, all utility connections shall be installed underground 

(4) 	
Accessory uses within the buildings occupying the emergency services operation shall be limited to: administrative and professional offices; cafeterias; banquet facilities; social quarters; recreational uses; daycare facilities; and other similar uses that are determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer. The cumulative gross floor area for all such accessory uses shall not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the cumulative gross floor area of all uses within the emergency services operation.  The accessory uses shall be considered accessory uses that directly benefit the emergency services operation.  All designated accessory uses and buildings shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(5) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines.  




Section 721: Fabrication and Finishing Uses 
(A) 	
Fabrication and finishing uses, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the fabrication and finishing use.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the fabrication and finishing use is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for fabrication and finishing uses: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The quantity and quality of the wastewater generated, stored, transported and/or discharged shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(5) 	
All activities relating to the fabrication and finishing use shall be conducted within an enclosed building and/or screened from the view of adjacent properties. 

(6) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines.  




Section 722: Food Processing Facility 
(A) 	
Food processing facilities, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the I-1 Zoning District, subject to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the food processing facility. In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the food processing facility is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for food processing facilities: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The quantity and quality of the wastewater generated, stored, transported and/or discharged shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(5) 	
The transporting, holding and/or slaughtering of live animals at the food processing facility shall be prohibited. All meats that are transported to and from the food processing facility shall be packaged and contained in a manner that complies with local, state and federal requirements. 

(6) 	
The processing, rendering and packaging of all food products shall be conducted within an enclosed building that complies with local, state and federal requirements. 

(7) 	
All unused or discarded food products and/or animal products shall be stored within leak-proof and vermin-proof containers within an enclosed building that complies with local, state and federal requirements.  All such waste shall be transported from the facility by a licensed hauler under contract with the owner of the food processing facility. 

(8) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines.  




Section 723: Funeral Home 
(A) 	
Funeral homes, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right in the C-1 Zoning District, subject to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the funeral home.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the funeral home is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for funeral homes: 

(1) 	
The facility and use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan as well as any ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The facility and use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The quantity and quality of the wastewater generated, stored, transported and/or discharged shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the funeral home shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(5) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
All proposed signs for the use shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines.  



(D) 	
On-site cremation facilities may be permitted as an accessory activity to the principal use provided that such facilities comply with state and federal laws. 


Section 724: Golf Courses 
(A) 	
Golf courses, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by conditional use within the R-2 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
Golf courses shall contain the following land area requirements: 

(1) 	
A minimum of fifty (50) gross acres of land area shall be required to accommodate a nine (9) hole golf course, which shall a length of more than 2,000 yards. 

(2) 	
A minimum of one hundred (100) gross acres of land area shall be required to accommodate an eighteen 

(18) 
hole golf course, which shall have a minimum length of 4,000 yards. 



(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for golf courses: 

(1) 	
The golf course shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan as well as any ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The golf course shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the golf course shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground 

(4) 	
All principal and accessory buildings associated with the golf course shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all external property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(5) 	
A club house may be permitted as a principal building, which may include the following related or accessory uses: professional offices; retail sales; restaurants and banquet facilities; bars and taprooms; entertainment facilities; locker rooms; health care services; educational or instructional facilities; and/or other similar uses, as determined appropriate by West Nantmeal Township Zoning Officer. 

(6) 	
A practice range or driving range may be permitted as an accessory use provided that the area is clearly defined and located at least two hundred (200) feet from all property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(7) 	
Cart paths designed and developed to accommodate motorized golf carts and maintenance vehicles shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from all property lines and street right-of-ways.  Landscaping buffers shall be incorporated along the property lines in order to mitigate any adverse noise impacts from the golf carts and maintenance vehicles. 

(8) 	
Cart paths designed to cross a public street shall be discouraged.  The Board of Supervisors may permit a crossing only if the applicant provides adequate traffic control safeguards to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community.  

(9) 	
Protective measures including security netting and fencing shall be considered in areas to be potentially hazardous as a result of arrant golf shots. 

(10) 	
Commercial recreation uses including miniature golf courses, executive golf courses, chip and putt golf courses, or other commercial recreation uses shall be prohibited in the R-2 Zoning District.  All such commercial recreation uses are permitted by special exception in the R-3, C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(11) 	
Clubs, lodges or social quarters that are unrelated to the golf course shall not be permitted within the R-2 Zoning District. 

(12) 	
Exterior lighting shall only be designed and utilized to illuminate the principal buildings, off-street parking areas and access drive.  No exterior lighting facilities shall be permitted to illuminate any portions of the golf course, practice range or driving range. 

(13) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(15) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines. 




Section 725: Home Centers 
(A) 	
Home centers, as defined under Article 2, shall be permitted by right in the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate a home center.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the home center is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
Home centers shall be subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
Home centers shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan as well as any ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
Home centers shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the home center shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(4) 	
Exterior storage areas for materials and equipment that are not contained within the integral components of an enclosed building or structure shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines. 

(5) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines.  All such areas shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste. 

(6) 	
All exterior storage areas shall be permanently secured by a fence having a minimum height of eight (8) feet. Landscaping materials should be utilized to buffer the appearance of the fencing. 




Section 726: Horseback Riding School and Stables 
(A) 	
The provisions for horseback riding schools are provided under Section 726.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The provisions for horseback riding stables are provided under Section 726.2 of this Zoning Ordinance 


Section 726.1: Horseback Riding Schools 
(A) 	
Horseback riding schools, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted by right within the R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts.  Horseback riding schools may be permitted as either a principal use or as an accessory use to a farm 

(B) 	
A minimum of five (5) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to support the horseback riding school. 

(C)	
 Horseback riding schools shall be subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
Horseback riding schools shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan as well as any ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection 

(2) 	
Horseback riding schools shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection 

(3) 	
The barn or other accessory structures utilized to house the horses shall be located one hundred (100) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines. 

(4) 	
No activities associated with the horseback riding school shall be permitted within twenty-five (25) feet of any property lines or street right-of-way lines. 

(5) 	
Areas designated for training, show, boarding and grazing shall be enclosed by a fence with a minimum height of four (4) feet and maximum height of six (6) feet. 

(6) 	
The raising and keeping of horses shall be limited based upon owner-occupied farmland or contiguous grazeable acres relating to animal units.  The total number of horses raised or kept at the designated area for the horse riding school shall not exceed 2.00 animal units per acre. 

(7) 	
Provisions for off-street parking and access drives shall be considered based upon the use, activities and events that may occur at the site.  All proposed off-street parking areas and access drives shall be maintained as mud-free conditions. 

(8) 	
Horse riding schools shall comply with all local, state and federal laws concerning nutrient management, sewage disposal, water supply, stormwater management, erosion and sedimentation control, air quality management, and vehicular access.  Where appropriate, the applicant shall submit plans or other forms of documentation to demonstrate compliance with local, state and federal laws. 




Section 726.2: Horseback Riding Stables 
(A) 	
Horseback riding stables, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted by right within the R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts.  Horseback riding stables may be permitted as either a principal use or an accessory use to a farm 

(B) 	
A minimum of five (5) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to support the horseback riding stable. 

(C) 	
Horseback riding stables shall be subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
Horseback riding stables shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan as well as any ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection 

(2) 	
Horseback riding stables shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection 

(3) 	
The barn or other accessory structures utilized to house the horses shall be located one hundred (100) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines. 

(4) 	
Areas designated for boarding and grazing shall be enclosed by a fence with a minimum height of four 

(4) 
feet and maximum height of six (6) feet. 

(5) 	
The raising and keeping of horses shall be limited based upon owner-occupied farmland or contiguous grazeable acres relating to animal units.  The total number of horses raised or kept at the designated area for the horse riding school shall not exceed 2.00 animal units per acre. 

(6) 	
Provisions for off-street parking and access drives shall be considered based upon the use, activities and events that may occur at the site.  All proposed off-street parking areas and access drives shall be maintained as mud-free conditions. 




Section 727: Hospitals, Medical Centers, Ambulatory Care Centers and Health Care Clinics 
(A) 	
Hospitals, medical centers, ambulatory care centers and health care clinics, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by conditional use within the I-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
A minimum of five (5) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate a hospital, medical center, ambulatory care center and/or health care clinic.  All principal uses associated with the hospital, medical center, ambulatory care center and/or health care clinic shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the I-1 Zoning District. 

(C) 	
Hospital, medical centers, ambulatory care centers and/or health care clinics shall comply with the following standards and specifications: 

(1) 	
The use shall be served by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 
The use shall be served by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the hospital or medical center shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
Accessory uses within the hospital or medical center shall be customary or accessory to the functional operation of the principal use. 

(5) 	
The primary points of ingress and egress to the use shall be located along a collector or arterial street.  As part of the land development application, the applicant shall mitigate all potential traffic impacts that will be created by the hospital or medical center. 

(6) 	
All designated points of ingress and egress for emergency management vehicles shall be located at least three hundred (300) feet from a residential zoning district and designed to consider traffic volumes on existing streets and adjacent uses. 

(7) 	
All heliport or helistop facilities shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from all property lines. The approach zones and landing pad area shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township.  The heliport or helistop facilities shall be approved and permitted by the county, state and federal authorities having jurisdiction. 

(8) 	
All property lines adjacent to existing residential land uses shall be adequately screened and buffered so as to protect the residential neighborhood from inappropriate noise, light and other disturbances. 

(9) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
The interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress. All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of emergency response vehicles, buses and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities.  

(11) 	
All proposed signs for the hospital or medical center shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet from any lot line. 

(13) 	
The disposal of all materials and wastes shall be accomplished in a manner that complies with state and federal laws.  The applicant shall provide documentation to West Nantmeal Township that licensed waste haulers have been contracted to dispose of the discarded materials and wastes from the site.  Should the nature of the use change in the future, such that the materials used or wastes generated changes significantly either in type or amount, the owner shall so inform the Zoning Officer, and shall provide additional evidence demonstrating continued compliance with these requirements. 




Section 728: Hotel and Motel Uses 
(A) 	
Hotel or motel uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts, subject to the appropriate provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses associated with the hotel or motel.  All principal uses associated with hotel or motel shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, which are further specified by the zoning district on which the hotel or motel use is located. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to hotel and motel uses: 

(1) 	
Hotels or motels shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
Hotels or motels shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving hotels or motels shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required, the utility services and connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
Accessory uses within hotels or motels shall be customary or accessory to the functional operation of the principal use. 

(5) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
All proposed signs for the hotel or motel shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
The side and rear lot lines of the development shall be adequately screened with a twenty (20) foot wide landscaped buffer yard.  The design of the buffer yard and the selected landscape materials shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township. 

(8) 	
Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress. All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of trucks and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(9) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 




Section 729: Incarceration Facilities 
(A) 	
Incarceration facilities, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by conditional use within the I-1 Zoning District, subject to the provisions specified within the Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of twenty (20) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses within an incarceration facility. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to incarceration facilities: 

(1) 	
The incarceration facility shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The incarceration facility shall be shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the incarceration facility shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required, the utility services and connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
The minimum lot width requirement for the incarceration facility shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(5) 	
All principal and accessory uses shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any street right-of­way line and all other external property lines. 

(6) 	
As part of the conditional use application, the security needs of the incarceration facility shall be assessed by the Board of Supervisors.  The following requirements shall be considered: 

(a) 	
The applicant shall provide documentation to account for the security needs of the incarceration facility considering the risk of the persons that are required to be a resident or occupant. 

(b) 	
The applicant shall provide documentation concerning the security measures that are to be implemented such as staffing, facility enhancements and technical provisions. 

(c) 	
If required by West Nantmeal Township, a security fence with a minimum height of eight (8) feet to a maximum height of twelve (12) feet shall be erected twenty-five (25) feet from the boundary lines of the incarceration facility.  The fence shall not contain openings greater than four (4) square inches and shall be designed with a twenty-four (24) hour secured automated access gate. 

(d) 	
Security check points shall be located along all internal roads within the incarceration facility. 



(7) 	
A twenty-five (25) foot wide buffer yard shall completely surround all areas approved for the incarceration facility.  The buffer yard shall consist of a dense evergreen screen, which shall be located and maintained along all boundary lines of the site, except at the entrances.  The selected evergreens shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet and shall be staggered on twelve (12) foot centers. 

(8) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
All proposed signs required for the incarceration facility shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 



(D) 	
The incarceration facility shall be authorized and licensed by the designated county, state or federal agency with jurisdictional control. 


Section 730: Junk Yards, Salvage Yards and Impoundment Facilities 
(A) 	
Junk yards, salvage yards and/or impoundment facilities, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by conditional use within the I-1 Zoning District, subject to the provisions specified within the Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of twenty (20) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses associated with a junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility 

(C) 	
The following design standards shall apply to a junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review 

and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
The minimum lot width requirement for the junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(5) 	
All containment and operation area for the junk yards, salvage yards and/or impoundment facilities shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(6) 	
Access to the site of the junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility shall be limited to those posted times when an attendant is on duty.  In order to protect against indiscriminate and unauthorized activities, the site shall be protected by locked barricades, fences, gates or other positive means designed to deny access to the area at unauthorized times. 

(7) 	
A security fence with a minimum height of eight (8) feet to a maximum height of twelve (12) feet shall be erected at the required one hundred foot (100) setback line, which shall be the limits of containment and the operation area for the junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility.  The fence shall not contain openings greater than four (4) square inches and shall contain gates at all entrances, which shall be locked except during operating hours. 

(8) 	
A twenty-five (25) foot wide buffer yard shall completely surround all areas approved for the junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility.  The buffer yard shall consist of a dense evergreen screen, which shall be located and maintained between the required security fence and the external property line of the site, except at the entrances.  The selected evergreens shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet and shall be staggered on twelve (12) foot centers. No materials shall be stored within this buffer yard. 

(9) 	
No vehicles shall be staged or parked at any entrance and/or access road of the site prior to one (1) hour of the standard operation hours of the junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility.  Overnight parking shall be prohibited. 

(10) 	
Measures shall be provided to control dust and debris.  The entire area shall be kept clean and orderly. The perimeter of the site shall be inspected for debris on a daily basis. 

(11) 	
Truck access shall be designed to minimize traffic hazards and inconveniences.  All interior roadways shall be maintained and constructed by the operator. All trucks leaving the site shall not deposit accumulating amounts of dirt, mud or other such substances on public roads. 

(12) 	
An equipment cleaning and tire cleaning area shall be provided on-site. All equipment used to dispose, dump, move, transport, grade, and compact solid waste shall be cleaned daily.  Runoff from the equipment cleaning area shall be controlled and disposed of in accordance with all pertinent local, state and federal laws. 

(13) 	
All tires of all trucks leaving the site shall be cleaned.  Runoff from the tire cleaning area shall be controlled and disposed of in accordance with all pertinent local, county, state or federal standards. 

(14) 	
No substances, which can harm persons, animals, vegetation or other form of property shall be dispersed beyond the property lines of the junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility. 

(15) 	
The applicant shall comply with all local, state and federal requirements pertaining to junk yards, salvage yards and /or impoundment facilities.  A copy of all permits and licenses issued to the applicant shall be submitted to West Nantmeal Township. 

(16) 	
Hazardous, contaminated and/or toxic materials, including but not limited to highly flammable materials, explosives, pathological wastes and radio-active materials, shall not be stored, transferred or disposed of within the junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility. 

(17) 	
The operator shall comply with all local, state and federal laws concerning stabilization, stormwater management, and erosion and sedimentation control. 

(18) 	
All vehicles, junk and salvage materials shall be stored and arranged so as to permit access to emergency management equipment and to prevent accumulation of stagnant water. 

(19) 	
No materials of any nature shall be piled to a height of three (3) cars in crushed condition or more than eight (8) feet from ground elevation, whichever is less. 

(20) 	
All liquids and/or fluids shall be drained from any junk or scrapped automobiles in accordance with state and federal laws. 

(21) 	
No junk, scrap materials, vehicles or other discarded items shall be buried on the property. 

(22) 	
All sales, service, maintenance and repair facilities shall be permitted provided that they are conducted within an enclosed building, which complies with the building code requirements for a commercial establishment within West Nantmeal Township and that they are considered as accessory uses to the junk yard, salvage yard or impoundment facility. 




Section 731 Kennels and Animal Shelters 
(1) 	
“Kennels” or “Animal Shelters”, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception in the R-1 Zoning District, subject to the appropriate provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
A minimum of five (5) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses associated with a kennel or animal shelter. 

(3) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a kennel or animal shelter: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the commercial kennel use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
The minimum lot width required for a kennel or animal shelter shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(5) 	
All buildings or structures used to house animals and any buildings or structures used to store food or other materials used for the kennel or animal shelter shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the street right-of-way line and all other property lines. 

(6) 	
Outdoor runs or common exterior areas may be permitted for the animals being cared for at the kennel or animal shelter, subject to the following conditions: 

(a) 
The outdoor runs are conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 

(b) 	
The outdoor runs are conducted within a defined external area, which is completely enclosed by a six (6) foot high fence. The perimeter of the fence shall be adequately screened with a landscaped buffer yard.  

(c) 	
The external areas in which the outdoor runs are conducted shall be located at least one hundred 


(100) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines. 

(7) 	
If an incineration (retort) device is proposed to be installed on the property, the applicant shall provide documentation as part of the special exception application that the required approvals, permits and licenses have been secured from the agencies having jurisdiction. 

(8) 	
There shall be no outside storage of materials, equipment or animal crates associated with the kennel or animal shelter. 

(9) 	
A plan for the storage and disposal of animal waste shall be submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board as part of the special exception application. 

(10) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All trash containers shall be air-tight, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet from any property line. 

(11) 	
The proposed kennel or animal shelter shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal regulations, including, but not limited to, the PA Dog Law, building codes, erosion and sedimentation control and storm water management, as well as standards for signs, lighting, parking and access. 

(12) 	
The proposed kennel or animal shelter shall be operated in such a manner so that it does not constitute a nuisance with regard to noise, odor, vectors, dust, vibration or other negative effects beyond the property lines of the lot upon which the use is located.  All kennels and animal shelters shall comply with the performance standards contained under Section 812 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
All designated points of ingress and egress for all vehicles shall be designed to consider traffic volumes on existing streets and adjacent uses. 

(14) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(15) 	
Any required signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(16) 	
The lighting facilities shall be designed in a manner so the illumination does not exceed 0.5 footcandle, as measured at the property lines, except at driveway entrances, provided the illumination at the cartway center line of the contiguous street shall not exceed 1.0 footcandle. 




Section 732: Laundromats and Dry Cleaners 
(A) 	
Laundromats and dry cleaners, as defined under Article 2, shall be permitted by right in the C-1 Zoning District, subject to the appropriate provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The minimum lot area shall be required for a laundromat or dry cleaner shall be as follows: 

(1) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of net lot area shall be required when the use is served by on-lot or private sanitary sewage disposal facilities and on-lot or private public water supply facilities. 

(2) 	
A minimum of 20,000 square feet of net lot area shall be required when the use is served by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and public water supply facilities. 

(3) 	
The use shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the zoning district on which the lot is located. 



(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for laundromats and dry cleaners: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the laundromats and dry cleaners shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(4) 	
Ventilation exhausts shall meet all applicable state and federal air quality standards.  All ventilation outlets shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from all property lines and shall be directed skyward. 

(5) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
All proposed signs for the use shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines. All such areas shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste. 




Section 733: Manufacturing Uses 
(A) 	
Manufacturing uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate a manufacturing use. The use shall be located on a conforming lot, which shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements that are specified by the zoning district on which it is located. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for manufacturing uses: 

(1) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The quantity and quality of the wastewater generated, stored, transported and/or discharged shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the manufacturing use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(5) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines.  




Section 734: Medical, Dental, Vision, Counseling and Health Care Services 
(A) 	
Medical, dental, vision, counseling and similar heath care services, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
The minimum lot area shall be required for a medical, dental, vision, counseling and similar heath care service use: 

(1) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of net lot area shall be required when the use is served by on-lot or private sanitary sewage disposal facilities or on-lot or private public water supply facilities. 

(2) 	
A minimum of 20,000 square feet of net lot area shall be required when the use is served by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and public water supply facilities. 

(3) 	
The use shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the zoning district on which the lot is located. 



(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to medical, dental, vision, counseling and similar health care service uses: 

(1) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Planning Commission and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the facilities and uses shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
All uses providing health care or treatment to their patients shall be conducted on an out-patient basis. 

(5) 	
Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress. All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of trucks, emergency vehicles and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(6) 	
The off-street parking spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(9) 	
All medical waste, bio-hazardous materials, equipment, red bag waste, and other similar items, which because of its potential health risks, shall be discarded in a manner specified by state and federal laws. 




Section 735: Mini-Malls 
(A) 	
Mini-malls, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by conditional use within the C-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
A minimum of three (3) contiguous acres of net land area shall be required to accommodate the uses and facilities for a mini-mall.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the C-1 Zoning District shall apply: 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to mini-malls: 

(1) 	
The cumulative gross floor area for a mini-mall shall not exceed 30,000 square feet. 

(2) 	
The uses, which may be permitted within a mini-mall shall be limited to: retail business establishments; personal business or service establishments; professional offices; banks or financial institutions; medical, dental, vision, counseling and health care uses; religious uses; educational uses; municipal or governmental uses; restaurants; taverns; and other similar uses.  

(3) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by West Nantmeal Township, planned out parcels, pad sites or detached buildings shall not be considered as part of the design. 

(4) 	
The mini-mall shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
The mini-mall shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(6) 	
All other utility provisions serving the mini-mall shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(7) 	
Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress. All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of trucks and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(8) 	
The off-street parking spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
All proposed signs for the mini-mall shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
The side and rear lot lines of the property shall be adequately screened with a twenty (20) foot wide landscaped buffer yard. 

(11) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 




Section 736: Municipal and Governmental Uses 
(A) 	
The provisions for “municipal uses” are further specified under Section 736.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The provisions for “governmental uses” are further specified under Section 736.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 736.1: Municipal Uses 
(A) 	
Municipal uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right in the R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
West Nantmeal Township shall comply with the provisions relating to the Conservation Overlay Districts, as further specified under Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 736.2: Governmental Uses 
(A) 	
Governmental uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
A governmental use shall comply with the following minimum lot area requirements: 

(1) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of net lot area shall be required when the use is served by on-lot or private sanitary sewage disposal facilities or on-lot or private public water supply facilities. 

(2) 	
A minimum of 20,000 square feet of net lot area shall be required when the use is served by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and public water supply facilities. 

(3) 	
The use shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the zoning district on which the lot is located. 



(C) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the governmental use.  The use shall be located on a conforming lot or development, which shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements that are specified by the zoning district on which it is located. 

(D) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to governmental uses: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan as well as any ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township. All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the governmental use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
The off-street parking spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
All proposed signs for each use within the governmental use shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 




Section 737: Nurseries and Landscaping Centers 
(A) 	
Nurseries and landscaping centers, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right in the R-1, R-2, C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
A minimum of two (2) contiguous acres of net land area shall be required for a nursery or landscaping center.  The use shall also comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the nursery or landscaping center use is located. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a nursery or landscaping center: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
The storage of merchandise that is available for retail sales may be permitted outside of the principal building or structure provided that such storage complies with the minimum setback provisions for the zoning district on which the nursery or landscaping center is located. 

(5) 	
No exterior storage of a substance, which has the potential to contaminate groundwater or surface water, shall be permitted unless the owner provides and installs safeguards, which are satisfactory to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.  All such protective safeguards shall be subject to the review and approval by West Nantmeal Township. 

(6) 	
The off-street parking spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
All proposed signs for each use within the nursery or landscaping center shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 




Section 738: Personal Service Establishment 
(A) 	
Personal service establishments, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right in the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
The minimum lot area shall be required for a personal service establishment shall be as follows: 

(1) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of net lot area shall be required when the use is served by on-lot or private sanitary sewage disposal facilities or on-lot or private public water supply facilities. 

(2) 	
A minimum of 20,000 square feet of net lot area shall be required when the use is served by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and public water supply facilities. 

(3) 	
The use shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the zoning district on which the lot is located. 



(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to personal service establishments: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
The off-street parking spaces and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 




Section 739: Places of Worship, Religious Uses and Cemeteries 
(A) 	
Places of worship, religious uses and cemeteries, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the R-1, R-2, R-3 and C-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
The minimum lot area for a place of worship, religious use or cemetery shall be as follows: 

(1) 	
A minimum of three (3) acres of contiguous net land shall be required for the use in the R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts.  A maximum of five (5) acres of contiguous net land area shall be applied for the use in the R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts. 

(2) 	
A minimum of three (3) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required for the use in the R-3 and C-1 Zoning Districts.  No maximum land area cap shall be applied to the R-3 and C-1 Zoning Districts. 

(3) 	
The use shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the zoning district on which the lot is located 



(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to places of worship, religious uses and cemeteries: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township , Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
Accessory uses shall be limited to: administrative offices; cafeterias; social quarters; meeting rooms; educational uses; recreational uses; daycare centers; health care facilities; and other similar uses. 

(5) 	
All principal and accessory buildings shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(6) 	
All accessory buildings, structures and/or designated areas utilized as a cemetery or burial grounds shall be located at least ten (10) feet from all property lines and street rights-of-way. 

(7) 	
The interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress. All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of emergency response vehicles, buses and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities 

(8) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance.  

(9) 	
All proposed signs for the use shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any all property lines and street right-of-way lines. 




Section 740: Printing or Publishing Facilities 
(A) 	
Printing and publishing facilities, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
A minimum of one (1) contiguous acres of net land area shall be required for printing and publishing facility within the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts.  The use shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements that are specified by the zoning district on which it is located. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall apply to printing and publishing establishments: 

(1) 
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to 

the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the printing and publishing use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or West Nantmeal Township. 

(5) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines.  




Section 741: Quarrying and Mining Operations 
(A) 	
Quarrying and mining operations shall be permitted within West Nantmeal Township as follows: 

(1) 	
Quarrying and mining operations, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by conditional use within the I-1 Zoning District. All such uses shall be considered as a principal use, which shall be subject to the provisions specified under Section 741 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Quarry support operations, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by conditional use within the I-1 Zoning District.  All such uses shall be considered as an accessory use to a quarrying and mining operation, which shall be subject to the provisions specified under Section 741 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(B) 	
A minimum of twenty (20) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to accommodate the uses and facilities for a quarry or mining operation. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a quarrying and mining operation: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
The minimum lot width requirement for the quarrying and mining operation shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(5) 	
Quarrying and/or mining activities shall not be conducted within two hundred (200) feet of any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(6) 	
Access to the site of the quarrying and mining operation shall be limited to those posted times when an attendant is on duty.  In order to protect against indiscriminate and unauthorized activities, the site shall be protected by locked barricades, fences, gates or other positive means designed to deny access to the area at unauthorized times or locations.  Such barricade, fence or gate shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in height and shall be kept in good repair. 

(7) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least three hundred (300) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or West Nantmeal Township. 

(8) 	
A security fence with a minimum height of eight (8) feet to a maximum height of twelve (12) feet shall be erected at least fifty (50) feet from all street right-of-way lines and property lines, except at the entrance of the facility.  The fence shall not contain openings greater than four (4) square inches and shall contain gates at all entrances, which shall be locked except during operating hours.  Warning signs shall be placed on the fence at intervals of no more than fifty (50) feet. 

(9) 	
A fifty (50) foot wide buffer yard shall completely surround all areas approved for operational use as a quarry or mine.  The buffer yard shall consist of a dense evergreen screen, which shall be located and maintained between the required security fence and the external property line of the site, except at the entrances.  The selected evergreens shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet and shall be staggered on twelve (12) foot centers.  No materials shall be stored within this buffer yard. 

(10) 	
No vehicles shall be staged or parked at any entrance and/or access road of the site prior to one (1) hour of the standard operation hours of the quarrying or mining facility.  Overnight parking shall be prohibited. 

(11) 	
Measures shall be provided to control dust and debris.  The entire area shall be kept clean and orderly. The perimeter of the site shall be inspected for debris on a daily basis. 

(12) 	
Truck access shall be designed to minimize traffic hazards and inconveniences.  All interior roadways shall be maintained and constructed by the operator. All trucks leaving the site shall not deposit accumulating amounts of mining products, dirt, mud or other such substances on public roads. 

(13) 	
A tire cleaning area shall be provided on-site.  All tires of all trucks leaving the site shall be cleaned. Runoff from the tire cleaning area shall be controlled and disposed of in accordance with all pertinent federal, state and/or Township standards. 

(14) 
All blasting operations shall conform to the regulations enforced by the appropriate agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the federal government.  Notice of all blasting operations shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the commencement of blasting to West Nantmeal Township and to the occupants of all properties within a radius of 1,000 feet of the location of blasting.  In addition, notice shall be given to all sensitive business ventures requesting such notice. 

(15) 	
The storage of explosives shall be in accordance with all pertinent local, state and federal laws. 

(16) 	
Crushing and processing operations of the minerals, rock and other products of the earth mined on the premises shall be permitted so long as the physical or chemical properties of the same are not changed 

and so long as such crushing or processing operations does not involve the manufacturing of cement or concrete, asphalt materials and products or any other similar forms of manufacturing or fabrication. 

(17) 	
The quarry walls shall be sloped in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Surface Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act and all other pertinent rules and regulations.  No slope shall be maintained exceeding the normal limiting angle of repose of the material in which the excavation or extraction should be made.  No under cutting shall be permitted within the required setback area. 

(18) 	
The depth of the quarry or mining activities shall be limited to a point that will not contribute to lowering the aquifer or water table within two thousand (2,000) feet of the site of the source of operations. 

(19) 	
No substances, which can harm persons, animals, vegetation or other form of property shall be dispersed beyond the property lines of the quarrying or mining operation. 

(20) 	
All quarry or mining operations shall be conducted with sufficient lateral support and quality control measures to consider the safety to persons and physical damage to streets, adjacent properties and other site improvements.  

(21) 	
The applicant shall comply with all local, state and federal requirements pertaining to the operation of quarrying and mining facility.  A copy of all permits and licenses issued to the applicant shall be submitted to West Nantmeal Township. 



(D) 	
As part of the conditional use application, the applicant shall submit the following for review and consideration: 

(1) 	
A complete hydrological report, analysis and impact plan shall be prepared by a professional hydrogeologist, geologist or engineer, which shall demonstrate the proposed quarrying or mining operation will not adversely affect the quantity or quality of the surface water and groundwater within two thousand (2,000) feet of the source of operations. 

(2) 	
A geological and geotechnical site investigation shall be prepared by a professional geologist, which shall demonstrate that the surrounding area is not prone to sinkhole development.  

(3) 	
A preliminary utility plan showing how sanitary sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, electric, telephone, natural gas, cable and other utilities will service the site or relocated to accommodate the quarrying and mining operation. 

(4) 	
A preliminary landscaping plan showing how the buffer yards and other landscaping enhancements will be incorporated within the site. 

(5) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed, which identifies limits of disturbance for all site improvements, the proposed ground elevations, stormwater management facilities, and other natural or man-made features of the site. 

(6) 	
A Traffic Impact Study shall be conducted in order to assess transportation conditions and needs.  The Traffic Impact Study should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with traffic volumes and vehicle weight will be mitigated and/or prevented. The Traffic Impact Study shall be submitted with the conditional use application. 

(7) 	
An Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Environmental Impact Assessment Report should identify how potential environmental or ecological impacts will be mitigated and/or prevented. The Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be submitted to West Nantmeal Township with the conditional use application. 




Section 742: Recreational Uses 
(A)  The provisions for “non-commercial recreation uses” are further specified under Section 742.1 of this Zoning  
Ordinance.  
(B)  The provisions for “commercial recreation uses” are further specified under Section 742.2 of this Zoning Ordinance.  
(C)  The provisions for “municipal uses” are further specified under Section 736.1 of this Zoning Ordinance.  
Section 742.1: Non-Commercial Recreational Uses 


(A) 	
Non-commercial recreational uses, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right in the R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts, subject to the provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
Non-Commercial recreation uses shall comply with the following lot area requirements: 

(1) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to permit non-commercial recreational uses within the R-1, R-2 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(2) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of contiguous land area shall be required to permit non-commercial recreational uses within the R-3 and C-1 Zoning Districts 



(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a noncommercial recreation use: 

(1) 	
Non-commercial recreational uses shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(2) 	
All buildings associated with the non-commercial recreation use shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all external property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(3) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving the non-commercial recreation use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(6) 	
Sufficient vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be designed, located and constructed in a manner considering the size and weight of all delivery vehicles and customer vehicles entering and exiting the property.  All such vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be mud free shall not create a traffic hazard. 

(7) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
All proposed signs for the passive recreational use shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 




Section 742.2: Commercial Recreational Uses 
(A) 	
Commercial recreational uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by conditional use within the R-3, C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts, subject to the provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to accommodate commercial recreational uses. In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the commercial recreation use is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a commercial recreation use: 

(1) 	
All active or passive recreational areas shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(2) 	
All buildings associated with the commercial recreation use shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all external property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(3) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving the commercial recreation use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(6) 	
The side and rear property lines shall be adequately screened and buffered with landscaping or fencing in order to protect the privacy of the adjacent uses from inappropriate noise, light and other disturbances. 

(7) 	
Sufficient vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be designed, located and constructed in a manner considering the size and weight of all delivery vehicles and customer vehicles entering and exiting the property.  All such vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be mud free shall not create a traffic hazard. 

(8) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
All proposed signs for the passive recreational use shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 




Section 743: Recycling Facilities 
(A) 	
Recycling facilities shall be defined as a business that accumulates material such as paper, glass, aluminum, plastic, stone, natural materials and/or building products, which are no longer useful for their original purpose. 

(B) 	
Facilities that recycle stone, concrete, asphalt and/or other similar construction materials shall be classified as a “quarry support operation”, which are permitted by conditional use within the I-1 Zoning District and shall be subject to the provisions specified under Section 741 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
Facilities that recycle paper, glass, aluminum, plastic, metal and/or other similar materials shall be classified as a “solid waste disposal and reduction facility”, which is permitted by special exception within the I-1 Zoning District and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 748 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
Facilities that recycle or salvage automobiles, trucks, scrap metal, tires, equipment, machines and/or other similar discarded bulk materials shall be classified as a “junk yard or salvage yard”, which is permitted by conditional use within the I-1 Zoning District and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 730 of this Zoning Ordinance.  


Section 744: Research Facilities 
(A) 	
Research facilities, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by conditional use within the I-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate research facilities.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the research facility is located, shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall apply to research facilities: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The quantity and quality of the wastewater generated, stored, transported and/or discharged shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the research facilities shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(5) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines.  




Section 745: Restaurants 
(A) 	
Restaurants, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the C-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
Restaurants shall comply with the following lot area requirements: 

(1) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of net lot area shall be required when the use is served by on-lot or private sanitary sewage disposal facilities or on-lot or private public water supply facilities. 

(2) 	
A minimum of 20,000 square feet of net lot area shall be required when the use is served by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and public water supply facilities. 

(3) 	
The use shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the zoning district on which the lot is located. 



(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for restaurants: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the restaurant shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
Restaurants with drive-through facilities shall comply with the provisions specified under Section 815 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Restaurants may contain an accessory area or use devoted to outdoor eating, retail sales, social quarters, meeting rooms, bars, taverns, taprooms, and similar uses, provided the cumulative total area of the accessory use does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the cumulative gross floor area of the restaurant. 

(6) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or West Nantmeal Township. 

(7) 	
The provisions for landscaping, lighting and other supplemental requirements shall be considered and designed to comply with the applicable provisions of Article 8 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
The off-street parking, loading spaces and interior access lanes shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines. 




Section 746: Retail Uses 
(A) 	
Retail uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Retail uses shall comply with the following lot area requirements: 

(1) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of net lot area shall be required when the use is served by on-lot or private sanitary sewage disposal facilities or on-lot or private public water supply facilities. 

(2) 	
A minimum of 20,000 square feet of net lot area shall be required when the use is served by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and public water supply facilities. 

(3) 	
The use shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the zoning district on which the lot is located 



(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for retail uses: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the retail use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
Retail uses with drive-through facilities shall comply with the provisions specified by Section 815 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
The provisions for landscaping, lighting and other supplemental requirements shall be considered and designed to comply with the applicable provisions of Article 8 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
The off-street parking, loading spaces and interior access lanes shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines. 




Section 747: Self-Storage Units and Portable Storage Facilities 
(A) 	
Self-storage units and portable storage facilities, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the I-1 Zoning District, subject to the provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of five (5) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the uses and facilities for self-storage units or portable storage facilities.  In addition, the following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply: 

(1) 	
The minimum lots width shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(2) 	
All buildings shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any street right-of-way line or exterior property lines. 

(3) 	
The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 

(4) 	
The stacking of portable and/or transportable storage containers shall not exceed a stacked height of thirty 

(30) 
feet.  The storage of such storage containers shall be kept inside a building. 

(5) 	
The maximum building coverage shall be thirty (30) percent of the net lot area. 

(6) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be fifty (50) percent of the net lot area. 



(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to self-storage units or portable storage facilities: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
One (1) office area or building may be included within the development site.  The office use shall be an accessory use to the self-storage or portable storage facilities.  

(5) 	
Self storage units or portable storage facility facilities shall be used solely for the storage of personal property.  The following are examples of uses specifically prohibited on the site: auctions (except storage lien auctions), commercial wholesale or retail sales (except ancillary supplies normally sold at self storage centers), or garage sales; the servicing, repair, or fabrication of motor vehicles, motor cycles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers, appliances, or similar equipment; the operation of power tools, spray painting equipment, table saws, lathes, compressors, welding equipment, kilns, or other similar equipment; the establishment of a transfer or storage business except the owner/operator of the self storage; any use that is noxious or offensive because of odors, dust, noise, fumes, or vibrations; retail sales and services; residential uses; and other uses determined inappropriate by the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Officer. 

(6) 	
The outdoor storage and/or parking of recreational vehicles, boats, campers, trailers or similar vehicles, shall only be permitted behind the buildings and shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any property line. The required buffer yard should conceal the view of all such vehicles.  The designated outdoor storage area and/or parking area shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from the street right-of-way line and other exterior property line. 

(7) 	
The storage of flammable, high combustible, explosive or hazardous chemicals shall be prohibited. Based upon the risk or danger of fire or explosion caused by the accumulation of vapors from gasoline, diesel fuel, paint, paint remover, and other flammable materials, the repair, construction or reconstruction of any boat, engine, motor vehicle or furniture is prohibited within a self-storage or portable storage facility unit. 

(8) 	
The storage of partially dismantled, wrecked and/or inoperative vehicles shall not be permitted within any exterior area of the self-storage or portable storage facility facility. 

(9) 	
Truck trailers, box cars or similar structures shall not be used as storage units. 

(10) 	
Each building shall be a fully enclosed building, built of durable materials on a permanent foundation. 

(11) 	
The front, side and rear lot lines of the property shall be adequately screened with a twenty (20) foot wide landscaped buffer yard. 

(12) 	
The building occupying the self-storage units and portable storage facility shall be enclosed and contained by an eight (8) foot security fence, with a twenty-four (24) hour automated access gate. 

(13) 	
The entrance and all vehicular access aisles shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet in width and shall be unobstructed by vehicles and/or equipment.  The entrance or main entrance shall be paved and landscaped from the cartway of the public road to a point fifty (50) feet within the automated access gate. 

(14) 	
A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space shall be required per 10,000 square feet of cumulative building space within the self-storage or portable storage facility facility.  The off-street parking spaces shall be in addition to the spaces designated for vehicular storage. 

(15) 	
Exterior lighting shall be limited to security lighting, which shall be designed not to exceed 0.25 footcandle along the perimeter of the property lines so as to preclude trespass glare onto adjacent properties. 




Section 748: Solid Waste Disposal and Reduction Facilities 
(A) 
Solid waste disposal and reduction facilities, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the I-1 Zoning District, subject to the provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of twenty (20) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses associated with a solid waste disposal and/or reduction facilities. In addition, the following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to solid waste disposal and reduction facilities 

(1) 	
The minimum lot width requirement shall be five hundred (500) feet. 

(2) 	
All principal and accessory buildings shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any street right-of-way line or exterior property lines. 

(3) 	
All areas designated and/or permitted for solid waste disposal and/or reduction uses shall be located at least three hundred (300) feet from any exterior property line or street right-of-way line. 

(4) 	
The maximum building height shall be fifty (50) feet. 

(5) 	
A building designated for administrative, management and maintenance purposes may be included within the development site provided that the cumulative gross floor area does not exceed 20,000 square feet. 



(C) 	
All solid waste disposal and/or reduction facilities shall comply with all local, county, state and federal laws governing the ownership, operation and maintenance of such facilities, which shall have the appropriate permits to operate the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facilities in accordance. 

(D) 	
Solid waste disposal and reduction facilities shall be subject to the following design standards and specifications: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be 

designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground 

(4) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least three hundred (300) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or West Nantmeal Township. 

(5) 	
Access to the site of the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility shall be limited to those posted times when an attendant is on duty.  In order to protect against indiscriminate and unauthorized activities, the site shall be protected by locked barricades, fences, gates or other positive means designed to deny access to the area at unauthorized times or locations.  The barricade, fence or gate shall be at least eight 

(8) 
feet to twelve (12) feet in height and shall be kept in good repair. 

(6) 	
A security fence with a minimum height of eight (8) feet to a maximum height of twelve (12) feet shall be erected at least fifty (50) feet from all street right-of-way lines and property lines, except at the entrance of the facility.  The fence shall not contain openings greater than four (4) square inches and shall contain gates at all entrances, which shall be locked except during operating hours.  Warning signs shall be placed on the fence at intervals of no more than fifty (50) feet. 

(7) 	
A fifty (50) foot wide buffer yard shall completely surround all areas approved for the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility.  The buffer yard shall consist of a dense evergreen screen, and is to be located and maintained along all boundary lines of the site, except at the entrances.  The selected evergreens shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet and shall be staggered on twelve (12) foot centers. No materials of any nature shall be stored within this buffer yard. 

(8) 	
All solid waste materials awaiting disposal and/or reduction shall be stored or staged in a manner or period of time, which does not exceed the requirements specified on the permit. 

(9) 	
No vehicles shall be staged or parked at any entrance and/or access road of the site prior to one (1) hour of the standard operation hours of the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility.  Overnight parking shall be prohibited. 

(10) 	
Measures shall be provided to control dust and debris.  The entire area shall be kept clean and orderly. The perimeter of the site shall be inspected for debris on a daily basis. 

(11) 	
Truck access shall be designed to minimize traffic hazards and inconveniences.  All interior roadways shall be maintained and constructed by the operator. All trucks leaving the site shall not deposit accumulating amounts of dirt, mud or other such substances on public roads. 

(12) 	
An equipment cleaning and tire cleaning area shall be provided on-site. All equipment used to dispose, dump, move, transport, grade, and compact solid waste shall be cleaned daily.  Runoff from the equipment cleaning area shall be controlled and disposed of in accordance with all pertinent laws. 

(13) 	
All tires of all trucks leaving the site shall be cleaned.  Runoff from the tire cleaning area shall be controlled and disposed of in accordance with all pertinent local, county, state or federal standards. 

(14) 	
No substances, which can harm persons, animals, vegetation or other form of property shall be dispersed beyond the property lines of the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility. 

(15) 	
The applicant shall comply with all local, state and federal requirements pertaining to the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility.  A copy of all permits and licenses issued to the applicant shall be submitted to West Nantmeal Township. 

(16) 	
Hazardous, contaminated and/or toxic materials, including but not limited to highly flammable materials, explosives, pathological wastes and radio-active materials, shall not be disposed of in the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility. 

(17) 	
The operator shall comply with all local, state and federal laws concerning stabilization, stormwater management, and erosion and sedimentation control. 

(18) 	
Routine inspections of the entire site shall be permitted to take place by any local, county, state or federal official who has proper authorization to conduct such inspections.  Any necessary corrective work or action shall be performed by the applicant in the time frame specified by the authorized inspector. 

(19) 	
The solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility shall contain an on-site scale, which shall be accurately calibrated to weigh and record all solid waste that is disposed or reduced in a manner permitted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(20) 	
All components of the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility shall be conducted within an approved facility, building, cell site, area, transfer site, or other area permitted by the appropriate local, state and federal agencies. 



(E) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant or developer shall submit the following information for review and consideration: 

(1) 	
A hydrological report, analysis and impact plan shall be prepared by a professional hydrogeologist, who shall demonstrate that the proposed solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility will not adversely affect the quantity or quality of the surface water and groundwater within two thousand (2,000) feet of the source of operations. 

(2) 	
A geological and geotechnical site investigation shall be prepared by a professional geologist, which shall demonstrate that the surrounding area is not prone to sinkhole development from the preparation stages through the post-closure stages. 

(3) 	
A preliminary utility plan showing how sanitary sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, electric, telephone, natural gas, cable and other utilities will service the site or relocated to accommodate the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility. 

(4) 	
A preliminary landscaping plan showing how the buffer yards and other landscaping enhancements will be incorporated within the site. 

(5) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed identify the limits of disturbance for all site improvements, the proposed ground elevations, erosion and sedimentation control facilities, stormwater management facilities, and other natural or man-made features of the site. 

(6) 	
A Traffic Impact Study shall be conducted in order to assess transportation conditions and needs.  The Traffic Impact Study should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with traffic volumes and vehicle weight will be mitigated and/or prevented. The Traffic Impact Study shall be submitted with the special exception application. 

(7) 	
An Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Environmental Impact Assessment Report should identify how potential environmental or ecological impacts will be mitigated and/or prevented. The Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be submitted with the special exception application. 




Section 749: Truck Service and Maintenance Establishments 
(A) 	
Truck service and maintenance establishments, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the truck service and maintenance establishment.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the use is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a truck service and maintenance establishments: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The quantity and quality of the wastewater generated, stored, transported and/or discharged shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground 

(5) 	
Where overnight parking is permitted, the trucks or commercial vehicles utilizing the facilities shall not be kept running or idling for a period of time exceeding the provisions specified by local and state laws. 

(6) 	
Truck access shall be designed to minimize traffic hazards and inconveniences.  All interior roadways shall be maintained and constructed by the operator. All trucks leaving the site shall not deposit accumulating amounts of mining products, dirt, mud or other such substances on public roads. 

(7) 	
Hazardous, contaminated and/or toxic materials, including but not limited to highly flammable materials, explosives, pathological wastes and radioactive materials, shall not be stored at the site. 

(8) 	
All vehicle service, maintenance and repair activities shall be conducted within an enclosed building, which has been approved and permitted by West Nantmeal Township. 

(9) 	
The outdoor storage of unlicensed or non-inspected vehicles or trailers shall be prohibited.  

(10) 	
All trucks, trailers and commercial vehicles stored on the property shall be arranged to permit access to emergency management equipment.  The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed and constructed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
All signs shall comply with the provisions that are specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 




Section 750: Utilities 
(A) 	
The provisions for “community utilities” are further specified under Section 750.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The provisions for “private utilities” are further specified under Section 750.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The provisions for “public utilities” are further specified under Section 750.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 750.1: Community Utilities 
(A) 	
Community utilities, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right as an accessory use to support principal uses permitted within the R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts, subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
Community utilities shall be designed to provide service to a defined area, community or neighborhood. 

(2) 	
The community utilities shall be located on a self contained lot or dedicated easement, which meets the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning district.  No above-ground structure shall be located within thirty (30) feet of the street right-of-way line or other property lines.  

(3) 	
The community utilities shall only be permitted if the principal use for the site or development has been approved by West Nantmeal Township. 



(B) 	
The location of community utilities should be considered as part of a subdivision plan or land development plan. 


Section 750.2: Private Utilities 
(A) 	
Private utilities, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the I-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
A minimum of twenty (20) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses associated with a private utility provider. 

(C) 	
Private utilities shall be subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
The offices, terminals, storage and maintenance buildings for the private utility provider shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage facilities and public water supply facilities. 

(2) 	
The minimum lot width for the private utility use shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(3) 	
All facilities and uses associated with the private utility use shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(4) 	
The maximum height of the buildings and all accessory equipment shall be fifty (50) feet. 

(5) 	
The maximum building coverage shall be thirty (30) percent of the total lot area. 

(6) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be fifty (50) percent of the total lot area. 

(7) 	
Measures shall be provided to control dust and debris.  The entire area shall be kept clean and orderly. The perimeter of the site shall be inspected for debris on a daily basis. 

(8) 	
Truck access shall be designed to minimize traffic hazards and inconveniences.  All interior roadways shall be maintained and constructed by the owner or manager.  All trucks leaving the site shall not deposit dirt, mud or other such substances on public roads. 

(9) 	
A fifty (50) foot wide buffer yard shall completely surround all areas approved for the private utility use. Unless otherwise permitted by West Nantmeal Township, the buffer yard shall consist of a dense evergreen screen, and is to be located and maintained along all boundary lines of the site, except at the entrances.  The selected evergreens shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet and shall be staggered on twelve (12) foot centers.  No materials of any nature shall be stored within this buffer yard. 

(10) 	
All local, state and federal regulations concerning air pollution or air quality shall be considered as minimum standards for the control of smoke, dust, fumes and emissions. 

(11) 	
Hazardous, contaminated and/or toxic materials, including but not limited to highly flammable materials, explosives, pathological wastes and radioactive materials, shall not be stored at the site. 

(12) 	
The owner or manager shall comply with all local, state and federal laws concerning stabilization, stormwater management, and erosion and sedimentation control. 

(13) 	
All trucks and trailers stored on the property shall be arranged so as to permit access by emergency management equipment.  The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(15) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 




Section 750.3: Public Utilities 
(A) 	
Public utilities, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance may not specifically apply to public utilities, which because of their status with the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission may exempt them from the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 751: Veterinary Hospitals 
(A) 	
Veterinary hospitals, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception in the R-1, R-2 and C-1 Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to accommodate all uses associated with the veterinary hospital. In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the veterinary hospital is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
A veterinary hospital shall not include a “kennel” or “animal shelter”, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance.  A kennel or animal shelter may be permitted by special exception within the R-1 Zoning District, subject to the provisions specified under Section 731 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to veterinary hospitals: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the veterinary hospital shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
Veterinary hospitals shall be located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from all existing residential uses, as measured from the veterinary hospital to the existing residential use. 

(5) 	
Outdoor runs may be permitted for the animals being cared for at the veterinary hospital, subject to the following conditions: 

(a) 	
The outdoor runs are conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 

(b) 	
The outdoor runs are conducted within a defined area, which is completely enclosed by a six (6) foot high fence.  The perimeter of the fence shall be adequately screened with a 10 foot wide landscaped buffer yard.  

(c) 	
The outdoor runs shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from all property lines. 



(6) 	
The veterinary hospital shall be adequately soundproofed so that the sounds generated by the animals being cared for are not audible or detectable from any lot line. 

(7) 	
If an incineration (retort) device is proposed to be installed on the property, the applicant shall prove during the special exception application that he has secured the required approvals, permits and licenses from the agencies having jurisdiction. 

(8) 	
The storage of any animal waste shall be regularly disposed of by discharge to an approved sewage disposal system or facility for biological wastes. Any temporary storage of animal or biological waste shall be within a building, within enclosed containers, pending removal to or disposal at an approved facility. A plan for management of such wastes shall be submitted for municipal review as part of the special exception application. 

(9) 	
All designated points of ingress and egress for all vehicles shall be designed to consider traffic volumes on existing streets and adjacent uses. 

(10) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 




Section 752: Warehouse and Freight Terminals 
(A) 	
Warehouse and freight terminals, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the I-1 Zoning District, subject to the provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of five (5) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the warehouse and freight terminal.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the use is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a warehouse and freight terminals: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground 

(4) 	
Truck access shall be designed to minimize traffic hazards and inconveniences.  All interior roadways shall be maintained and constructed by the operator. All trucks leaving the site shall not deposit accumulating amounts of mining products, dirt, mud or other such substances on public roads. 

(5) 	
All trucks, trailers and commercial vehicles stored on the property shall be arranged so as to permit access to emergency management equipment.  The required off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed and constructed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
All proposed signs for the use shall comply with the provisions that are specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 




Section 753: Wholesale and Distribution Uses 
(A) 	
Wholesale and distribution facilities, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right in the I-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the wholesale and distribution use.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the use is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a wholesale and distribution facilities: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
Retail sales of items commonly distributed as part of the wholesale operation may be permitted provided that the accessory retail use does not exceed 2,000 square feet in gross floor area. 

(5) 	
Truck access shall be designed to minimize traffic hazards and inconveniences.  All interior roadways shall be maintained and constructed by the operator. All trucks leaving the site shall not deposit accumulating amounts of mining products, dirt, mud or other such substances on public roads. 

(6) 	
All trucks, trailers and commercial vehicles stored on the property shall be arranged so as to permit access to emergency management equipment.  The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed and constructed to comply with the provisions that are specified under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
All proposed signs for the use shall comply with the provisions that are specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 




Section 754: Undefined or Other Land Uses 
(A) 	
Other types of land uses, not specifically defined, identified or recognized within this Zoning Ordinance, may evolve or become commonly acceptable as a reasonable use.  It is the purpose of this section to provide for all reasonable and appropriate land uses and to establish a mechanism for the inclusion of such land uses within West Nantmeal Township. 

(B) 	
All undefined land uses that are not identified or recognized by this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted by special exception within the I-1 Zoning District.  The Zoning Officer shall determine if the use is not defined, identified or recognized within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by West Nantmeal Township, the following design and development requirements shall apply to all undefined or other reasonable land uses: 

(1) 	
The Zoning Officer shall determine the required land area and dimensional requirements for a use that has been determined to be not defined, identified or recognized by this Zoning Ordinance.  These provisions shall include the required lot area, lot width, setback requirements (front, side and rear), building height, building coverage and lot coverage requirements for the undefined use.  Prior to assigning the required land area and dimensional requirements for the use, the Zoning Officer shall consult with the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors, Planning Commission and Engineer. 

(2) 	
The undefined use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.  

(3) 	
The undefined use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 



(D) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the following information and documentation to be submitted to West Nantmeal Township on behalf of the applicant: 

(1) 	
The applicant shall submit a request for inclusion of an undefined or other reasonable land use that is not defined, identified or recognized as part of the Zoning Ordinance, with illustrations and complete documentation that describes the land use activity and the manner in which it differs from the permitted uses defined or permitted by the Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Prior to the commencement of the hearing, the Zoning Officer shall advise West Nantmeal Township if the application meets the purpose and objective of this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence that the undefined use shall comply with all provisions established within the Zoning Ordinance.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, lighting plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the special exception application, the applicant shall consult with the West Nantmeal Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 




Article 8: Supplemental Regulations 
Section 801: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	
The purpose and objective of the provisions established under Article 8 of this Zoning Ordinance is to establish specific supplemental regulations for residential and non-residential land uses. 

(B) 	
The provisions contained in Article 8 of this Zoning Ordinance are intended to serve as minimum requirements to promote the public health, safety and the general welfare of the residents and property owners of West Nantmeal Township.  The regulations shall supplement and not replace the provisions established in this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
Where the supplemental regulations contained within Article 8 impose greater restrictions than those of any other statute, ordinance or regulation, the provisions established under Article 8 shall prevail. 


Section 802: Access to Lots, Buildings, Structures and Uses 
(A) 	
Every building and structure hereafter erected or moved shall be located on a lot adjacent to or have an approved access point to a public street or an approved private street.  The buildings and structures shall be so located on the lots in such a manner to provide safe and convenient access for emergency vehicles and off-street parking. 

(B) 	
Where more than one (1) principal use is permitted, the property shall either be subdivided to comply with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance or be capable of being subdivided to comply with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.  West Nantmeal Township shall determine the requirements for subdivision. 


Section 803: Accessory Uses and Structures 
(A) 	
Residential lots containing accessory buildings, structures and uses, including any garages, carports, decks, patios, terraces, gazebos, greenhouses, utility sheds, storage sheds, tennis courts, domestic animal shelter, or other similar accessory buildings, structures and uses shall comply with the provisions specified under Section 803.1 of this Zoning Ordinance.  

(B) 	
Non-residential lots containing accessory buildings, structures and uses, including any garages, storage facilities, pole barns, farm building, greenhouses, supplemental uses, recreation facilities, or other similar accessory buildings, structures and uses shall comply with the provisions specified under Section 803.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The provisions for accessory uses and structure, as specified under Section 803.1 and 803.2 shall be considered as minimum standards for compliance with this Zoning Ordinance.  The landowner shall be responsible to obtain all other permits and/or approvals that may be required for code enforcement, erosion and sedimentation control, stormwater management, utility services, and other provisions required by other local, state or federal agencies.  


Section 803.1: Residential Accessory Uses and Structures 
(A) 	
Residential lots containing a permitted residential dwelling unit shall comply with the following general provisions: 

(1) 	
The accessory building, structure or use shall be subordinate and customarily incidental to the principal building and utilized as an accessory use on the lot occupied by the principal building. 

(2) 	
No more than thirty (30) percent of the accessory building or structure shall extend or protrude into the front yard or in front of the front façade of the principal residential building occupying the approved use. Otherwise, the accessory buildings and structures shall be located within the side yard or rear yard of the property, or behind the front facade of the residential use. 

(3) 	
Setback provisions may apply for certain accessory buildings and structures for a residential use.  Where setback provisions are not specified, the following minimum setback requirements shall apply for residential uses: the front yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet; the side yard setback shall be ten (10) feet; and the rear yard setback shall be ten (10) feet. 

(4) 	
The land area occupied by the accessory building or structure shall account towards the building coverage calculations for the lot and zoning district on which it is located.  The cumulative building coverage shall not exceed the maximum building coverage requirements.  

(5) 	
The land area occupied by the residential accessory building or structure shall account towards the impervious surface ratio calculations for the lot and zoning district on which it is located.  The cumulative impervious coverage shall not exceed the maximum impervious coverage requirements. 

(6) 	
The footprint of all accessory buildings (cumulative total) shall not be larger than the footprint of the principal building.  Accessory buildings for agricultural uses shall be exempt from this requirement. 

(7) 	
The maximum height of any accessory building or structure shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 

(8) 	
No permanent residential accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the commencement of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory component. 



(B) 	
The following provisions shall apply to attached residential garages, detached residential garages or carports: 

(1) 	
Attached residential garages, detached residential garages, and/or carports shall be calculated as part of the building coverage for the lot.  The cumulative building coverage shall not exceed the maximum building coverage requirements for the lot and zoning district on which it is located. 

(2) 	
Attached residential garages, detached residential garages, and/or carports shall be calculated as part of the impervious coverage for the lot.  The cumulative impervious coverage shall not exceed the maximum impervious coverage requirements for the lot and zoning district on which it is located. 

(3) 	
Attached residential garages, detached residential garages, and/or carports located on a lot occupied by a single-family detached dwelling unit shall comply with the building setback requirements of the underlying zoning district on which they are located. 

(4) 	
Attached residential garages or detached residential garages on a lot occupied by a single-family attached dwelling, single-family semi-detached dwelling, townhouse, or other dwelling having a common lot line may be located along the common lot line, provided that they do not project onto the adjacent property and they are located at least ten (10) feet from the rear lot line. 



(C) 	
The following provisions shall apply to sheds and pole buildings: 

(1) 	
Sheds located on a residential lot within the R-3 and C-1 Zoning Districts shall comply with the following provisions: 

(a) 	
Sheds may be erected in the rear yard and side yard, provided they are located at least five (5) feet from the property line and provided the shed does not exceed one hundred-fifty (150) square feet in floor area. 

(b) 	
Sheds exceeding one hundred-fifty (150) square feet in floor area shall comply with the minimum side yard and rear yard requirement for the zoning district on which the shed is located. 

(c) 	
Sheds shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height. 

(d) 	
No more than two (2) sheds shall be permitted per residential lot. 



(2) 	
Sheds and pole buildings located on a residential lot within the R-1, R-2 and I-1 Zoning Districts shall comply with the following provisions: 

(a) 	
Sheds may be erected in the rear yard and side yard, provided they are located at least ten (10) feet from the property line and provided the utility shed or storage shed does not exceed one hundred-fifty (150) square feet in floor area. 

(b) 	
Sheds exceeding one hundred-fifty (150) square feet in floor area shall comply with the minimum side yard and rear yard requirement for the zoning district on which the utility shed or storage shed is located. 

(c) 	
Sheds shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in floor area. 

(d) 	
Sheds shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height. 

(e) 	
No more than three (3) sheds shall be permitted per residential lot. 

(f) 	
No sheds shall be permitted within a multi-family development consisting of townhouses, condominiums or apartments, unless they have been designed as a uniform feature within the development. 

(g) 	
Pole buildings may be located on a lot occupied by a residential use provided that it shall comply with the building setback and coverage requirements of the underlying zoning district and does not exceed a height of twenty five (25) feet. No more than one (1) pole building shall be permitted on a lot occupied by a residential use. 

(h) 	
The provisions specified under Section 803.2 of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply to lots within the R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts that are occupied by non-residential uses. 





(D) 	
The following provisions shall apply to decks, patios and gazebos: 

(1) 	
Decks and patios located on a lot occupied by a single-family detached dwelling unit shall comply with the building setback requirements of the underlying zoning district on which they are located. 

(2) 	
Decks and patios located on a lot occupied by a single-family semi-detached dwelling or townhouse dwelling may be located along the common lot line, provided that they do not project onto another property and comply with the remaining setback requirements. 

(3) 	
Decks and patios located on a lot occupied by a single-family detached dwelling unit, single-family semi­detached dwelling or townhouse dwelling may be covered provided that it is in accordance with all building code requirements. 

(4) 	
Decks and patios located on a lot occupied by a townhouse dwelling may only be located in the rear yard and subject to the following provisions: 

(a) 	
The deck or patio may be located along the lot line or in the case where a townhouse dwelling is not located on a fee-simple lot, an imaginary line extending from the common wall of any contiguous townhouse dwelling units. 

(b) 	
Unless otherwise designed as a uniform feature within the development, no deck or patio shall be enclosed or under roof. 

(c) 	
If a deck or patio extends into the side yard setback or rear yard setback otherwise required by this Zoning Ordinance, no other accessory structure shall be located closer to the deck or patio or the lot line other than the permitted setback for an accessory structure. 

(d) 	
No deck or patio shall extend into the minimum space required between any townhouse building faces otherwise required by this chapter. 

(e) 	
A deck or patio that meets the requirements of this chapter shall be included in the determination of the impervious surface ratio and the building coverage for the lot. Where designed and planned as a unified development, the cumulative total impervious surface ratio and cumulative total building coverage shall also apply. 



(5) 	
Gazebos may be permitted on a lot occupied by a residential use provided it is located in a manner to comply that complies with the building setback requirements of the underlying zoning district on which the gazebo is located. 



(E) 	
The following provisions shall apply to non-commercial greenhouses: 

(1) 	
Non-commercial greenhouses located on a lot occupied by a single-family detached dwelling unit shall comply with the building setback requirements of the underlying zoning district. 

(2) 	
All non-commercial greenhouses shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet per acre of land and shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) cumulative square feet in total gross covered floor area occupied by all of the non-commercial green houses located on the property. 



(F) 	
Domestic animal housing units may be permitted provided that the structure is located at least ten (10) feet from the side or rear property line. 

(G) 	
Permanent non-commercial recreation facilities, structures and uses shall comply with the following requirements: 

(1) 	
The non-commercial recreational uses shall include tennis courts, hockey rinks, skateboard facilities, basketball courts, and other similar accessory use, as determined by the Zoning Officer, where the cumulative playing surface area exceeds one thousand (1,000) square feet. 

(2) 	
The use including all structural facilities and ground surfaces shall comply with the building setback requirements for the zoning district on which permanent non-commercial recreation use is located. 

(3) 	
Any exterior lighting facilities for the non-commercial recreation facilities, structures or uses shall comply with the building setback requirements.  All such lighting facilities shall be directed downward to the playing surface area and shielded to prevent light spillage onto adjacent properties. 



(H) 	
Fences, walls and hedges shall comply with the provisions specified by Section 810 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Private non-commercial in-ground or above-ground swimming pools, which are located on a residential lot, shall comply with the provisions of Section 818.B of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(J) 	
Private non-commercial in-ground or above-ground hot tubs or therapeutically spas, which are located on a residential lot, shall comply with the provisions of Section 818.C of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 803.2: Non-Residential Accessory Uses and Structures 
(A) 	
Non-residential lots containing a permitted non-residential use shall comply with the following general provisions: 

(1) 	
The accessory building, structure or use shall be subordinate and customarily incidental to the principal building and utilized as an accessory use on the lot occupied by the principal building. 

(2) 	
All accessory buildings, structures or uses shall comply with all building setback and coverage requirements for the underlying zoning district on which it is located. 

(3) 	
The building setback provisions shall apply to accessory buildings and structures for a non-residential uses. Where setback provisions are not specified, the following minimum setback requirements shall apply for non-residential uses: the front yard setback shall be forty (40) feet; the side yard setback shall be ten (10) feet; and the rear yard setback shall be ten (10) feet. 

(4) 	
The land area occupied by the accessory building or structure shall account towards the building coverage calculations for the lot and zoning district on which it is located. 

(5) 	
The land area occupied by the accessory building or structure shall account towards the impervious surface ratio calculations for the lot and zoning district on which it is located. 

(6) 	
The maximum height of any non-residential accessory building or structure shall be thirty (30) feet. 



(B) 	
Storage facilities are permitted provided that such facilities are located in areas, which have direct access to a public street or driveway.  The outdoor storage of materials shall be screened from the view of adjacent properties with a berm, trees, landscaping materials and/or fence. 

(C) 	
Restaurants, cafeterias and/or recreational facilities are permitted provided they are intended for the use of employees only, unless they are permitted as principal uses in the district in which they are constructed. 


Section 804: Residential Conversions 
(A) 	
Residential conversions of a single-family detached dwelling into a dwelling for not more than two (2) families shall be permitted by right within the C-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall demonstrate that the residential conversion shall comply with the following provisions: 

(1) 	
The minimum lot area per family shall not be reduced to less than the minimum lot area that is required for a single family dwelling in the zoning district in which the residential conversion is located. 

(2) 	
The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements specified by the zoning district on which the residential use is located shall not be reduced. 

(3) 	
The maximum building coverage and lot coverage requirements for the appropriate zoning district shall not be exceeded. 

(4) 	
The residential uses are serviced by public sewage disposal facilities or on-lot sewage disposal systems with sufficient capacities.  If permitted, separate utility connections shall be evaluated in order to comply with the requirements of West Nantmeal Township. 

(5) 	
The residential uses are serviced by public water supply facilities or on-lot water supply facilities with sufficient capacities.  If permitted, separate utility connections shall be evaluated in order to comply with the requirements of West Nantmeal Township. 

(6) 	
The residential conversion shall take place within a building capable of accommodating two (2) families. 

(7) 	
The building can be altered and improved to comply with all building code requirements.  The applicant shall provide documentation to the Zoning Hearing Board, Zoning Officer, Building Code Official and Sewage Enforcement Officer that all plumbing, heating, electrical, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and similar facilities comply with all applicable ordinances, regulations, codes and laws specified by West Nantmeal Township and/or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(8) 	
Each residential unit shall contain independent washing and bathing facilities as well as a complete kitchen with cooking facilities to accommodate the tenants. 

(9) 	
At least two (2) off-street parking spaces are provided for each unit, which are designed to comply with the provisions of Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
There shall be no external alterations of the building, unless it is required for safety, structural durability, accessibility, architectural enhancement, or as permitted by West Nantmeal Township. 



(C) 	
If the residential conversion is permitted, the Zoning Hearing Board may prescribe such further conditions with respect to the conversion and use of such building as it deems appropriate. 


Section 805: Height Exceptions 
(A) 
The building height limitations contained within this Zoning Ordinance shall not apply to chimneys, spires, belfries, cupolas, farm buildings, silos, greenhouse ventilators, antennas (not in combination with support towers), water tanks, and other similar appurtenances, which are usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. 

(B) 	
The projection of the exempted structures specified within Section 805(A) may be increased to a maximum height of fifty (50) feet provided that the height of the exempted structure is not greater than the distance to any property line, as measured from the exempted structure to any property line. 

(C) 	
Provisions relating to alternative or emerging energy facilities are specified under Section 819 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
The height exceptions specified within this section of the Zoning Ordinance shall be consistent with the provisions specified by state and federal aviation laws.  Where conflicts should arise, the provisions of the state or federal aviation law shall be upheld. 


Section 806: Front Yard and Lot Width Exceptions 
(A) 	
When an unimproved lot is situated between two (2) improved lots with front yard dimensions less than those required for the zoning district in which the unimproved lot is located, the front yard required for the unimproved lot may be reduced to a depth equal to the average of the two (2) adjoining lots; provided, however, that this provision shall only apply in such cases where the improved lots in question are improved as of the time of the adoption of the Ordinance and the improvements are located within one hundred (100) feet of the unimproved lot.  For the purpose of this section, an unimproved lot shall be the same as a vacant lot and an improved lot shall be one on which a principal building is erected. 

(B) 	
All residential and non-residential lots shall comply with the appropriate minimum lot width requirement for that use in the zoning district on which it is located, as measured at the street line, legal right-of-way line, ultimate right-of­way line (where it exists) and the building setback line. The following lot width exceptions shall be permitted: 

(1) 	
Where single-family residential lots are created along the bulb of a cul-de-sac street, the minimum lot width may be reduced by twenty-five (25) percent of the required lot width at the street line, provided that the minimum lot width requirement is established at the building setback line, as measured from the street right-of-way line to a point equivalent to the front yard setback requirement, which is specified by the appropriate zoning district in which the single family detached dwelling is located. 

(2) 	
No more than four (4) single-family lots shall be located along the bulb of a cul-de-sac street. 

(3) 	
Where single-family residential lots are created along a street curve with a horizontal radius less than one hundred-fifty (150) feet, as measured along the street centerline, the minimum lot width may be reduced by twenty-five  (25) percent of the required lot width, provided that the minimum lot width requirement is established at the building setback line, as measured from the street right-of-way line to a point equivalent to the front yard setback requirement, which is specified by the appropriate zoning district in which the single family detached dwelling is located.  The side lot lines should be established at ninety (90) degree angles to the street line tangents or radial to the street line curves. 



(C) 	
The Zoning Officer shall review and authorize all front yard and lot width exceptions in accordance with the provisions established under this section of the Zoning Ordinance.  All such permitted exemptions shall be noted on the zoning permit, subdivision plan and/or land development plan. 


Section 807: Flag Lots or Key Hole Lots 
(A) 	
Flag lots or key hole lots are permitted as single family detached lots within the R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts, subject to the following provisions: 

(1) 	
Flag lots shall only be permitted within residential developments containing ten (10) or fewer lots, which are designed to accommodate single family detached dwelling units. 

(2) 	
No more that two (2) flag lots shall be permitted as a result of the overall subdivision and/or cumulative phases of the development.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the following site conditions exist: 

(a) 	
The tract of land cannot be subdivided in a manner to comply with the minimum lot width and area requirements for the zoning district in which the flag lot is located. 

(b) 	
The tract of land represents the total contiguous land area owned by the applicant. 

(c) 	
The tract of land cannot be further subdivided in the future by normal or typical design. 

(d) 	
The tract of land cannot be properly subdivided due to the presence of certain physical or environmental development constraints associated with the site. 

(e) 	
The configuration of the proposed lots will not limit the potential for development on adjacent tracts of land in the future. 





(B) 	
If the applicant demonstrates that the site conditions are amenable to the development of a flag lot, the subdivision shall be designed considering the following requirements: 

(1) 	
The access strip or stem of the flag lot shall be designed in accordance with the following requirements: 

(a) 	
The access strip or stem of the flag lot shall be owned in fee simple and extended from an existing public street to the rear property line of the flag lot. 

(b) 	
The width of the access strip or stem shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet. 

(c) 	
The Board of Supervisors may authorize a reduction in the width of the access strip or stem, if the applicant can demonstrate that it will not be utilized by more than one (1) principal use or party and that there will be no adverse problems associated with slope, drainage and/or sedimentation.  The width of the access strip or stem may not be reduced to a width less than thirty (30) feet.  

(d) 	
The unimproved portion of the access strip or stem shall be properly graded and stabilized. 

(e) 	
The fifty (50) foot wide access strip or stem may be utilized as a future right-of-way to permit the construction of a public or private street.  If additional lots are created and/or if additional lots utilize the access strip or stem for ingress and egress purposes, the fifty (50) foot wide access strip shall be improved to comply with the design standards and specifications for a public street. 



(2) 	
The net lot area for each flag lot shall meet or exceed the minimum lot area for the zoning district on which the flag lot is located.  The area of the access strip or stem shall not be included as part of the net lot area for the flag lot. 

(3) 	
The building setback line for the flag lot shall meet the minimum required setback dimensions for the zoning district in which the flag lot is located.  The setback lines shall be measured from the edge of the flag stem or flag portion of the lot.  The front yard depth or setback shall be measured from the access strip or stem (extended through the lot) and from the rear property line.  All other setback requirements shall comply with the rear yard setback provisions. 



(C) 	
If the tract of land contains any residue or undeveloped land area, the applicant shall submit a sketch plan or a preliminary plan depicting how the remaining area will be developed or perpetually preserved as open space. 


Section 808: Visibility at Street Intersections 
(A) 	
Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street intersections.  Within such triangles, nothing, except permitted street signs, traffic lights or signs, utility poles and mail boxes, which impedes vision between a height of two and one-half (2-1/2) feet and ten (10) feet above the center line grades of the intersecting streets shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow.  Such triangles shall be established as follows: 

(1) 	
For intersections involving a minor street, the dimension of the clear sight triangle shall be established for a distance of seventy-five (75) feet, as measured from the middle of the intersection or where the centerlines of the intersecting streets cross. 

(2) 	
For intersections involving a collector street, the dimension of the clear sight triangle shall be established for a distance of one hundred (100) feet, as measured from the middle of the intersection or where the centerlines of the intersecting streets cross. 

(3) 	
For intersections involving an arterial street, the dimension of the clear sight triangle shall be established for a distance of one hundred and fifty (150) feet, as measured from the middle of the intersection or where the centerlines of the intersecting streets cross. 



(B) 	
The functional classifications of all existing streets within West Nantmeal Township are identified within the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan. 


Section 809: Corner Lot Restrictions and Requirements 
(A) 	
For all corner lots, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, the minimum lot width and front yard setback requirements of the zoning district on which the corner lot is located shall be applied to each street on which the corner lot has frontage. 

(B) 	
In cases in which a pre-existing lot of record is changed or converted into a corner lot, as the result of an adjacent subdivision or land development, the front yard of the pre-existing lot shall be established along the public street to which it originally had frontage as well as along the proposed or new road to which it will have frontage.  All other setback requirements shall conform with the appropriate side and rear yard setback requirements for the zoning district on which the pre-existing lot is located. 

(C) 	
All corner lots shall comply with the provisions established for visibility at street intersections, as provided under Section 808 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 810: Fences, Walls and Hedges 
(A) 	
Fences, walls and/or hedges may be permitted within and along the periphery of any required yard provided: 

(1) 	
No fence, wall and/or hedge shall be erected or planted within or encroaching upon the legal or ultimate street right-of-way, floodway, utility easement or drainage easement. 

(2) 	
No fence, wall and/or hedge shall be erected in any manner that obstructs a clear line of sight or vision from a driveway or street intersection. 

(3) 	
All fences and walls utilized for a residential use shall not exceed a maximum height of three (3) feet within the front yard and six (6) feet within the side yard or rear yard.  Fences exceeding three (3) feet in height may be permitted in the front yard provided the fence contains an open area of not less than seventy-five (75) percent. 

(4) 	
All fences and walls utilized for a non-residential use shall not exceed a maximum height of eight (8) feet. Security fences for certain non-residential uses may be extended to twelve (12) feet in height. 

(5) 	
Fences and walls shall be constructed so as to place structural members toward the property being enclosed by the fence, thereby presenting the best appearance towards adjacent property. 

(6) 	
Security fencing for non-residential uses and agricultural uses may be utilized in all Zoning Districts. 

(7) 	
An existing fence or wall replaced in its entirety shall comply with the provisions established within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Ordinary and normal maintenance and/or repairs of a fence or wall in any zoning district shall not require the issuance of a permit. Otherwise, a permit shall be required for any fence installation or wall construction, as specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Any fence or wall, which in the judgment of the Zoning Officer is unsafe, dangerous, or a threat to the public health, safety and/or welfare shall be removed, repaired or replaced as determined necessary by the Zoning Officer at the expense of the property owner. 



(B) 	
The following wall and/or fences shall be exempt from the provisions established under this section of the Zoning Ordinance: 

(1) 	
Fences and walls used for agricultural uses in order protect and contain livestock. 

(2) 	
Fences and walls used for recreational uses in order to: provide security measures; minimize visibility; and to protect the public health, safety or welfare. 

(3) 	
Retaining walls constructed in accordance with industry and building code specifications. 

(4) 	
Fences and walls of an historic nature, which are accessory to an officially designated historic structure. 

(5) 	
Buried electronic fences used to control pets, provided that they do not emit radiation which would pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 



(C) 	
Prior to the installation of any fence, wall or hedge row, the landowner should verify the limits of the property lines that may be in question.  In situations where the property line is in doubt, the Zoning Officer may require the property owner to have a professional land surveyor determine and mark the property line in question. 


Section 811: Projections Into Yards 
(A) The following projections shall be permitted into required yards and shall not be considered in the determination of the lot coverage requirements: 
(1) 	
A lawful building erected prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, which encroaches into the required side yard established for that district may be further extended into the rear yard, provided that the building extension is contiguous to the existing building and provided that the building extension maintains at a minimum the rear yard setback established for that zoning district. 

(2) 	
A porch abutting the frontage of a building, not exceeding twenty (20) feet in height nor sixteen (16) feet in width may be extended by not more than five (5) feet into the front yard with unenclosed sides except for four (4) columns, which support a roof limited to the dimensions of the porch plus an 18 inch projection on any side for cornices, eaves or gutters. 

(3) 	
A porch abutting the side of a building, not exceeding twenty (20) feet in height nor sixteen (16) feet in width may be extended by not more than five (5) feet into the side yard with unenclosed sides except for 


four (4) columns, which support a roof limited to the dimensions of the porch plus an eighteen (18) inch projection on any side for cornices, eaves or gutters.  In such cases, the porch shall be located at least five 
(5) 
feet from the property line. 

(4) 	
Porches, decks or patios located within the rear yard of a single family semi-detached dwelling, multi­family townhouse units and multi-family apartment units may be located along the common lot line, provided that they do not project into the rear yard setback. 

(5) 	
A porch, deck or patio, which does not extend above the first floor elevation or contain a roof, may be erected into a required side or rear yard for a distance of not more than one-half the distance of the side or rear yard. In cases where a common wall or property line are not relevant, the porch, deck or patio shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the property line. 

(6) 	
A carport may be erected over an existing driveway provided that the carport is located in a manner to comply with all setback requirements for that zoning district. 

(7) 	
A buttress, chimney, cornice, pier or pilaster of a building may project not more than three (3) feet into a required yard setback. 

(8) 	
Open balconies, steps, fire escapes, basement door units, oriel windows, eaves, window sills, and other similar architectural or cantilever construction features may project into the required yard provided that such features shall project no more than five (5) feet into any required yard.  In all such cases, the projection shall not be located closer than five (5) feet to a property line. 


(B) 	In situations where the property line is in doubt, the Zoning Officer may require the property owner to have a professional land surveyor determine and mark the precise limits of the property line in question. 
Section 812: Non-Residential Performance Standards and Controls 
(A) 	
Unless otherwise specified by other provisions adopted by West Nantmeal Township, all non-residential uses shall comply with the performance standards and controls specified by the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance.  

(B) 	
With the exception of agricultural uses, the following requirements for air quality management shall apply to all existing and proposed non-residential uses: 

(1) 	
No gases, vapors, odors and/or particulates shall be emitted from any non-residential use which are detrimental to persons, property, animals or vegetation. 

(2) 	
No toxic, radioactive or corrosive gases, vapors or fumes shall be released into the atmosphere. 

(3) 	
No odors causing annoyance or discomfort to the adjacent residents shall be detectable beyond the property lines of the non-residential use on which such odors originate. 

(4) 	
Any storage or spreading of manure, sludge, fertilizer, or other soil enrichment substances shall be conducted in a manner to limit odor.  Further, all such activities shall be conducted in manner required by all pertinent local, state and federal laws.  

(5) 	
All state and federal regulations concerning air pollution or air quality shall be considered as minimum standards for the control of smoke, dust, fumes and emissions. 



(C) 	
The provisions pertaining to noise and vibration control are further specified and regulated under West Nantmeal Township Ordinance Number 97. 

(D) 	
The following requirements for light, glare and heat control shall apply to all non-residential uses: 

(1) 	
Any non-residential use or operation producing intensive light, glare and/or heat shall be performed within an enclosed building or behind a solid fence in such a manner as to be completely imperceptible from any point beyond the boundary lines. 

(2) 	
No luminaire, spotlight or other source that is within two hundred (200) feet of a residential use shall be placed at a height exceeding twenty (20) feet above the average surrounding ground level.  This limitation shall not apply to lights needed for air safety or lights intended to illuminate an architectural feature. 

(3) 	
All light sources utilized shall be shielded or diffused to prevent the lighting from creating a nuisance to adjacent properties or prevent a distraction to motorist on adjacent public streets. 

(4) 	
Any flashing, flickering or strobe lighting shall not be detected from any point beyond the boundary lines. 

(5) 	
All non-residential uses shall also comply with the provisions specified under Section 817 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(E) 	
The following requirements for sewage disposal, wastewater management and water supply shall apply to all existing and proposed non-residential uses: 

(1) 	
In no case shall potentially hazardous effluent or waste from any non-residential use be discharged into the environment or public infrastructure. 

(2) 	
The effluent from any non-residential use shall comply with the regulations specified by West Nantmeal Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All non-residential uses shall comply with all pertinent provisions relating to sewage disposal, wastewater management and water supply, as adopted by West Nantmeal Township. 



(F) 	
The following requirements for solid waste management and disposal shall apply to all non-residential uses: 

(1) 	
No storage of solid waste materials on the site shall be permitted in excess of ten (10) days. 

(2) 	
All solid waste materials awaiting transport shall be properly screened and concealed from the view of all adjacent properties.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin-proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate existing and projected volumes of solid waste. 

(3) 	
All solid waste management violations must be resolved within a twenty-four (24) hour period. 

(4) 	
Incineration for the purpose of reducing or disposing of liquid or solid waste material must comply with the appropriate provisions for open burning and incineration adopted by West Nantmeal Township as well as all state and federal air quality standards. 

(5) 	
All non-residential uses shall comply with the appropriate provisions for garbage, refuse and rubbish disposal, as adopted by West Nantmeal Township. 



(G) 	
The following requirements for outdoor storage shall apply to all existing and proposed non-residential uses: 

(1) 	
Outdoor storage of any type shall be prohibited, if such storage is considered and/or construed as malodorous, hazardous to the environment and potentially detrimental to the health and safety of the adjacent property owners. 

(2) 
All storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products stored outdoors shall be enclosed by a security fence and planting screen adequate to conceal the storage facilities from the view of adjacent properties. 

(3) 	
No materials or waste shall be deposited on site in such form or manner by which it can be transported off the site by natural causes or forces. 

(4) 	
No materials or substances, which have the potential to contaminate groundwater or surface water shall be permitted to be stored outside unless the owner can provide safeguards, which are satisfactory to West Nantmeal Township as well as all other state and federal agencies. 

(5) 	
Commercial outdoor sales shall comply with the provisions of Section 815 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(H) 	
The following utility and energy requirements shall apply to all existing and proposed non-residential uses: 

(1) 	
Electromagnetic radiation, which interferes with radio, telephone, satellite or television reception, or other communication equipment, shall be completely imperceptible from any point beyond the property lines. 

(2) 	
No injurious electromagnetic radiation or radioactive emission shall be produced by any non-residential use.  All radioactive emissions shall meet federal and state standards. 

(3) 	
Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utilities shall be installed underground. 



(I) 	
No building or structure may be erected, altered or used, and no lot or premises may be used, for any activity which is continuously noxious, injurious or offensive by reason of dust, smoke, odor, fumes, noise, vibration, gas, effluent discharge, illumination or similar substances or conditions. 


Section 813: Landscaping 
(A) 
Where zoning district or development regulations require landscaping, street trees, replacement trees, buffer yards, screening and/or planting strips, the applicant shall prepare and submit a landscaping plan in accordance with the provisions specified by this Zoning Ordinance and the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The plant materials utilized for a landscaping plan shall be selected from the approved list, as contained within the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The design standards and specifications for landscaping, street trees, replacement trees, buffer yards, screening and/or planting strips are contained within the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 


Section 814: Temporary Structures and Uses 
(A) 	
A temporary permit shall be issued for the authorization of temporary structures or uses necessary during construction, renovations, remediation, moving or other special circumstances of a discontinuing nature. 

(B) 	
The time period of the initial permit shall be one (1) year, which may be renewed for one (1) year time periods up to and not exceeding two (2) years from the time the original temporary permit was issued. 

(C) 	
The temporary structure(s) shall be removed completely within thirty (30) days of the expiration of the permit without cost to West Nantmeal Township. 


Section 815: Commercial Drive-Through Establishments 
(A) 	
Commercial drive-through establishments, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be considered as an accessory feature or use to the following uses: banks and financial institutions; car washing facilities; personal service establishments; retail uses; restaurants; and other uses that are generally associated as having drive-through facilities, as determined by the Zoning Officer. 

(B) 	
Commercial drive-through establishment may be located on a conforming lot in the C-1 and I-1 Zoning District provided that the principal use complies with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, which are further specified by the zoning district on which the commercial drive-through establishment is located or by the appropriate development requirements specified by this Zoning Ordinance.  

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to commercial drive-through facilities: 

(1) 	
The commercial drive-through facilities and access lanes shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from an existing residential use or residential zoning district, as measured from the property line. 

(2) 	
The side and rear lot lines of the commercial drive-through establishment shall be adequately screened with a landscaped buffer yard. 

(3) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or West Nantmeal Township. 

(4) 	
Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress. All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of trucks and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(5) 	
A stacking or pre-service lane, measuring at least ten (10) feet in width and eighty (80) feet in length shall be provided for each service lane or bay for the drive-through establishment.  Alternative designs may be accepted by West Nantmeal Township as part of a land development plan application, provided that the design does not interfere with internal or external traffic patterns. 

(6) 	
All designated points of ingress and egress for all vehicles shall be designed to consider traffic volumes on existing streets and adjacent uses. 

(7) 	
All exterior speaker, microphone or intercom systems shall be designed in a manner so the messages, music or other sounds are not audible at any street line or property line.  All such systems shall not be utilized between the hours of 9:00 pm and 7:00 am. 

(8) 	
The lighting facilities shall be designed in a manner so the illumination does not exceed 0.5 footcandle, as measured at the property lines, except at driveway entrances, provided the illumination at the cartway center line of the contiguous street shall not exceed 1.0 footcandle. 




Section 816: Commercial Outdoor Storage and Sales 
(A) 	
Outdoor storage of any type shall not be permitted unless such storage conforms to the normal functions and procedures conducted on the premises.  Outdoor storage of any type that is not a normal function of the property or permitted use shall be prohibited, if such storage is considered as unsightly, malodorous, hazardous to the environment and potentially detrimental to the health and safety of the adjacent property owners. 

(B) 	
The materials to be stored outdoors shall be enclosed by a fence and planting screen to conceal the storage facilities from the view of adjacent properties. 

(C) 	
The location of the permitted materials to be stored outside as well as any required fence enclosure shall comply with the minimum setback provisions of the zoning district in which it is located. 

(D) 	
Any lot, land or structure, or parts thereof, used for the collection, storage, dismantling, salvage, sale, exchange and/or recycling of used and discarded materials, including, but not limited to, waste, paper, rags, glass, containers, fabric, debris, and similar material from vehicles, equipment or machinery shall be considered as a "junk yard" or “salvage yard”, which as a result of being classified of such use shall conform with the provisions of Section 730 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(E) 	
The deposit or storage of two (2) or more unlicensed, non-inspected, abandoned, wrecked or disabled vehicles shall be deemed to be a "junk yard" or “salvage yard”, which as a result of being classified of such use shall conform with the provisions of Section 730 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(F) 	
The storage of licensed, functional or operational equipment and vehicles utilized as part of a non-residential use shall be permitted, provided that the equipment or vehicles are not exclusively part of a junk yard or salvage yard operation in West Nantmeal Township. 

(G) 	
The storing or parking of automobiles for sale shall not be located within any street right-of-way and shall be located at least ten (10) feet from all other property lines. 

(H) 	
No materials or waste shall be deposited on site in such form or manner by which it can be transported off the site by natural causes or forces. 

(I) 	
No exterior storage of a substance, which has the potential to contaminate groundwater or surface water, shall be permitted unless the owner provides and installs safeguards, which are satisfactory to West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and/or agency with jurisdiction. All such protective safeguards shall be subject to the review and approval by West Nantmeal Township. 

(J) 	
Commercial outdoor sales may be permitted as an accessory feature or use to permitted non-residential use within the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts.  Commercial outdoor sales shall be subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
All permitted commercial outdoor sales or visual display areas shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for the zoning district on which the commercial use is located. 

(2) 	
All permitted commercial outdoor sales or visual display areas shall comply with the provisions for visibility at street intersections, as specified by Section 808 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
All permitted commercial outdoor sales shall not compromise the safety of pedestrians or vehicular traffic by altering or obstructing their respective travel patterns.  

(4) 	
Commercial outdoor sales may be permitted for those non-residential uses whose merchandise are customarily displayed outdoors, provided the use has been designated, approved and permitted as a temporary use and activity on the site. 

(5) 	
Seasonal or sidewalk sales may be permitted on the sidewalk or outside of the front or side of the principal building of a retail establishment, whereas, goods are offered for retail sale to the public, typically at discounted price, provided that all such sales shall not exceed 180 cumulative days during the course of a calendar year. 




Section 817: Exterior Lighting 
(A) 	
This section sets forth minimum criteria for the installation, use and maintenance of exterior lighting, the purposes of which are to require lighting in outdoor public places where safety and security are concerns; protect drivers and pedestrians on nearby streets from glare from non-vehicular light sources that shine directly into their eyes and thereby impair safe travel; shield neighboring properties from glare resulting from excessive light sources and from nonexistent or improperly directed or shielded light sources; limit the height of light standards to preclude or lessen light pollution; and promote efficient design and operation with regard to energy conservation. 

(B) 	
Lighting facilities shall be required for all off-street parking areas and off-street loading areas and for all driveways providing ingress and egress thereto and for all subdivisions and/or land developments for business, commercial, retail, personal service, industrial, multi-family, recreational, institutional and public uses, and for all construction or reconstruction or improvement of any such use for which land development approval is not required. In the approval of any subdivision or land development plan, West Nantmeal Township shall have the authority to require lighting to be incorporated for other uses or locations where in their reasonable discretion such lighting is warranted. In addition, the provisions of this section shall apply to signs, architectural lighting, and landscape lighting. 

(C) 	
Where required by West Nantmeal Township to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, a lighting plan shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with the following criteria:  

(1) 	
A lighting plan shall be submitted for review and approval for all applications and uses, which require exterior lighting. 

(2) 	
The lighting plan shall include a schematic layout of all proposed exterior fixture locations, footcandle data, and a plat demonstrating intensities and uniformities within the limitations established within this Zoning Ordinance, as well as the manufacturer's description of the equipment (catalog cuts), glare control devices, lamps, mounting heights and means, proposed hours of operation of the lighting, and maintenance schedule. Illumination intensities shall be plotted on a ten-foot-by-ten-foot grid. 

(3) 	
The applicant shall submit a visual impact photometric plan that demonstrates both light coverage and light spillage resulting from the proposed lighting plan and the provision for adequate measures to mitigate nuisance from light pollution and disabling glare, both on the use or development site and on adjacent properties. 

(4) 	
The lighting facilities shall be designed in a manner so the illumination does not exceed 0.1 footcandle, as measured at the property lines, except at driveway entrances, provided the illumination at the cartway centerline of the street shall not exceed 1.0 footcandle. 



(D) 	
Lighting plans shall be prepared to comply with the provisions specified within the West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 


Section 818: Swimming Pools and Therapeutic Spas 
(A) 	
Private non-commercial swimming pools, which are designed to contain a water depth of twenty-four (24) inches or more, that are utilized for the purpose of swimming and bathing shall comply with the following standards: 

(1) 	
The pool shall be considered as an impervious surface and applied to the maximum impervious surface ratio permitted on the lot for which it is located. 

(2) 	
The swimming pool, filters, pumps, apron and other mechanical or structural equipment shall only be permitted within the side yard or rear yard of a lot, and shall comply with the following setback requirements: 

(a) 	
Swimming pools shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the side lot line and rear lot line for properties located within the R-3 and C-1 Zoning Districts. 

(b) 	
Swimming pools shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the side lot line and rear lot line for properties located within the R-1, R-2 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 



(3) 	
Any flood lighting or other illumination used in conjunction with the swimming pool shall be shielded and directed away from adjacent property owners. 

(4) 	
The swimming pool shall be enclosed by a secured fence or barrier and shall be equipped with a self-latching gate, which shall comply with the specifications of the building codes adopted by West Nantmeal Township. 

(5) 	
The pool shall be used or intended to be used in connection with a residential use and available only to the family of the householder and their private guests. 



(B) 	
Public, community or commercial swimming pools, which are designed to contain a water depth of twenty-four (24) inches or more, shall be considered an active or commercial recreation use, which shall comply with the provisions of Section 742.2 (Recreational Uses) of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
Therapeutic spas or hot tubs, which are designed to contain a water depth of twenty-four (24) inches or more shall comply with the following standards and specifications: 

(1) 	
The therapeutic spa or hot tub, including the filters, pumps and other mechanical or structural equipment shall comply with the following setback requirements: 

(a) 	
Therapeutic spas or hot tubs shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from the side lot line and rear lot line for townhouse units located within the R-3 and C-1 Zoning Districts. 

(b) 	
Therapeutic spas or hot tubs shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the side lot line and rear lot line for single-family detached dwellings and single-family semi-detached dwellings located within the R-3 and C-1 Zoning Districts. 

(c) 	
Therapeutic spas or hot tubs located within the R-1, R-2 and I-1 Zoning Districts shall comply with the setback requirements of the zoning district on which use and the accessory therapeutic spa and hot tub is located. 



(2) 	
Any flood lighting or other illumination used in conjunction with the pool, therapeutic spa or hot tub shall be shielded and directed away from adjacent property owners. 

(3) 	
The therapeutic spa or hot tub shall be completely enclosed by a cover or barrier in accordance with the specifications of the manufacturer and the building codes established by West Nantmeal Township. 

(4) 	
The therapeutic spa or hot tub shall be used in connection with a permitted residential use and shall be available only to the family of the householder and their private guests. 



(D) 	
In addition to these provisions, the requirements for permits, construction, plumbing, sanitation, inspection, operation and maintenance, which are further regulated under the codes adopted by West Nantmeal Township shall apply. 


Section 819: Alternative and Emerging Energy Facilities 
(A) 	
Purpose and Objective 

(1) 	
West Nantmeal Township seeks to provide opportunities for alternative and emerging energy facilities while regulating the use of potentially intrusive facilities, equipment and machinery. 

(2) 	
The purpose of this section of the Zoning Ordinance is to establish provisions for the design, permitting, construction and operation of alternative and emerging energy facilities within the Township, subject to reasonable conditions that will protect the public health, safety and/or general welfare of the community. 



(B) 	
Specific terms relative to “alternative and emerging energy facilities” that are utilized within this section are further defined under Section 202 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
Applicability and Permitted Uses 

(1) 	
This section of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply to all alternative and emerging facilities that are proposed to be constructed after the effective date of the Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Alternative and/or emerging energy facilities constructed prior to the effective date of this section of the Zoning Ordinance shall not be required to meet the requirements specified under this section of the Zoning Ordinance.  Any physical modification to an existing alternative or emerging energy facility that alters the size, type and generating capacities of the facilities shall require a permit and shall comply with the applicable provisions specified under this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Alternative and/or emerging energy facilities shall be permitted within all zoning districts.  If the alternative and/or emerging energy facility is an accessory use, it shall be permitted by right, except for wind turbines which require conditional use approval of the Board.  If the alternative and/or emerging energy facility is the principal use of the property, it shall be permitted by conditional use of the Board of Supervisors. 

(4) 	
Alternative and/or emerging energy facilities may be utilized as the primary energy source by the principal use of the lot on which it is located.  Surplus energy may be exchanged, transferred and/or sold to a public or private utility company, provided that such surplus energy is exchanged, transferred and/or sold in accordance with the provisions established by the Public Utility Commission and Public Utility Code. 

(5) 	
Private Energy and Utility Providers, as defined under Section 202 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall comply with all provisions established by the Public Utility Commission and the Public Utility Code. 



(D) 	
Land Use and Dimensional Requirements 

(1) 
The following provisions shall specifically apply to wind turbines or wind energy facilities: 

(a) 	
Wind turbines or wind energy facilities shall be permitted by conditional use.  

(b) 	
Wind turbines or wind energy facilities that are designed and permitted as an attached alternative energy facility shall comply with the maximum height requirements for buildings in the zoning district on which it is located.  

(c) 	
Wind turbines or wind energy facilities that are designed and permitted as a freestanding alternative energy facility shall be setback more than 1.1 times the turbine height. The required setback distance shall be measured from the center of the wind turbine base to the nearest point of the occupied building. 

(d) 	
All wind turbines or wind energy facilities shall be located, designed and installed as per the manufacturer’s specifications as well as all zoning, building code and utility requirements. 

(e) 	
All wind turbines or wind energy facilities shall be setback from all occupied buildings located on a non-participating landowner’s property a distance of not less than five (5) times the turbine height, as measured from the center of the wind turbine base to the nearest point of the occupied building(s). 

(f) 	
All wind turbines or wind energy facilities shall be setback from the nearest property line a distance of not less than the normal setback requirements for that zoning classification or 1.1 times the turbine height, whichever is greater. The required setback distance shall be measured from the center of the wind turbine base to the property line. 

(g) 	
All wind turbines or wind energy facilities shall be setback from the nearest public road a distance of not less than 1.1 times the turbine height, as measured from the center of the wind turbine base to the right-of-way line of the nearest public road. 

(h) 	
No wind turbine shall be permitted in the front yard of the lot on which it is located. 

(i) 	
The minimum height of a wind turbine shall be fifteen (15) feet, as measured from the ground surface to the tip of the blade at its lowest turning movement. 

(j) 	
The maximum height of a wind turbine shall be fifty (50) feet, as measured from the ground surface to the tip of the blade at its highest turning movement. 

(k) 	
A non-participating landowner shall not intentionally block, interfere or disrupt the functional operation from an existing wind resource to an alternative energy facility. 



(2) 	
The following provisions shall specifically apply to solar energy systems: 

(a) 	
Solar energy systems shall be permitted by right provided that such facilities are located on a lot with a permitted use in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(b) 	
Solar energy systems which are designed as an attached alternative energy facility shall be permitted provided that all structural components of the solar energy system do not exceed the permitted building height requirements of the zoning district on which it is located.  The building height shall be measured from the average ground elevation of the building to the average height of the solar panel(s) or other structural components of the solar energy facilities. 

(c) 	
Solar energy systems designed and permitted as a freestanding alternative energy facility shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height and shall be located at least fifteen (15) feet from a property line.  All such solar energy systems shall comply with the building and lot coverage requirements of the zoning district on which it is located. 

(d) 	
Solar energy systems shall be located, designed and installed as per the manufacturer’s specifications as well as all zoning, building code and utility requirements. 

(e) 	
Solar energy systems shall be located behind the front façade of the building occupying the permitted use.  No solar energy system shall be permitted in the front yard of the lot on which it is located. 

(f) 	
A non-participating landowner shall not intentionally block, interfere or disrupt the functional operation of an existing solar energy system. 

(g) 	
Solar energy panels shall be designed and located in order to minimize glare towards an occupied residential use. 



(3) 	
The following provisions shall specifically apply to geothermal energy systems: 

(a) 	
Geothermal energy systems shall be permitted by right provided that such facilities are located on a lot with a permitted use in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(b) 	
Geothermal energy systems shall be located, designed and installed as per the manufacturer’s specifications as well as all zoning, building code and utility requirements. 

(c) 	
Geothermal energy systems may be located on a lot with a permitted use provided that all structural components comply with the building setback requirements and lot coverage requirements of the zoning district on which it is located. 

(d) 	
A non-participating landowner shall not intentionally block, interfere or disrupt the functional operation of a geothermal system. 



(4) 	
The following provisions shall specifically apply to wood-fired broilers: 

(a) 	
Wood-fired boilers shall be permitted by special exception within the R-1, R-2, C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts. 

(b) 	
Wood-fired broilers shall be located on a conforming lot with a minimum lot area of two (2) net acres. 

(c) 	
Wood-fired boilers designed as a freestanding alternative energy facility shall not exceed twenty 

(20) feet in height and shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from a property line.  All such systems shall comply with the building and lot coverage requirements of the zoning district on which it is located. 

(d) 	
Wood-fired boilers shall be located, designed and installed as per the manufacturer’s specifications as well as all zoning, building code and utility requirements. 

(e) 	
Wood-fired boilers shall be located behind the front façade of the building occupying the permitted use.  No structural components of the wood-fired broiler shall be permitted in the front yard of the lot on which it is located. 

(f) 	
Wood-fired boilers shall be designed and located in order to minimize smoke and odor that is emitted and directed towards an occupied residential use. 

(g) 	
Wood-fired boilers may be located on a lot provided that it is located, designed and installed considering the health, safety and general welfare of the adjacent property owners. 



(5) 	
The following provisions shall specifically apply to emerging energy facilities: 

(a) 	
Emerging energy systems shall be permitted by special exception provided that such facilities are located on a lot with a permitted use in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(b) 	
Emerging energy systems may be located on or attached to an occupied building provided that the structural components of the emerging energy facilities do not exceed the permitted building height requirements of the zoning district to which it is located. 

(c) 	
Emerging energy systems may be located on a lot with a permitted use provided that all structural components comply with the building setback requirements and lot coverage requirements of the zoning district on which it is located. 

(d) 	
Emerging energy systems may be located on a lot provided that it is located, designed and installed considering the health, safety and general welfare of the adjacent property owners.  As part of the special exception application, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach reasonable conditions and safeguards. 



(6) 	
The following renewable energy resource protection provisions shall apply to alternative or renewable energy resource protection: 

(a) 	
The landowner shall provide documentation of the land and airspace on his property, which must remain open to assure adequate solar access, water and/or wind to the renewable energy system. All such documentation shall be considered as part of the permit application or special exception application. 

(b) 	
As part of the permit application, the landowner shall notify the Zoning Officer that the alternative or renewable resource system has been installed.  The landowner shall also provide the Zoning Officer with any other permits that have been obtained from agencies with jurisdiction in order to locate the alternative or renewable energy resource system on his property. 



(7) 	
The following setback modifications may be considered for alternative and/or emerging energy facilities as part of a zoning variance application: 

(a) 	
A landowner may obtain a modification of the setback requirements specified under §140­

58.8.4.A (occupied buildings on non-participating landowner’s property) by having a modification agreement executed between both parties, which sets forth the applicable setback provision(s) and the proposed changes. 

(b) 	
The written modification agreement shall notify the property owner(s) of the setback required by this section of the ordinance, describe how the proposed alternative and emerging energy facility is not in compliance, and testify that consent is granted for the alternative or emerging energy facility to not be setback as required by this section of the ordinance. 

(c) 	
Any such modification agreement shall be recorded in the Bucks County Recorder of Deeds Office. The modification agreement shall describe the properties benefited and burdened, and inform all subsequent purchasers that the modified setback shall run with the land and may forever burden the subject property. 

(d) 	
Any modification pertaining to the dimensional setback requirements from public roads or street rights-of-way shall not be considered as part of any application. 

(e) 	
Any modification pertaining to the dimensional setback requirements from an adjacent property owner shall not be considered as part of any application. 



(8) 	
The following provisions shall apply to noise, shadow flickering and/or interference involving alternative and/or emerging energy facilities: 

(a) 	
Audible sound from any alternative and/or emerging energy facility shall not exceed the noise levels set forth in the Township’s Noise Ordinance.  

(b) 	
The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to minimize shadow flicker at the property line. 

(c) 	
The applicant shall not disrupt radio, telephone, television or similar communication signals, and shall mitigate any harm caused by the alternative and/or emerging energy system. 





(E) 	
Permit and Application Requirements 

(1) 	
No alternative or emerging energy facility shall be located, modified or constructed within the Township unless a permit has been issued to the landowner in accordance with the provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
The permit application and special exception and/or conditional use application shall demonstrate that the alternative or emerging energy facility will comply with the provisions contained under this section of the Zoning Ordinance.  The following specific items shall be provided by the applicant: 

(a) 	
A complete narrative describing the proposed alternative or emerging energy facility, which shall include: a project overview; the project location; the number of the alternative or emerging energy facilities; the area and height of the alternative or emerging energy facilities; the initial and potential generating capacities; the facility dimensions; and the manufacturer’s specifications. 

(b) 	
An affidavit or similar evidence of agreement between the landowner and the facility owner/operator demonstrating that the facility owner/operator has the capabilities and permission of the landowner to apply for necessary permits for construction and operation of the alternative or emerging energy facility. 

(c) 	
The properties within five hundred (500) feet on which the proposed alternative or emerging energy facility will be located. 

(d) 	
A site plan showing the boundary lines of the property occupied by the alternative or emerging energy facility and the properties within five hundred (500) feet on which the proposed alternative or emerging energy facility will be located.  The site plan shall also include: topographical and natural features; the planned location of the alternative or emerging energy facilities; the building setback lines; the access road and turnout locations; building and structures; and all public utilities. 

(e) 	
The existing and projected annual energy needs of the permitted use that will benefit from the alternative or emerging energy facility, including the amount of surplus energy that will be exchanged, transferred and/or sold to a public or private utility company. 

(f) 	
Documents related to the potential abandonment and/or decommissioning of the alternative or emerging energy facilities. 

(g) 	
Other relevant studies, reports, certifications and approvals as may be reasonably requested by the Township to ensure compliance with this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 





(F) 	
Design, Transport and Installation Requirements 

(1) 	
The design of the alternative or emerging energy facility shall conform to applicable industry standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute, the Uniform Construction Code, and/or other pertinent codes adopted by Northampton Township. 

(2) 	
The following provisions shall apply to the use of public roads involving the transport of alternative and/or emerging energy facilities. 

(a) 	
The applicant shall identify all state and local public roads to be used within the Township to transport equipment and parts for construction, operation or maintenance of the alternative and/or emerging energy facility. 

(b) 	
The Township Engineer shall inspect and document the condition of all roads prior to construction and thirty (30) days after the construction has been completed or as weather permits.  The applicant shall be responsible for the payment of all fees associated with the inspections conducted by the Township Engineer. 

(c) 	
Any road damage caused by the applicant or its contractors shall be promptly repaired at the applicant’s expense to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer. 

(d) 	
The Township may require the applicant to post a bond for any required repairs or maintenance to public roads 



(3) 	
All wind turbines and wind energy facilities shall be equipped with a redundant braking system, which shall include both aerodynamic over-speed controls (including variable pitch, tip, and other similar systems) and mechanical brakes.  Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a fail-safe mode.  Stall regulation shall not be considered a sufficient braking system for over-speed protection. 

(4) 	
Above-ground alternative and emerging energy facilities shall be clear-coated, transparent, and/or be designed with a non-obtrusive color such as white, off-white, gray or black.  All such facilities shall not be artificially lighted, except to the extent required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable authority that regulates air safety. 

(5) 	
Above-ground alternative and emerging facilities shall not display advertising, except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer. 

(6) 	
On-site transmission and power lines between an alternative or emerging energy facility shall be placed underground. 

(7) 	
Clearly visible warning signs concerning voltage must be placed at the base of all above-ground transformers and substations.  Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags, reflectors, or tape shall be placed on the anchor points of guy wires and along the guy wires up to a height of ten (10) feet from the ground. 

(8) 	
Wind turbines shall not be climbable up to fifteen (15) feet above ground surface.  All access doors to wind turbines and electrical equipment shall be locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry by non-authorized persons. 

(9) 	
Above-ground alternative and emerging energy facilities shall not be combined with other support towers or accessory structural components that are devoted to or utilized by public or private utilities. 



(G) 	
Liability and Insurance Requirements 

(1) 	
The landowner and the operator shall be responsible for repairing any excess damage to public or private roads caused by the alternative and emerging energy facility. 

(2) 	
Unless otherwise required by the Township, the landowner shall maintain a general liability policy covering bodily injury and property damage with a minimal limit of at least $1 million per occurrence and a minimum of $1 million in the aggregate. Certificates shall be made available to the Township upon request. 



(H) 	
Decommissioning 

(1) 	
The landowner or facility operator shall, at its expense, complete decommissioning of the alternative or emerging energy facility within (12) twelve months after the end of the useful life of the alternative and emerging system.  The alternative or emerging energy system will presume to be at the end of its useful life if no energy is generated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months. 

(2) 	
The removal of the above-ground alternative or emerging energy facility components shall be completed within twelve (12) months of decommissioning of the alternative or emerging energy system.  All disturbed earth shall be re-stored, graded and re-seeded. 

(3) 	
The landowner or facility operator shall post and maintain decommissioning funds in an amount equal to net decommissioning costs; provided that at no point shall decommissioning funds be less than twenty-five percent (25%) of decommissioning costs.  The decommissioning funds shall be posted and maintained with a bonding company or a lending institution approved by the Township. 

(4) 	
An independent and certified professional engineer may be retained by the Township to inspect the decommissioning of the alternative and emerging facilities.  All such inspection fees shall be paid by the applicant or landowner. 

(5) 	
Decommissioning funds may be in the form of a performance bond, surety bond, letter of credit, corporate guarantee or other form of financial assurance as may be acceptable by the Township. 

(6) 	
If the landowner or facility operator fails to complete decommissioning during the prescribed period of twelve (12) months, the Township may take such measures as necessary to complete decommissioning in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(7) 	
The Township may release the decommissioning funds when the landowner or facility operator has satisfactorily demonstrated compliance with the decommissioning plan. 



(I) 	
Public Inquiries, Inspections, Violations and Remedies 


(1) 	
The landowner and the facility operator shall provide the Township with a telephone number and identify a responsible person for the public to contact with inquiries and complaints throughout the life of the alternative or emerging energy facility. 

(2) 	
The landowner and the facility operator shall consult with a qualified inspector every twelve (12) months to determine if the alternative and emerging energy facility is operating in accordance with the specifications of the manufacturer. 


Section 820: Blasting and Detonation Requirements 
(A) 	
All general blasting and/or detonation operations shall conform with the regulations of the International Fire Code and the provisions contained in NFPA 495. 

(B) 	
Blasting and/or detonation operations for any purposes shall comply with all local, state and federal laws. 

(C) 	
The storage of explosives shall be in accordance with all pertinent local, state and federal laws. 

(D) 	
Written notice of all blasting and/or detonation operations shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the commencement of blasting and/or detonation to the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Officer and to the occupants of all properties within a radius of one thousand (1,000) feet of the location of the blasting and/or detonation.  In addition, notice shall be given to the local fire department and police department. 

(E) 	
All blasting and/or detonation operations shall be conducted by a qualified licensed contractor.  A copy of the license and certificate of insurance shall be provided to West Nantmeal Township at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the commencement of blasting.  The minimum amount of the certificate of insurance shall be determined by the Zoning Officer. 


Section 821: Domestic Livestock Use 
(A) 	
Domestic livestock use shall be permitted as an accessory use to a single-family use, subject to the regulations specified under this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The following definitions shall specifically apply to domestic livestock uses: 


Domestic Livestock Use -Any activity involving the breeding, raising, caring for, housing, hobby/personal use of domestic animals and products derived from those animals by the occupant, owner or lessee of the lot on which such use is located.  Such animals may include, but need not be limited to, equine species such as horses and ponies, camelids such as llamas and alpacas, and other species not defined as household pets or regulated elsewhere in this Ordinance.  A domestic livestock use shall not include breeding, raising, caring for, housing and hobby/personal use of wild or dangerous animals which are regulated by federal or state law.  A domestic livestock use shall be accessory to a single family detached dwelling located on the same lot. This definition excludes all commercial animal operations such as, but not limited to, livestock production for wholesale and retail markets, boarding and riding stables, kennels and liveries. 
Animal Unit (AU) - One thousand (1,000) pounds live weight of livestock, fowl or other animals, regardless of the actual number of individual animals comprising the unit. 
Standard Animal Weight - The given weight of a particular animal, whether mature or immature, used to determine how many animals comprise an Animal Unit as defined in this Section. 
(C) 
Matrix Chart 10 provides the standard animal weights to be applied to domestic livestock uses. 

(D) 	
The following provisions shall apply to lot size requirements for domestic livestock uses: 

(1) 	
The minimum lot size required for the zone in which the domestic livestock use is located must be met. One (1) acre, exclusive of buildings and impervious surfaces, must be provided for each Animal Unit which is housed or pastured on the lot.  One (1) additional acre of land shall be provided for each additional Animal Unit, beyond the one (1) permitted on the first acre, which is to be housed or pastured on the lot. 

(2) 	
The land designated as acreage for each Animal Unit shall be used exclusively for the animal(s) of the domestic livestock use proposed, and such open area shall be maintained entirely in vegetative cover. Wood lots and forested areas shall not be included in the calculation of the open acreage required for an Animal Unit(s).   



(E) 	
The following provisions shall apply to setback requirements for domestic livestock uses: 

(1) 	
All buildings and structures used to house animals for the domestic livestock use, and any buildings or structures used to store feed or other materials used for the domestic livestock use, shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all property lines.  Such buildings and structures shall not be located in the front yard. 

(2) 	
Any area, structure or building used for the storage of animal wastes shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from all property lines, existing street right-of-way lines, wetlands and waterways. Such areas, structures and buildings shall not be located in the front yard.  



(F) 	
The following provisions shall apply to fencing requirements for domestic livestock uses: 

(1) 	
All animals in the domestic livestock use shall be kept within a fenced enclosure at all times when said animals are not leashed, haltered, or bridled and under the direct control of the owner or an authorized agent of the owner of the animals.  

(2) 	
All grazing or pasture areas shall be fenced. 



(G) 	
Conversion of a domestic livestock use to a more intense, commercial livestock operation shall not be permitted. No conversion of a domestic livestock use to any other principal or accessory use shall be permitted unless such use complies with all provisions in this Ordinance and permitting requirements in force and effect at the time such a conversion is applied for. 

(H) 	
Animal wastes, such as manure and other by-products of animal husbandry, shall be stored, maintained and disposed of in such a manner as to preclude discharge to the waters of the Commonwealth (as the term is defined by the Clean Stream Laws, 35 P.S. §691.1) and contiguous or adjoining properties by action of stormwater and other natural elements.  Lots shall be graded so that animal wastes are confined to the lots on which they originate or are stored. The design and construction of animal waste storage facilities shall be in accordance with applicable federal and state regulations, whichever is more stringent, and shall be approved by the Chester County Conservation District. 

(I) 	
The proposed domestic livestock use shall comply with all applicable Commonwealth, federal and local regulations, including, but not limited to, nutrient management, building codes, erosion and sedimentation control and storm water management, as well as standards for signs, lighting, parking and access. 

(J) 	
A domestic livestock use shall not constitute a nuisance with regard to noise, odor, vectors, dust, vibration or other nuisance effects beyond the property lines of the lot upon which the use is located.  All domestic livestock uses shall comply with the performance standards of this Zoning Ordinance.   


Matrix Chart 10:  Standard Animal Weights for Domestic Livestock Uses  
Type of Animal  Standard Weight in Pounds During Production (Range)  
Swine Nursery Pig Finishing Pig  Gestating Sow Sow and Litter Boar   30 (15-45) 145 (45-245) 400 470 450  
Beef Calf [0-8 months] Finishing [8-24 months] Cow  300 (100-500) 850 (500-1,200) 1,150  
Veal Calf [0-16 weeks]  250 (100-400)  
Poultry Layer [18-65 weeks] Layer [18-105 weeks] Layer Brown Egg [20-65 weeks] Layer Brown Egg [20-105 weeks] Pullets [0-18 weeks] Broiler, Large [0-57 days] Broiler, Medium [0-43 days]  3.25 (2.75-3.76) 3.48 (weighted average) 4.3 (3.6-5) 4.63 (weighted average) 1.42 (0.08-2.75) 3.0 (0.09-5.9) 2.3 (0.09-4.5)  
Roaster Male[0-8 weeks] Female [0-10 weeks] Turkey, Tom [0-18 weeks] Turkey, Hen [0-14 weeks] Duck [0-43 days] Guinea [0-14 to 24 weeks]  3.54 (0.09-7) 3.54 (0.09-7) 14.1 (0.12-28) 7.1 (0.12-14) 3.56 (0.11-7) 1.9 (0.06-3.75)  
Pheasant [0-13 to 43 weeks]  1.53 (0.05-3)  
Chukar [0-13 to 43 weeks]  0.52 (0.04-1)  
Quail [0-13 to 43 weeks]  0.26 (0.02-0.5)  
Dairy Holstein/Brown Swiss Cow Heifer [1-2 years] Calf [0-1 years] Bull Ayrshire/Guernsey Cow Heifer [1-2 years] Calf [0-1 years] Bull  1,300 900 (650-1,150) 375 (100-650) 1,500 1,100 800 (575-1,025) 338 (100-575) 1,250  
Jersey  Cow   Heifer [1-2 years] Calf [0-1 years]  Bull  900 600 (400-800) 225 (50-400) 1,000  
Sheep  Lamb [0-26 weeks] Ewe Ram  50 (10-90) 150 185  
West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Article 8:  Supplemental Regulations  Page: 213  

Goat  
 Kid [0-10 months] 45 (5-85)  
 Doe  125  
 Buck  170  
Horse  
 Foal [0-6 months]  325 (125-625)  
 Yearling  750 (625-875)  
 Nondraft Breeds, Mature  1,000  
 Draft Breeds, Mature  1,700  
Horse  
 Foal [0-6 months]  325 (125-625)  
 Yearling  750 (625-875)  
 Nondraft Breeds, Mature  1,000  
 Draft Breeds, Mature  1,700  
Note:  For those animal types not included in Matrix Chart 10, the average animal weight shall be determined by the Zoning Officer by contacting local breeders and/or owners of such animals to determine an appropriate representative weight.  

Section 822: Exotic Animals 
(A) 	
No person shall keep a wild or exotic animal in any place other than a zoological park, veterinary hospital or clinic, humane society, circus sideshow, amusement show or facility used for educational or scientific purposes, which provide proper cages, fences and other protective devices adequate to prevent such animal from escaping or injuring the public. 

(B) 	
No person shall sell, offer for sale or adoption, exchange or transfer, with or without charge, any wild or exotic animal.   


Section 823: Prohibited Uses 
(A) 	
No building or structure may be erected, altered or used, and no lot or premises may be used, for any activity which is continuously noxious, injurious or offensive by reason of dust, smoke, odor, fumes, noise, vibration, gas, effluent discharge, illumination or similar substances or conditions. 

(B) 	
No building, structure, land, watercourses, or parts thereof within West Nantmeal Township shall be used or occupied, erected, constructed, assembled, moved, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered unless in conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Article 9: Off-Street Loading and Parking 
Section 901: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	
The purpose and objective of the provisions established under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance is to establish specific regulations pertaining to off-street loading, parking and access management. 

(B) 	
The provisions contained in Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance are intended to serve as minimum requirements to promote the public health, safety and the general welfare of the residents and property owners of West Nantmeal Township.  The regulations shall supplement and not replace other land use provisions established within this Zoning Ordinance.  Where theses regulations impose greater restrictions than those of any other statute, ordinance or regulation, the provisions established under Article 9 of the Zoning Ordinance shall be upheld. 


Section 902:  General Provisions for Off-Street Loading and Off-Street Parking 
(A) 	
Off-street loading and parking spaces shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, whereas, the number, type, size, orientation and location of the off-street loading and parking spaces shall be satisfactorily designed to accommodate the use. 

(B) 	
The provisions for off-street loading shall apply to non-residential uses when a new non-residential use is established, changed or modified and/or when a building is constructed, enlarged or altered to accommodate the non­residential use.  Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the off-street loading spaces shall comply with the design standards specified under Section 903 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The provisions for off-street parking shall apply to residential and non-residential uses when a new use is established, changed or modified and/or when a building is constructed, enlarged or altered to accommodate the use. Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the off-street parking spaces shall comply with the design standards specified under Section 904 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
Where the lot area cannot accommodate the required number of off-street loading spaces or off-street parking spaces for the intended use, either the minimum lot area shall be enlarged or the intensity of the use shall be reduced. 

(E) 	
Where an existing building or use pre-exists the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, the provisions for off-street loading and off-street parking, as specified within this Article shall not specifically apply, unless the building or use is enlarged or altered in a manner that increases the demand for off-street loading or off-street parking. 

(F) 	
Where an existing building or use is enlarged by floor area, number of residential units, seating capacity, bed spaces, service bays, or other provisions specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the required number of off-street loading spaces and/or off-street parking spaces shall be proportionately or incrementally increased based upon the enlargement of the building or use. 

(G) 	
Where the computations for off-street loading spaces or off-street parking spaces results in a fractional number greater than ¼ or 0.25, the fractional number shall be rounded up to the next whole number.  The West Nantmeal Township Zoning Officer shall determine or verify the number of off-street loading and parking spaces that are required for a specific use. 

(H) 	
No off-street loading space or off-street parking space shall be utilized for any other use that interferes with its purpose, availability or function. 

(I) 	
All designated off-street loading spaces or off-street parking spaces shall be continued and maintained so long as the use in which the spaces were originally designed for are still in operation or existence.  Unless otherwise approved by West Nantmeal Township, the designated off-street loading spaces or off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced in size or modified in any manner. 

(J) 	
Common or joint off-street parking spaces may be permitted for residential or non-residential uses, subject to thefollowing provisions: 

(1) 	
The total number of off-street parking spaces required for each permitted use shall be accounted for in thecumulative total for the common or joint off-street parking area. 

(2) 	
The residential or non-residential uses shall share common characteristics and will not have any adverse conflicts.  As part of this requirement, the applicant or developer shall demonstrate that the uses will not generate additional off-street parking demands from employees and patrons during peak hours of operation. 

(3) 	
The common or joint off-street parking spaces shall be located within two hundred (200) feet from theproperty line of the principal use(s). 

(4) 	
The individual property owners and/or tenants for each use shall secure a recorded agreement with the owner(s) of the property in which the common or joint off-street parking facilities are located.  The recorded agreement shall clearly define the specific areas, conditions for use, maintenance, fees, and other terms that may be required by the West Nantmeal Township Solicitor. 



(K) 	
Common or joint off-street loading spaces shall not be permitted.  Each use requiring an off-street loading space shall designate an approved area for off-street loading, as specified under Section 903 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(L) 	
The parking of trucks and commercial vehicles on a residential lot within the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts shall comply with the following requirements: 

(1) 	
For residential lots with less than one (1) acre, no motor vehicles exceeding a gross registered weight of 18,000 pounds shall be permitted. 

(2) 	
For residential lots between one (1) and two (2) acres in gross lot area, no more than one (1) motor vehicle with a gross registered weight between 18,000 and 26,000 pounds shall be permitted. 

(3) 	
For residential lots exceeding two (2) acres in gross lot area, no more than two (2) motor vehicles with agross registered weight between 18,000 and 26,000 pounds shall be permitted. 

(4) 	
For residential lots exceeding four (4) acres in gross lot area, no more than two (2) motor vehiclesexceeding a gross registered weight of 26,000 pounds shall be permitted.  All such vehicles shall not be parked within the front yard and shall be located in a manner to comply with the side and rear yardsetback requirements.  The vehicles shall be screened from the view of adjacent residential properties. 

(5) 	
Provisions for Category 1 Home Occupations and Category 2 Home Occupations are specified under Section 615 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(M) 	
No commercial vehicle or part thereof having a gross weight of more than 26,000 pounds shall be stored or parkedalong any street for more than twenty-four (24) hours over any seven (7) day period.  All such vehicles shall comply with all pertinent local, state and federal laws. 

(N) 	
Major recreational equipment, including but not limited to boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent trailers or similar equipment, shall not be parked or stored on any public street within West Nantmeal Township.  All such major recreation equipment may be parked or stored on an approved lot,provided it is located as follows: within a carport; within a completely enclosed building; within the side or rear of a lot, but no closer than twenty (20) feet to a property line; or on an non-residential lot, which has been previouslyapproved for storing major recreational equipment. 

(O) 	
Unless otherwise permitted as part of the normal functions of a commercial campground or similar use, no major recreational equipment shall be utilized for living, housekeeping or similar activities, when parked or stored on anylot within West Nantmeal Township.   

(P) 	
The deposit or storage of two (2) or more unlicensed, non-inspected, abandoned, wrecked or disabled vehicles shall not be permitted on any lot within West Nantmeal Township for a period of time exceeding seven (7) consecutive days unless it is part of an automobile repair establishment, junkyard or similar use determined by the ZoningOfficer. All such vehicles shall not be parked within the front yard and shall be located in a manner to comply withthe side and rear yard setback requirements.  An abandoned vehicle shall be screened or covered in order to conceal its view from adjacent residential properties. 


Section 903:   Off-Street Loading Areas 
(A) 	
Where required to accommodate a residential or non-residential use, paved off-street loading and unloading space(s) shall be provided with proper access from a public street, common driveway or alley.  All such areas for the loading and unloading of vehicles, and for the servicing of establishments or shops by refuse collection, fuel and other service vehicles, shall be of such size, design and arrangement that they may be used without blocking or otherwise interfering with the use of automobile accessways, parking facilities or pedestrian ways. 

(B) 	
All loading areas and access drives shall be paved to accommodate the type of vehicles entering and exiting the site.  

(C) 	
The loading areas shall not be located within required front yards and shall not be located within ten (10) feet of any side or rear lot line.  All such spaces shall have dimensions not less than twelve (12) feet by forty five (45) feet with a clearance of not less than fourteen (14) feet in height.  Alternative designs may be permitted by West Nantmeal Township, provided that the applicant or landowner can demonstrate that the types of trucks that have access to the site do not require the prototypical dimensional requirement for loading and unloading. 

(D) 	
The total number of off-street loading spaces shall be determined by the requirements specified on Matrix Chart 11. The required off-street loading spaces shall be located exclusive of any public right-of-way or required parking area. 

(E) 	
Where Matrix Chart 11, as specified under Section 903(D) of this Zoning Ordinance, does not specify a requirement for the land use activity, or the site conditions do not warrant the specified requirement contained within the table, the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors may consider and require an alternative provision. 


Matrix Chart 11:  Off-Street  Loading  Space  Requirements  
Land Use Category  Gross Floor Area or Units  Required Spaces  
Residential developments containing townhouse or apartment units  Less than 25 residential units  (1)  1  
26 to 100 residential units (2)  2  
100 to 300 residential units (2)  3  
More than 300 residential units  (2)  4  
Office Buildings, Banks and Financial Institutions  Less than 10,000 square feet  (1)  1  
10,000 to 20,000 square feet (2)  2  
Over 20,000 square feet  (2)  3  
Retail Sales, Professional Service Establishments, Restaurants, Shopping Centers, Mini-Malls and other Commercial Uses  Less than 5,000 square feet  (1)  1  
5,000 to 25,000 square feet (2)  2  
25,000 to 50,000 square feet (2)  3  
Over 50,000 square feet  (2)  4  
Institutional and Recreational Uses  Less than 20,000 square feet  (1)  1  
20,000 to 50,000 square feet (2)  2  
Over 50,000 square feet  (2)  3  
Manufacturing, Mini-Warehousing, Self-Storage Units, Warehousing , Wholesaling Establishments and other Industrial Uses  Less than 10,000 square feet  (1)  1  
10,000 to 50,000 square feet (2)  2  
50,000 to 100,000 square feet (2)  3  
Over 100,000 square feet (2)  4  
(1) Denotes that the off-street loading requirement may be reduced or eliminated if the applicant or developer provides documentation to West Nantmeal Township that the use will not need or utilize the off-street loading space. (2) Denotes that the off-street loading requirement may be reduced or increased by West Nantmeal Township depending upon the needs and intensity of the use.   

Section 904: Off-Street Parking Areas 
(A) 	
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided whenever: a building is constructed or new use established; the use of an existing building is changed to a use requiring more parking facilities; an existing building is altered so as to increase the amount of parking spaces required; and/or a residential or non-residential use requires off-street parking as specified by the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
Each off-street parking space shall have a minimum area of two hundred (200) square feet with the minimum dimensions of ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet.  In addition, appropriate driveways, aisles and maneuvering space shall be provided to permit safe and convenient access to and use of the area provided for parking purposes.  Proper access from a street, alley or driveway shall be provided. 

(C) 	
Off-street parking spaces for residential uses shall be located on the same lot as the use served.  Off-street parking spaces for other uses shall be provided for on the same lot as the use being served, or in parking facilities within two hundred (200) feet of the principal uses, except in the case of a shopping center or similar grouping of buildings on a lot, in which case all parking areas shall be provided entirely within the lot lines of the property. 

(D) 	
All parking spaces designated for single-family residential units shall be located behind the street right-of-way line. 

(E) 	
Joint parking facilities for two (2) or more uses may be established, provided that the number of spaces provided is not less than the sum of the spaces required for each individual use. 

(F) 	
All parking spaces and means of access, other than those relating to a dwelling, shall be adequately illuminated during night hours of use.  The illumination shall be designed in accordance with Section 919 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The illumination shall not be of excessive brightness and shall not produce a light trespass or glare beyond the limits of the off-street parking area. 

(G) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by West Nantmeal Township, all off-street parking areas and access drives shall be paved and contain marked parking spaces.  The off-street parking areas shall be properly graded to provide convenient vehicular access and proper drainage and shall be maintained in usable condition.  The minimum grade of areas used for parking shall be at least one (1) percent and the maximum grade shall not exceed five (5) percent. Surface water shall not be concentrated onto public sidewalks and other premises. 

(H) 	
The areas designated to comply with the provisions for off-street parking shall not be used for the sale, dead-storage, repair, dismantling or servicing of vehicles. 

(I) 	
Off-street parking facilities existing at the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance shall not be subsequently reduced to an amount less than that required under this Zoning Ordinance for a similar new building or use. 

(J) 	
The width of aisles within the off-street parking areas shall comply with the following minimum requirements: 

(1) 	
Where the angles of the parking spaces are at ninety (90) degrees, the width of the aisle shall be twenty-four (24) feet in width and may accommodate two (2) way travel. 

(2) 	
Where the angles of the parking spaces are at sixty (60) degrees, the width of the aisle shall be eighteen 

(18) 
feet in width and shall be restricted to one (1) way travel. 

(3) 	
Where the angles of the parking spaces are at forty-five (45) degrees, the width of the aisle shall be sixteen (16) feet in width and shall be restricted to one (1) way travel. 

(4) 	
The parking spaces shall not be designed with angles of less than forty-five (45) degrees. 

(5) 	
Regardless of the configuration or angle of the parking space, the area of the parking space shall accommodate a rectangular area with a width of ten (10) feet and a depth of twenty (20) feet. 



(K) 	
Where parking requirements are determined by the number of seats and no permanent seats are provided, the number of parking spaces to be provided shall be based upon the capacity for temporary seats in normal usage. 

(L) 	
The parking areas shall be arranged and marked to provide safe and orderly movement without disrupting traffic or moving other vehicles.  The design of off-street parking areas for all uses shall be such to prevent the back up of vehicles on a public street. 

(M) 	
Parking areas shall be arranged so that no portion of any vehicle parked within a designated parking space can extend over any property line of the lot on which it is parked. 

(N) 	
Parking areas for non-residential uses, which are designed to contain more than five (5) vehicles shall be screened from the view of persons on any land areas zoned as R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts, which is adjacent to the land on which the non-residential parking area is located.  The screening shall be comprised of a fence, wall and/or landscaping materials of at least four (4) feet in height, which shall be designed to obstruct headlight glare of the parked cars. 

(O) 	
Parking areas and access drives for non-residential uses shall be located a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any property line and street right-of-way line.  The area between the parking area and the lot line or street right-of-way line shall be landscaped in accordance with the standards specified under Section 914 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(P) 	
Parking areas and access drives for multi-family residential development shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from an exterior property line and street right-of-way line.  The area between the parking area and the lot line or street right-of-way line shall be landscaped in accordance with the standards specified under this Zoning Ordinance. 

(Q) 	
The off-street parking areas and access drives for all other residential uses shall be located to comply with the following minimum setback requirements from any property line: five (5) feet for single-family detached units; zero 

(0) feet for the common property line of a single family semi-detached units and five (5) feet for all other property lines; zero (0) feet for the internal common off-street parking area of multi-family units within the development and twenty (20) feet from all exterior property lines and existing street right-of-way lines. 

(R) 	
The number of off-street parking spaces to be provided for each use shall be sufficient to accommodate the use and occupants, full-time employees, visitors and customer parking.  The off-street parking spaces required shall be further specified by Matrix Chart 12 and shall be located exclusive of any public right-of-way or other specified use. 

(S) 	
Where Matrix Chart 12, as specified under Section 904(R) of this Zoning Ordinance, does not specify a requirement for the land use activity, or the site conditions do not warrant the specified requirement list within the table, West Nantmeal Township may consider and require an alternative requirement. 

(T) 	
West Nantmeal Township may permit a reduction for the total number of off-street parking spaces as part of the subdivision or land development plan.  Where a reduction in the total number of off-street parking spaces is considered, the applicant shall provide documentation to support that the use does not warrant the total number of spaces required.  

(U) 	
The handicapped parking spaces shall be located, designed and constructed in accordance with all local, state and federal laws.  The total number of handicapped parking spaces shall be determined by  Matrix Chart 13 and shall be located exclusive of any public right-of-way or other specified use: 

(V) 
In addition to the requirements of Matrix Chart 13, as specified under Section 904(U), the required handicapped spaces shall be designed in accordance with the following specifications: 

(1) 	
Handicapped parking spaces shall be located within a safe and convenient area, which would result in the shortest reasonable distance from the handicapped parking space to the building or intended use as well as other provisions, such as, cross-slopes, access ramps, elevators, ramps, walkways and entrances. 

(2) 	
Above-grade signs and suitable pavement markings shall be provided at each required handicapped parking space. The sign and pavement markings shall be subject to the approval of West Nantmeal Township. 

(3) 	
Where a curb exists between a parking lot surface and a sidewalk surface, an inclined curb approach or a curb cut shall be provided to accommodate handicapped individuals, as specified by all locals, state and federal laws.  If a curb ramp is located where pedestrians must walk across the ramp, then the ramp shall be designed with flared sides, as specified by West Nantmeal Township. 

(4) 	
All handicap parking shall comply with the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Uniform Construction Code.  



(W) 	
Off street parking areas shall be suitably designed to control stormwater and minimize erosion.  The minimum grade of areas used for parking shall be at least one (1) percent and the maximum grade shall not exceed five (5) percent. The maximum grade of access drives shall not exceed ten (10) percent.  The surface water shall be directed to stormwater management facilities, which are designed as per the provisions of West Nantmeal Township. 

(X) 	
Off-street parking areas shall be suitably landscaped in order to enhance or buffer the surrounding area.  The following landscaping requirements shall be provided for all off-street parking areas containing ten (10) or more off-street parking spaces: 

(1) 	
A landscaping plan shall be prepared and submitted with the subdivision plan or land development plan. The landscaping plan shall meet the criteria specified under this Zoning Ordinance and the provisions specified by the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Concrete or curbed planter islands shall be placed at each end of a row of parking spaces, which begins or terminates at an internal circulation drive, and within each row of parking spaces.  The planter islands shall be placed so that there are not more than twenty (20) off-street parking spaces in a continuous row without an intervening landscaped planter island. The continuous concrete curbing shall be required around each planting island.  Each such island shall be at least one hundred-eighty (180) square feet in size and planted with suitable landscaping materials. 

(3) 	
The perimeter of the off-street parking area shall be suitably landscaped to provide a visual buffer or to enhance the aesthetics of the area adjacent to the off-street parking area.  The landscaping materials shall be selected from the list contained within the Subdivision and land Development Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Parking areas required to accommodate non-residential uses shall be screened from the view of residential uses located with the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts.  The screening shall be comprised of a fence, wall and/or landscaping materials of at least four (4) feet in height, which shall be designed to obstruct headlight glare and screen the view of the parked cars. 

(5) 	
Where possible, the use of existing trees shall be incorporated into the design of the off-street parking area or to establish a buffer yard. 




Matrix Chart 12:  Categorical Off-Street Parking Requirements  
Use  Land Use Category  Off-Street Parking Requirement  
Residential  Single Family Detached Units  2 parking spaces per unit not including garage spaces  
Single Family Semi-Detached Units  2 parking spaces per unit not including garage spaces  
Townhouses  2 parking spaces per unit plus 0.5 spaces per unit for overflow parking within the development  
Apartments  2 parking spaces per unit plus 0.5 spaces per unit for overflow parking within the development  
Group Homes  1 parking space for each employee plus 1 space for each 2 beds  
Convalescent and Nursing Homes  1 parking space for each employee plus 1 space for each 3 beds  
Age Qualified Retirement Communities  1 parking spaces per unit plus 0.5 spaces per unit for overflow parking within the development  
Secondary Housing Unit  1 additional parking space  
Other Residential Uses  As determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer  

Matrix Chart 12:  Categorical Off-Street Parking Requirements  
Use  Land Use Category  Off-Street Parking Requirement  
Commercial  Adult Business and Entertainment Use  1 parking space per 100 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Automobile Sales  1 parking space per 500 square feet of office/retail space plus 1 space per vehicle plus 1 space per employee  
Automobile Service Stations  1 parking space per 250 sq. feet of office/retail space plus 3 spaces per service bay plus 1 space/ employee  
Banks and Financial Institutions  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Business and Professional Office  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Club, Lodge, Taverns, Taprooms and Social Clubs  1 parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Community Center  1 parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Convenience Store or Mini-Market  1 parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Home Day Care Facility  2 parking spaces for the residential use plus 2 stacking spaces for loading/unloading   
Commercial Day Care Facility  1 parking space per 6 students plus 4 stacking spaces for loading/unloading plus 1 per employee  
Funeral Homes  1 parking space per 50 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Convenience Store or Mini-Market  1 parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Home Center  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Hotel or Motels  1 parking space per room, plus 1 space per employee on the maximum shift plus accessory uses  
Kennels  1 parking space per 10 animals kept or housed plus 1 space per employee  
Laundromats and Dry Cleaner  1 parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Medical, Dental, Vision, Counseling and Health Care Services  6 parking spaces per practitioner engaged with the principal services plus 1 space per employee  
Mini-Malls  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Nursery or Landscaping Center  1 parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area for retail sales plus 1 space per employee  
Personal Service Establishment  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Restaurants  1 parking space per 3 seats plus 1 space per employee per shift plus tavern or taproom requirements  
Retail Business Establishment  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Shopping Centers  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Veterinary Hospitals  4 parking spaces per practitioner engaged with the principal services plus 1 space per employee  
Other Commercial Uses  As determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer  
Construction Services  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Page: 221 Article 9:  Off-Street Loading and Parking  

Matrix Chart 12:  Categorical Off-Street Parking Requirements  
Use  Land Use Category  Off-Street Parking Requirement  
Industrial  Fabrication and Finishing  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Food Processing Facility  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Junk Yards, Salvage Yards and Impoundment Facility  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Manufacturing  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Printing and Publishing Facilities  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Quarrying and Mining  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Research Facilities  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Solid Waste Disposal and Reduction  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Truck Service and Maintenance Establishments  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Warehousing, Freight Terminal, Wholesale and Distribution  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Other Industrial Uses  As determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer  
Agricultural  General Agricultural Uses  As determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer  
Intensive Agricultural Uses  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Commercial Composting and Mushroom Production  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Commercial Greenhouse and Tree Farm  1 parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area for retail sales plus 1 space per employee  
Other Agricultural Uses  As determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer  
Recreational  Commercial Campgrounds  1 parking spaces per camp site plus 1 space per employee and additional spaces for visitors  
Community Recreation Center  1 parking space per 3 seats (auditorium) plus 1 space per 500 square feet (non-auditorium) plus 1 space per employee on the maximum shift plus accessory uses  
Commercial Recreation Facility  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee on the maximum shift  
Golf Courses, Driving Ranges and Miniature Golf Courses  4 parking spaces per tee plus 1 space per employee on the maximum shift plus accessory uses  
Health and Fitness Club  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee on the maximum shift  
Public or Commercial Swimming Pools  1 parking space per 4 persons of total membership capacity plus 1 space per employee  
Other Recreational Use  As determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer  
Institutional  Assisted Living Care Facilities, Nursing Homes and Convalescent Homes  1 parking space per 4 beds plus 1 space per employee and visiting medical staff on the maximum shift  
Auditorium, Conference Center, and Public Meeting/Assemblage Facilities  1 parking space per 3 seats, which may be available on chairs, seats, pews, benches or bleachers  
West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Page: 222 Article 9:  Off-Street Loading and Parking  

Matrix Chart 12:  Categorical Off-Street Parking Requirements  
Use  Land Use Category  Off-Street Parking Requirement  
Education Use: Nursery School through the 9th Grade.  1 parking space per 10 students plus 1 space per employee plus auditorium requirements  
Education Use: 10th through 12th Grade; Vocational; or Higher Learning Facility   1 parking space per 4 students plus 1 space per employee plus auditorium requirements  
Hospitals, Medical Centers, Ambulatory Care Centers and Health Clinics  1 parking space per 4 beds plus 1 space per employee and visiting medical staff on the maximum shift  
Places of Worship and Religious Facilities  1 parking space per 3 seats, which may be available on chairs, seats, pews, benches or bleachers  
Utility, Governmental or Municipal Uses  As determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer  
Other Institutional Uses  As determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer  

Matrix Chart 13:  Handicapped  Parking Space Requirements  
Off-Street Parking Spaces Required  Total Number of Handicapped Spaces Required  
Less than 5 off-street parking spaces  1 handicapped parking space  
5 to 25 off-street street parking spaces  2 handicapped parking space  
26 to 50 off-street street parking spaces  3 handicapped parking spaces  
51 to 75 off-street street parking spaces  4 handicapped parking spaces  
76 to 100 off-street street parking spaces  5 handicapped parking spaces  
101 to 125 off-street street parking spaces  6 handicapped parking spaces  
126 to 150 off-street street parking spaces  7 handicapped parking spaces  
151 to 200 off-street street parking spaces  8 handicapped parking spaces  
201 to 300 off-street street parking spaces  9 handicapped parking spaces  
301 to 400 off-street street parking spaces  10  handicapped parking spaces  
401 to 500 off-street street parking spaces  11  handicapped parking spaces  
501 to 1,000 off-street street parking spaces  2 percent of the total number of off-street parking spaces  
1,001 or more off-street street parking spaces  20 handicapped parking spaces plus 1 percent of the total number of off-street parking spaces  

Section 905: Driveways, Private Roads, Fire Lanes and Fire Apparatus Access Roads 
(A) 	
Driveways or access lanes shall be required to permit accessibility between a public or private street and the existing or proposed use on the lot to which it provides service.  Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the driveway or access lane shall be designed in accordance with the following provisions: 

(1) 	
All driveways or access lanes shall be so constructed and maintained with materials, which will not wash nor be deposited upon public roads.  No driveways or access lanes shall be located, designed and constructed so as to create a drainage or sedimentation problem on an adjacent property or street 

(2) 	
All driveways serving residential or non-residential uses shall be located, designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions specified by West Nantmeal Township. 

(3) 	
All driveways and access lanes shall be located, designed and constructed as to provide optimum sight distance and visibility at the intersection with the existing or proposed street. 

(4) 	
A permit issued by West Nantmeal Township shall be required for all proposed driveways entering onto a road, which is currently owned by West Nantmeal Township or proposed to be owned by West Nantmeal Township. 

(5) 	
A permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, shall be required for all proposed driveways entering onto a road, which is currently owned or proposed to be owned by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(6) 	
No more than (1) point of ingress and egress shall be established for a residential use unless the lot contains a single-family dwelling with the minimum required lot width along two (2) different streets.  



(B) 	
The following provisions shall apply to common driveways and/or shared driveways: 

(1) 	
Common or shared driveways may provide access to not more than three (3) residential lots, provided that the shared or common driveway has been designed, located and constructed in accordance with the requirements of West Nantmeal Township. 

(2) 	
The minimum design criteria and construction specifications are specified within the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Where required by West Nantmeal Township, a fire lane shall be located, designed and constructed in accordance with those provisions specified by the International Fire Code.  All proposed fire lanes shall be reviewed and inspected by West Nantmeal Township. 

(D) 	
Where required by West Nantmeal Township, a fire apparatus access road shall be located, designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions specified by the International Fire Code. 


Article 10: Signs 
Section 1001: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	
The purpose of the provisions established under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance is to establish specific regulations pertaining to signs for all land uses, zoning districts and conditions within West Nantmeal Township. The objectives of these provisions are as follows: to promote and maintain overall community beautification; establish reasonable time, place and manner regulations on the exercise of free speech; promote traffic safety; and promote appropriate and efficient use of land. 

(B) 	
The regulations concerning signs, as established under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be subject to the interpretation of the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Officer.  Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of these regulations, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Zoning Hearing Board.  


Section 1002: General Standards and Requirements for all Signs 
(A) 	
Permits:  Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, a permit shall be required for all signs within West Nantmeal Township in accordance with the following procedures: 

(1) 	
Two (2) completed copies of a permit application shall be submitted to erect, install, replace, remove and alter signs, as required by the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.  The application shall include the permit fee. 

(2) 	
The permit application shall contain all information necessary for the Zoning Officer to determine whether the proposed sign conforms with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.  At a minimum, the following information shall be included: 

(a) 	
Two (2) copies of the plans and diagrams drawn accurately to scale depicting the dimensions of the lot, cartway, right-of-way and location of the sign. 

(b) 	
The exact size, dimensions and location of the sign to be placed on the lot or building, together with its type, construction, materials to be used, and the manner of installation. 

(c)	
 Any other useful information, which may be required of the applicant by the Zoning Officer. 



(3) 	
The permit application shall be granted or refused within thirty (30) days from the date of completed application. 

(4) 	
No sign permit shall be issued except in conformity with the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance, except upon order of the Zoning Hearing Board, granted pursuant to the procedures established for a variance. 



(B) 	
Construction:  All signs, except temporary signs, shall be constructed of durable material and kept in good condition and repair. Any sign, which is allowed to become dilapidated or in a state of disrepair, shall within thirty (30) days of notification, be removed at the expense of the owner or lessee of the property. 

(C) 	
Location and Placement:  All signs shall be located and placed in compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.  The following requirements shall apply: 

(1) 	
No sign shall be posted, stapled or otherwise permanently attached to public utility poles or trees within a street right-of-way. 

(2) 	
Unless otherwise specified, no portion of any freestanding sign shall be located within five (5) feet of the street right-of-way line or within twenty (20) feet of a property line. 

(3) 	
All traffic control signs, directional signs, traffic signals or other signs, which are located within a street right-of-way shall be permitted by West Nantmeal Township or Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. 

(4) 	
No sign shall be located, placed or arranged in any manner that interferes with vehicular traffic, including the obstruction of sight distance.  



(D) 	
Area: The area of all signs, which are permitted within West Nantmeal Township are specified under Section 1003 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The following specific provisions shall apply to the area of a sign: 

(1) 	
The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording, border trim or framing, and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing. 

(2) 	
Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to a surface, building, wall or window, the area shall be determined by calculating the smallest rectangle, which encompasses all of the letters and symbols used for the sign, regardless of the actual shape created by the letters and symbols. 

(3) 	
The area of a sign, painted upon or applied to a building, shall be considered to include all lettering, wording and accompanying designs or symbols together with any backing associated with the sign. 

(4) 	
In computing the square foot area of a double-faced sign, only one (1) side of the sign shall be considered as the area of the sign, provided that both faces are identical inside the frame of the sign.  In cases where the signs are not parallel or if an interior angle is created to provide visibility, both sides of such sign shall be considered in calculating the sign area. 



(E) 	
Height.  The height of all signs, which are permitted within West Nantmeal Township are specified under Section 1003 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The following specific provisions shall apply to the height of a sign. 

(1) 	
The height of a sign shall be measured from the average elevation of the ground or finished grade to the highest point of the sign. 

(2) 	
The maximum height of any sign shall be twenty (20) feet. 

(3) 	
No sign that is a part of or is supported by a building shall be erected, placed or displayed upon the roof of such building, nor shall such sign extend above the height of the building. 

(4) 	
Height requirements for off-premises signs or billboards are contained under Section 1006 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(F) 	
Clearance, Visibility and Sight Distance:  The following minimum requirements shall apply to the ground clearance, visibility and sight distance for all permitted signs within West Nantmeal Township. 

(1) 	
All freestanding signs, which are located within twenty (20) feet of a street right-of-way line shall have at least seven (7) feet of clear space between such sign and the average ground elevation.  However, the necessary support structures may extend through such open space.  Freestanding signs shall be located at least five (5) feet from the right-of-way line. 

(2) 	
Ground signs shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way line. 

(3) 	
No ground or freestanding sign shall be located within the clear sight triangle of a street intersection.  The provisions for establishing the clear sight triangle are specified under Section 808 of this Ordinance. 

(4) 	
The minimum sight distance requirements for pedestrians and vehicles shall be considered and applied to all permit applications involving signs. 



(G) 	
Projection.  An on-premises projecting sign, which is mounted upon a building so that its principal face is a right angle or perpendicular to the wall of the building may be permitted, subject to the following provisions: 

(1) 	
All such projecting signs shall extend at least one (1) foot from the building but no more than ten (10) feet from the building. 

(2) 	
No sign shall project outward or perpendicular from the face of a building, whereas there is an open area between the ground and the sky. 

(3) 	
The minimum height of a projecting sign shall be at least eight (8) feet from the average ground elevation and no higher than twenty (20) feet above the average ground elevation. 

(4) 	
The maximum area of all projecting signs shall be twenty (20) square feet, as measured on a single side of the projecting sign.  Double-faced projecting signs may be permitted for the same use. 



(H) 	
Maximum Number of Signs:  The maximum number of on-premises signs for a use on a single lot is specified under Section 1003 of this Zoning Ordinance.  Where multiple uses are contained on a single property, a freestanding sign may be permitted provided it conforms with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Illumination. The following provisions shall apply to the illumination of signs within West Nantmeal Township: 

(1) 	
Unless otherwise specified within this Zoning Ordinance, signs may be illuminated by direct and non-glaring lighting, provided that such lighting is shielded so no direct light will shine on abutting properties or obstruct the vision of motorists or pedestrians within a street right-of-way. 

(2) 	
The use of red, green or amber lights on any sign within two hundred (200) feet of a street intersection shall be prohibited. 

(3) 	
The use of flashing, transmitted video, or other similar lighting features for signs shall be prohibited. 

(4) 	
The use of intermittent, animated or transmitted visual message signs may be permitted within the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts.  The message display area or screen of such signs shall not change more that four (4) times per minute.  All such signs shall not be located within ten (10) feet of a street right-of-way line and two hundred (200) feet from the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts.   

(5) 	
The use of illuminated signs within the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts shall be prohibited unless the illuminated sign is specifically related to emergency management uses, medical facilities, municipal uses, institutional uses, and other similar uses considered appropriate by the Zoning Officer. 



(J) 	
Double Faced Signs:  Any permitted sign may be constructed and installed as a double-faced sign, provided that: it has two parallel surfaces contained within a common frame; the signs are directly opposite from each other; the signs match in size and shape; and are not over three (3) feet apart.  All such signs shall be considered as one (1) sign and only one face of one (1) side of the signs shall be used to calculate the total size of the sign.  Should the two surfaces deviate from being parallel or should they differ in size or shape, the sign shall be considered as two (2) signs. 

(K) 	
Supplementary Sign Regulations for all Zoning Districts:  The following supplementary sign regulations shall apply to all zoning districts within West Nantmeal Township: 

(1) 	
Real estate signs for the selling, renting or leasing of residential properties shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: the area of the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet; the spacing of such signs shall be at least two hundred (200) feet apart on the same lot or property; the sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line and all other property lines; no more than two (2) signs shall be permitted for each property being sold; and the sign shall be removed within seven (7) days after the final transaction is completed. 

(2) 
Real estate signs for the selling, renting or leasing of non-residential properties shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: the area of the sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet; the spacing of such signs shall be at least 200 feet apart on the same lot or property; the sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line and twenty (20) feet from all other property lines; and the sign shall be removed within seven (7) days after the final transaction is completed. 

(3) 	
Property control or restriction signs shall be permitted subject to the following conditions; the area of the sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet; the spacing of such signs shall be at least one hundred (100) feet apart on the same lot or property; and the sign does not contain any personal message, which is considered irrelevant to controlling or restricting the use of a property or lot. 

(4) 	
Temporary signs may be permitted provided they are not considered permanent and they comply with the provisions established under this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Special event or promotional signs may be permitted provided they are not considered permanent and they comply with the provisions established under this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Special use signs may be permitted provided they are not considered permanent and they comply with the provisions established under this Zoning Ordinance 



(L) 	
Traffic Control and Directional Signs: Unless otherwise permitted by West Nantmeal Township or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, all traffic control signs and directional signs shall conform with the following: 

(1) 	
Traffic control and directional signs located within the street right-of-way shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. The location, size, type, height, spacing and quantity of the sign (s) shall be stipulated on the permit, as issued by West Nantmeal Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. 

(2) 	
Traffic control and directional signs located outside the street right-of-way within a lot or on private property shall be subject to the review and approval of West Nantmeal Township.  All such signs shall be located at least two (2) feet from the street right-of-way and ten (10) feet from all other property lines. The maximum number of signs as well as the maximum height and size of each sign are specified under Section 1003 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(M) 	
Political Signs:  Political signs, being signs erected in conjunction with a political election, naming a candidate or slate of candidates for a primary or general election or referencing a position in support of or opposition to an issue placed in referendum, shall be installed so as to comply with the following requirements: 

(1) 	
Political signs shall not be placed within the right-of-way of any road and shall be placed only on properties with the property owner’s permission. 

(2) 	
Political signs may be posted thirty (30) calendar days prior to the date of the election. 

(3) 	
Political signs must be removed within five (5) days following the election. 



(N) 	
Removal of Signs:  Signs that are no longer utilized for the original intent or use shall be removed from the site or changed to accommodate a new sign for the new use within thirty (30) days of occupancy by the new use or the abandonment of the prior use.  All replacement signs shall conform with the provisions specified under this Zoning Ordinance.  Upon the removal of any sign, whether temporary or permanent, such removal shall include all associated support including the posts, poles, brackets, arms, trailers and other support mechanisms. 


Section 1003: Summarization Chart for Categorical Sign Requirements 
(A) 	
Matrix Chart 14 on the following pages summarizes the categorical sign requirements by type, quantity, height, area, location and permit procedures for each use within West Nantmeal Township.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 14, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. 

(B) 	
The provisions specified within this matrix chart shall be subject to the interpretation of the Zoning Officer. 


Matrix Chart 14:  Summary  of Categorical  Sign Requirements  
Use  Type of Sign  Maximum Number  Maximum Height  Maximum Size or Sign Area  Setback Requirements  Permitted Zoning Districts  Permit Required 
ROW  Property Line  
Permanent On-Premises Residential  Signs  Individual Name and Street Address  1  10 feet  4 square feet  ----  5 feet  All Districts  No  
Property Control or Restrictions Sign  1 per 100 linear feet  10 feet  2 square feet  2 feet  2 feet  All Districts  No  
Home Occupation Sign  1  10 feet  4 square feet  2 feet  5 feet  All Districts  Yes  
Subdivision or Development Sign containing 20 or more units  2 per main entrance  10 feet  30 square feet  5 feet  20 feet  All Districts  Yes  
Permanent On-Premises Commercial  or Industrial Signs  Freestanding Sign for Single Use or Ground Sign for a Single Use  1  20 feet  50 square feet  5 feet  20 feet  C-1 and I-1  Yes  
8 feet  50 square feet  10 feet  20 feet  C-1 and I-1  Yes  
Wall or Parallel Sign  8  30 feet, or to permitted building height  20% of building face;max. 200 cum. sq. ft. on one designated side  ----  ----  C-1 and I-1  Yes  
Projecting Sign  1  20 feet  20 square feet  ----  ----  C-1 and I-1  Yes  
Window Sign  ---­ 20 feet  50% of cumulative front window space   ----  ----  C-1 and I-1  No  
Directional or Traffic Control Sign  6 per acre  10 feet  6 square feet per sign  ----  10 feet  C-1 and I-1  Yes  
Non-Residential Developments and Uses  Freestanding Sign or Ground Sign for Business and Professional Office  and Industrial Parks, and Similar Uses  1 per street frontage  20 feet  100 cumulative square feet for all uses  5 feet  30 feet  C-1 and I-1  Yes  
8 feet  100 cumulative square feet for all uses  10 feet  30 feet  C-1 and I-1  Yes  
Freestanding Sign or Ground Sign for Hospitals, Medical Centers, Ambulatory Care Centers, Health Care Clinics and Mini-Malls  1 per street frontage  20 feet  80 cumulative square feet for all uses  5 feet  30 feet  C-1 and I-1  Yes  
8 feet  80 cumulative square feet for all uses  10 feet  30 feet  C-1 and I-1  Yes  
Permanent Off-Site Advertising Sign / Billboard  Freestanding Advertising Sign or Billboard along the Pennsylvania Turnpike in the I-1 Zoning District  1 per 650 linear feet  40 feet  680 square feet  10 feet  30 feet  I-1  Yes  

West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Page: 230 Article 10: Signs 
Matrix Chart 14:  Summary  of Categorical  Sign Requirements  
Use  Type of Sign  Maximum Number  Maximum Height  Maximum Size or Sign Area  Setback Requirements  Permitted Zoning Districts  Permit Required 
ROW  Property Line  
Permanent On-Premises Municipal, Governmental, Recreational, Institutional and other Uses  Freestanding Sign for Single Use or Ground Sign for a Single Use  1 per street frontage  20 feet  50 square feet  5 feet  20 feet  All Districts  Yes  
8 feet  50 square feet  10 feet  20 feet  All Districts  Yes  
Wall or Parallel Sign  6  30 feet, or to permitted building height  20% of building face; max. 50 cum. sq. ft. on one designated side  ----  ----  All Districts  Yes  
Projecting Sign  1  20 feet  20 square feet  ----  ----  All Districts  Yes  
Directional or Traffic Control Sign  4 per acre  10 feet  4 square feet per sign  ----  10 feet  All Districts  Yes  
Agricultural Uses  Produce Sales or Identification Sign  1  10 feet  12 square feet  5 feet  20 feet  All Districts  Yes  
Temporary On-Premises Signs  Subdivision or Development Sign  1  10 feet  32 square feet  5 feet  20 feet  All Districts  Yes  
Contractor and Financing Sign  1  10 feet  32 square feet  5 feet  20 feet  All Districts  Yes  
Real Estate and Marketing Sign  1  10 feet  32 square feet  5 feet  20 feet  All Districts  No  
Special Event Sign  1  10 feet  32 square feet  5 feet  20 feet  All Districts  No  
General Notes concerning the Summary Chart of Categorical Sign Requirements (1) The matrix chart provides an abbreviated summary of the basic sign requirements for certain uses and activities within West Nantmeal Township.  Additional land use and development requirements may apply.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 14 (Summary of Categorical Sign Requirements), the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. (2) Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text portion of the Zoning Ordinance and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 14 (Summary of Categorical Sign Requirements), the provisions contained within the text portion of the Zoning Ordinance shall prevail. (3) The provisions specified within this Matrix Chart 14 shall be subject to the interpretation of the Zoning Officer.  

West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 Page: 231 Article 10: Signs 
Section 1004: Sign Requirements for Residential Uses 
(A) 	
An individual nameplate or street address sign may be posted on any residential lot provided it does not exceed four 

(4) square feet in area.  All such signs shall not be located within the street right-of-way and within five (5) feet from all other property lines.  

(B) 	
Property control and restrictions signs including “no trespassing”, “no hunting”, “no solicitation”, and other similar signs may be permitted subject to the following conditions; the area of the sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet; the spacing of such signs shall be at least one hundred (100) feet apart on the same lot or property; and the sign does not contain any personal message, which is considered irrelevant to controlling or restricting the use of a property or lot. 

(C) 	
Home occupation signs displaying the name and address of the occupant or the profession or activity of the occupant of a dwelling subject to the following conditions: 

(1) 	
No more than one (1) such sign shall be erected for each permitted use or dwelling. 

(2) 	
The area of such sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet. 

(3) 	
The sign shall not be illuminated. 

(4) 	
The height of the sign shall not exceed a height of ten (10) above the average ground elevation. 

(5) 	
The sign shall be fixed flat on the main wall of such building or may be erected in the front yard, but not within the street right-of-way or five (5) feet form any other property line. 



(D) 	
Residential development containing a total of twenty (20) or more residential units may provide a sign for the purposes of identifying the name of the development subject to the following criteria: 

(1) 	
The signs shall be limited to two (2) freestanding or ground signs per entrance to the development. 

(2) 	
The maximum size of the sign shall be thirty (30) square feet per sign. 

(3) 	
The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be ten (10) feet and shall be constructed of weather-resistant wood, vinyl or decorative masonry. 

(4) 	
Any wall or fence structure, which supports such signs may not exceed ten (10) feet in height or a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet in area.  

(5) 	
The sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line, twenty (20) feet from all other property lines and shall not be located in the clear sight triangle, as established under Section 908 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The final location of such signs shall be approved by the Zoning Officer prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 

(6) 	
Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall provide sufficient evidence to the Zoning Officer that adequate measures have been taken to ensure proper maintenance of the sign and any accompanying landscaping, and that the sign will be durably constructed as to require minimal maintenance. 

(7) 	
The illumination of such signs may be permitted provided that down-lighting is utilized with low intensity lighting, which is less than 100 watts and is located in a manner so that glare or reflection is not greater than 0.1 footcandle at the street right-of-way line. 



(E) 	
Directional signs may be permitted provided they are utilized within the interior of a residential development, are limited to one (1) directional sign per street, and do not exceed four (4) square feet in size. 


Section 1005: Sign Requirements for Non-Residential Uses 
(A) 	
The maximum number of on-premises signs for a non-residential use shall be limited to the following: 

(1) 	
No more than one (1) ground sign or freestanding sign shall be permitted. 

(2) 	
No more than eight (8) wall or parallel signs shall be permitted, which shall not exceed two hundred 


(200) cumulative square feet or occupy more than twenty (20) percent of the front building facade, whichever is less. 
(3) 	
No more than one (1) projecting sign shall be permitted. 

(4) 	
Unless otherwise directed by West Nantmeal Township, no more than six (6) directional or accessory signs shall be permitted per acre. 



(B) 	
A freestanding or ground sign may be permitted for all non-residential uses and developments, subject to the provisions specified under Section 1003 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In addition to those requirements, the following provisions shall apply: 

(1) 	
A business park, professional office park and industrial park may have one (1) freestanding or ground sign for each street the development has more than three hundred (300) feet of frontage.  The area of each sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) cumulative square feet and shall meet the following criteria: 

(a) 	
A freestanding sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line and thirty (30) feet from all other property lines.  The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be no less than seven (7) feet and no more than twenty (20) feet, as measured from the average ground elevation. 

(b) 	
A ground sign may be permitted in lieu of a freestanding sign provided that it is located at least ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way line and thirty (30) feet from all other property lines. The maximum height of a ground sign shall be no more than eight (8) feet, as measured from the average ground elevation.  Any wall or fence structure, which supports such signs may not exceed eight (8) feet in height or a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet and shall be constructed of weather-resistant wood, vinyl or decorative masonry. 

(c) 	
The freestanding or ground sign may identify the name of the development as well as any individual permitted uses contained within the development provided it is constructed as a single component with the ability to be changed at any time. 



(2) 	
A mini-mall containing multiple non-residential uses with less than 30,000 square feet of cumulative floor area may contain one (1) freestanding sign or ground sign for the development, which shall not exceed eighty (80) cumulative square feet and shall meet the following criteria: 

(a) 	
The freestanding sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line and thirty (30) feet from all other property lines.  The height of all such freestanding signs shall be no less than seven (7) feet and no more than twenty (20) feet, as measured from the average ground elevation. 

(b) 	
A ground sign may be permitted in lieu of a freestanding sign provided that it is located at least ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way line and thirty (30) feet from all other property lines. The maximum height of a ground sign shall be no more than eight (8) feet, as measured from the average ground elevation.  Any wall or fence structure, which supports such signs may not exceed eight (8) feet in height or a maximum of one hundred sixty (160) square feet and shall be constructed of weather-resistant wood, vinyl or decorative masonry. 

(c) 	
The area of the sign shall not exceed eighty (80) cumulative square feet for all uses.  The total number of individual advertisements on any such sign shall be limited to eight (8) per side. 



(3) 	
All other individual non-residential uses may have one (1) freestanding or ground sign, subject to the provisions specified under Section 1003 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Non-residential uses within the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts may utilize illuminated or animated signs that transmit video messages to be displayed or screen provided that such signs shall not change more that four (4) times per minute.  All such signs shall not be located within ten (10) feet of a street right-of-way line and two hundred (200) feet from the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts. 

(D) 	
A municipal, governmental, recreational or institutional use may have one (1) freestanding or ground sign for the purposes of displaying the name of the use and its activities or services, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet and not more than one (1) sign for each street that the use has more than three hundred (300) feet of frontage.  All other pertinent sign requirements for municipal, governmental, recreational or institutional uses, as defined and specified under this Zoning Ordinance shall apply. 

(E) 	
An agricultural use, as  further defined and outlined under Section 804 of this Zoning Ordinance, may have one (1) freestanding or ground sign for the purposes of displaying the name of the use and its activities or services, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet. All other pertinent sign requirements for agricultural uses, as specified under Section 1003 of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply. 


Section 1006:   Off-Premises Advertising Signs or Billboards 
(A) 	
Off-premises advertising signs or billboards, as defined by this Zoning Ordinance are permitted by right along the Pennsylvania Turnpike (Interstate 76) within the I-1 Zoning District. 

(B) 	
All off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall not exceed six hundred and eighty (680) square feet.  The spacing of such signs shall be as follows: 

(1) 	
The required spacing shall be at least six hundred and fifty (650) linear feet apart from another off-premises advertising sign or billboard on the same side of the road. 

(2) 	
The required spacing shall be at least five hundred (500) linear feet apart from another off-premises advertising sign or billboard on the opposite side of the road. 



(C) 	
All off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall be located to comply with the following requirements for setback, separation distance, height and arrangement: 

(1) 	
Off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the street right-of­way line and no further than one hundred (100) feet from the street right-of-way line, as measured on the same side of the street to which the off-premises advertising sign or billboard is located. 

(2) 	
Off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from all other property lines. 

(3) 	
Off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from the center of the nearest street intersection or interchange. 

(4) 	
The height of all such off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall be no more than forty (40) feet to the top edge of the sign, as measured from the grade of the cartway of the highway over which the sign is erected measured at the closest point of the cartway parallel to the center point of the face of the off-premises advertising sign or billboard. 

(5) 	
The minimum height or clearance distance between the bottom edge of the off-premises advertising sign or billboard and the average ground elevation around the support structure shall be ten (10) feet or as per building code requirements. 

(6) 	
When two (2) off-premises advertising signs or billboards are located and orientated in the same direction, the maximum cumulative surface area of the signs shall not exceed six hundred and eighty 


(680) square feet and shall not exceed a height of forty (40) feet. 
(7) 	
When two (2) off-premises advertising surface signs or billboards are orientated in a back-to-back arrangement, they shall be parallel and directly opposite from each other and shall not be spaced by more that eight (8) feet.  The size and shape of the signs should not deviate from each other and they shall utilize the same support structure. 

(8) 	
When two (2) off-premises advertising surface signs or billboards are orientated in a V-type arrangement, they shall be at least fifteen (15) feet apart at the mid-point distance nor shall the interior angles be greater than forty-five (45) degrees.  The size and shape of the signs should not deviate from each other and they shall utilize the same support structure. 

(9) 	
No off-premises advertising sign or billboard shall be located in any manner that disrupts or distracts the operator of a motor vehicle. 



(D) 	
All off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall be located to comply with the following design requirements: 

(1) 	
All off-premises advertising sign or billboard shall be designed, located and constructed in accordance with all local and state codes. As part of this requirement, all permit applications shall include signed and sealed plans from a licensed engineer within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(2) 	
The off-premises advertising sign or billboard shall not contain vulgar messages or depict any lewd, pornographic, lascivious or other offensive acts.  

(3) 	
The off-premises advertising sign or billboard shall be maintained and inspected by the applicant of the permit on a regular basis, but shall not exceed a period of time of more than one-hundred eighty (180) days.  As part of this requirement, the applicant shall inspect the following: the support structure to determine if is sound and in good repair; the lighting to determine if it operating sufficiently; the display area to determine if is in good condition and free of graffiti; the area within the lease area to determine if it is clear of overgrown vegetation, debris, trash and other unsightly materials; and all other items that should be inspected periodically. 



(E) 	
All off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall be located to comply with the following lighting, display and illumination requirements: 

(1) 	
All off-premises advertising signs or billboards may be illuminated provided that such illumination is directed towards the sign and shielded so as to prevent the illumination from being directed towards the street or any adjacent properties.  Downward illumination or night-friendly illumination is encouraged. 

(2) 	
Off-premises advertising signs or billboards containing flashing, intermittent, oscillating, reflective and/or moving lighting features shall be prohibited. 

(3) 	
Off-premises advertising signs or billboards may incorporate features to provide electronic message displays such as the time, date, temperature, weather and similar information provided it does not disrupt or distract the operator of a motor vehicle. 

(4) 	
Off-premises advertising signs or billboards may incorporate a timed or electronic display change, whereas the display of the sign may change to another sign within a specified period of time.  All such signs may be considered provided the message does not change more than four (4) times per minute and it does not disrupt or distract the operator of a motor vehicle. 

(5) 	
The provision for exterior lighting, as specified under Section 919 of this Zoning Ordinance shall also apply to the illumination off-premises advertising signs or billboards. 



(F) 	
The off-premises advertising sign or billboard shall be located to comply with the following permit requirements: 

(1) 	
The applicant shall submit a written agreement with the permit application indicating that the owner of the property has agreed to lease the property to the commercial sign or advertising company and has approved the proposed display or message contained on the off-premises advertising sign or billboard. 

(2) 	
Three (3) complete permit applications shall be submitted to West Nantmeal Township, as required by the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.  The permit application shall include the required permit fee. 

(3) 	
The permit application shall contain the following information: three (3) copies of the plans and diagrams drawn accurately to scale depicting the dimensions of the lot, cartway, right-of-way, location of the sign; the exact size, dimensions and location of the off-premises sign or billboard to be placed on the lot or building, together with its type, construction, materials to be used, support structures, and the manner of installation; and any other useful information, which may be required by West Nantmeal Township. 

(4) 	
The completed permit application, plans and support diagrams shall be signed and sealed by a licensed engineer within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(5) 	
Upon securing the local permit from West Nantmeal Township, the applicant shall be responsible for applying for all necessary permits through the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.   The applicant shall be responsible for providing West Nantmeal Township with a copy of the permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. 



(G) 	
In addition to the provisions established herewith, the applicant and property owner for all off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall comply with all other pertinent provisions, as established by West Nantmeal Township. 


Section 1007: Special Use Signs, Temporary Signs and Promotional Signs 
(A) 	The following provisions shall apply to special use and temporary signs within West Nantmeal Township: 
(1) 	
Temporary signs announcing a campaign, drive or event of a civic, municipal, philanthropic, educational, institutional, religious, or similar organization, provided the following criteria apply: the sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area; no more than two (2) signs shall be permitted; the signs may be erected for a period not to exceed 30 days in any calendar year; the sign shall be removed within seven 

(7) 
days after the commencement of the campaign, drive or event. 

(2) 	
Temporary signs for a yard sale or garage sale provided the following conditions shall apply: the sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area; no more than four (4) signs shall be permitted; the signs may be erected for a period not to exceed 30 days in any calendar year; the sign shall be removed within two 

(2) 
days after the commencement of the campaign, drive or event. 

(3) 	
Temporary signs for contractors, developers, architects, engineers, builders, financers and artisans may be permitted on the premises where the work is being performed, provided that the following criteria apply: the sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet; the sign shall not be illuminated; no more than three 

(3)
 signs shall be permitted for each street the project area or development has more than 300 feet of frontage; the sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height; and provided that all such signs shall be removed within seven (7) days upon completion of the work. 

(4) 	
Real estate signs for the selling, renting or leasing of residential properties shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: the area of the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet; the spacing of such signs shall be at least two hundred (200) feet apart on the same lot or property; the sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line; and the sign shall be removed within seven (7) days after the final transaction. 

(5) 	
Political signs, being signs erected in conjunction with a political election, naming a candidate or slate of candidates for a primary or general election or referencing a position in support of or opposition to an issue placed in referendum, shall be installed so as to comply with the Pennsylvania Election Code and all other requirements of West Nantmeal Township. 

(6) 	
Business and advertising signs located within a sports facility or venue subject to the following criteria: the signs shall be located within the permitted sports facility or venue such as a football stadium, little league baseball field or similar playing field owned or operated by a not-for-profit organization or entity organized to promote youth sports teams; the non-profit organization or entity is recognized and authorized in writing as such by the appropriate state and federal agencies; no more than one (1) sign 


measuring a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet in area shall be permitted for each fifty (50) square feet of playing field or ground floor stadium area; all such signs shall be made of wood, plastic or metal; and all such signs may be located only on walls, fences, and scoreboards, but shall not be mounted on light poles, roofs or other freestanding surfaces.  
(B) 	
The following provisions shall apply to special event or seasonal signs for an existing non-residential use located within a non-residential district, including signs, banners, flags, balloons, floodlights and other similar promotional features: 

(1) 	
The maximum size of a special event sign shall be thirty-two (32) square feet. In the case of more than one (1) sign, the combined area of all signs shall be no more than thirty-two (32) square feet.  

(2) 	
No portion of a ground-mounted sign used to advertise a special event shall exceed the height of fifty (50) inches.  Any banner or wall sign used to advertise a special event shall not extend above the roofline of the building upon which the sign is displayed. 

(3) 	
A special event sign shall be fastened securely.  Ground signs shall be anchored with a metal pipe or other secure support.  Hanging signs shall be secured and not allowed to flap or sag. 

(4) 	
All seasonal signs must be maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
The sign shall not obstruct the vision or sight distance of the operator of any vehicle or interfere with normal pedestrian movements.  In no case shall the sign be located within the street right-of-way.  A plot plan showing the location of any special event sign must accompany each permit application. 

(6) 	
The special event sign may be two-sided with different advertisement displays on either side. 

(7) 	
The special event sign shall not contain flashing messages as part of the display. 

(8) 	
No such sign shall remain in place or otherwise be displayed for more than thirty (30) days per event or season, and no person shall exhibit any such sign for more than a total of seventy-five (75) days during any calendar year. 

(9) 	
The use of spot lights, floodlights and other similar promotional features may be utilized provided they comply with the following provisions: they shall not be utilized on the property for more than thirty (30) consecutive days or more than seventy-five (75)  cumulative days in any calendar year; they shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from the street right-of-way line and twenty (20) feet from the property line; they shall be well maintained; and they shall not disrupt vehicular or pedestrian traffic along any public street right-of-way. 

(10) 	
The use of banners, flags, balloons and similar promotional features may be utilized provided they comply with the following provisions: they shall not be utilized on the property for more than 30 consecutive days or more than seventy-five (75)  cumulative days in any calendar year; they shall not be located more than sixty (60) feet in the air, as measured for the average ground elevation where the balloons are permitted; the minimum setback or fall zone to any street right-of-way line or property line shall be one (1) horizontal foot to one (1) vertical foot considering the height of the balloon; they shall be well maintained; and they shall not disrupt vehicular or pedestrian traffic along any public street right-of­way. 

(11) 	
A special event sign permit shall be required for each sign used to advertise any special event during any calendar year.  The property owner, or lessee with the owner's permission, may make one permit application establishing all dates, times and the duration of each separate special event sign proposed to be displayed during a calendar year, or may make separate applications for each such event, providing the total does not exceed the maximum seventy-five (75) day limit. 

(12) 	
The permit applicant shall pay the fee established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.  The special event sign permit shall be subject to the review and approval of the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Officer. 



(C) 	
The following provisions shall apply to grand opening and promotional signs for a new non-residential use located within a non-residential zoning district, including signs, banners, flags, balloons, floodlights and other similar promotional features: 

(1) 	
The use of promotional signs and features shall be limited to the first sixty (60) days after the initial occupancy permit is issued for the non-residential use. 

(2) 	
The maximum area of a promotional sign shall be limited to two (2) signs, which shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per sign.  The promotional signs shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way line and twenty (20) feet from all other property lines. 

(3) 	
All promotional banners, flags, balloons, spot lights, floodlights and other permitted promotional features shall be located at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line and twenty (20) feet from the property line. 

(4) 	
No other promotional features other than the balloons shall exceed the height of the roofline. 

(5) 	
The promotional signs banners, flags, balloons, spot lights, floodlights and other similar promotional features shall not disrupt vehicular or pedestrian traffic along any public street right-of-way.  



(D) 	
The following provisions shall apply to banners, which are hung and displayed across public street rights-of-way to promote community events including civic, municipal, charitable, philanthropic, educational, institutional, religious, or similar non-profit organizations: 

(1) 	
The applicant must complete and submit a permit to the West Nantmeal Township at least sixty (60) days prior to the desired date of hanging a banner over a public street or way.  The banner(s) may be hung and displayed as set forth by the provisions established within this section of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
The hanging of banners must be in complete conformance with the application, as submitted to West Nantmeal Township and as finally approved by West Nantmeal Township. 

(3) 	
The hanging of banners is the sole responsibility of the applicant. 

(4) 	
No banner may hang lower than 16 feet over the street or public way. 

(5) 	
Unless otherwise approved by West Nantmeal Township, no more than eight (8) banners may be displayed over any particular street or public way. 

(6) 	
Banners may not be hung more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the event being advertised and must be removed no later than seven (7) days after the conclusion of the event being advertised. 

(7) 	
Banners, which are not removed within seven (7) days after the advertised event has concluded shall be removed by the applicant shall be liable for the actual cost of removal. 

(8) 	
Banners hung across streets and other rights-of-way without proper approval or authorization shall be removed by the responsible person(s) shall be liable for the cost of removal. 

(9) 	
The applicant shall assume all liability and responsibility for the display of the banners. 




Section 1008: Nonconforming Signs and Abandoned Signs 
(A) 	
Signs existing at the date of enactment of this Zoning Ordinance, which do not conform to the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be considered nonconforming signs and subject to the following provisions: 

(1) 	
Any sign, which is considered nonconforming based upon its location, height, clearance, visibility, projection, quantity and illumination shall only be replaced with a conforming sign. 

(2) 	
Any sign, which is considered nonconforming based upon its surface area shall only be replaced by a conforming sign or a sign that is twenty-five (25) percent less than the surface area of the original nonconforming sign. 

(3) 	
Nonconforming signs may be repaired and/or repainted provided that the modifications do not exceed the dimensions of the existing sign or create any further nonconformities. 



(B) 	
A sign shall be considered to be abandoned if the following conditions apply: a sign erected on a property for a specific use, which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of one (1) year or more; any sign which was previously erected for a prior occupant or business; or any sign which relates to a time, event or purpose which is considered a past event. The following provisions shall apply to signs, which are considered “abandoned signs” within West Nantmeal Township: 

(1) 	
No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by that person a sign, which has been abandoned. 

(2) 	
An abandoned sign shall be removed by the landowner or person controlling the property within thirty (30) days of the abandonment as described by this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Upon the removal of any nonconforming sign or abandoned sign, whether temporary or permanent, such removal shall include all associated structures associated with the sign including, but not limited to, posts, poles, brackets, arms, trailers and supports. 


Section 1009: Prohibited Signs 
(A) 	The following signs shall be considered as prohibited signs, which shall not be permitted within West Nantmeal Township: 
(1) 	
Spinning, animated, twirling or any other moving objects used for commercial advertising purposes with or without a message, whereas the spinning, animation and/or twirling occurs in intervals of less than fifteen (15) seconds or one (1) complete rotation within a fifteen (15) second interval during any given time of the day. 

(2) 	
Flashing, blinking, twinkling, animated or other message changing devices used for commercial advertising purposes, whereas the flashing, blinking, twinkling, animation and/or message changing occurs in interval of less than fifteen (15) seconds during any given time of the day.  Signs indicating the time and temperature may be permitted, provided that the message or display does not change in intervals of less than fifteen (15) seconds during any given time of the day. 

(3) 	
Signs placed, inscribed or supported upon the highest roofline or upon any structure, which extends above the highest roofline of any building. 

(4) 	
Wall signs that partially extend above the roofline. 

(5) 	
Roof signs, which are erected on top of a principal or accessory building. 

(6) 	
Balloons, streamers, banners and promotion signs, exceeding the provisions of Section 1007 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Portable signs utilized or displayed for more than 48 cumulative hours over any 30 consecutive day period of time on the same property.   

(8) 	
Signs located on parked vehicles within twenty (20) feet of the street right-of-way for a period of time exceeding seventy-two (72) cumulative hours over any seven (7) day time period.  All such signs shall not be considered as a permitted off-premises advertising signs or billboards and shall be prohibited. 

(9) 	
Signs located on parked vehicles, which are owned or leased to the company for which the business or use applies, may park at any permitted site provided that provisional spaces on the vehicle are not offered to promote other uses or events. 

(10) 	
Signs containing vulgar messages or depicting any lewd, pornographic, lascivious or other offensive acts. 

(11) 	
Any sign exceeding the provisions for location, placement, type, area, height, clearance, visibility, sight distance, projection, quantity and illumination, as specified within the West Nantmeal Township. 

(12) 	
Caution tape or crime scene tape that is not utilized for emergency management purposes. 

(13) 	
Signs considered as a detriment to the health, safety and/or general welfare of the community shall be prohibited in West Nantmeal Township. 


Article 11: Nonconformities 
Section 1101: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	
The purpose and objective of the provisions established under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance is to establish specific regulations pertaining to nonconforming uses, lots, land areas, building and/or structures. 

(B) 	
Through the enactment of this Zoning Ordinance, there exists or will exist certain nonconformities which, if lawful before this Zoning Ordinance was passed or amended, may be continued, subject to certain limitations, although such nonconformities would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance or future amendments thereto. 

(C) 	
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption and on which actual building construction has been diligently conducted upon. 


Section 1102: Continuation 
Any nonconforming building or structure, nonconforming use of a building or structure, nonconforming use of a lot or use of a nonconforming lot existing on the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance may be continued in the form evident at the time of enactment of this Ordinance, except as otherwise provided in this Article of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Section 1103: Discontinuance 
If a nonconforming use of land or a building ceases, is discontinued, is vacated or is non-operative for a continuous period of twelve (12) months or more, subsequent use thereof shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Section 1104: Nonconforming Use of Land 
Any lawful nonconforming use of land, exclusive of buildings and structures and the use contained therein, may be extended upon the lot upon which it exists at the time of the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance provided that such extension shall conform to area and lot regulations and to the design standards of this Zoning Ordinance for such use. The extension of a nonconforming use of land shall be limited to the lot which was in existence on the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Section 1105: Expansion of Nonconforming use 
(A) 	
Any lawful nonconforming use of a portion of a building or structure may be extended throughout the building or structure existing on the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
Any lawful nonconforming building or structure or nonconforming use of a building or structure may be expanded on the lot occupied by such building or structure.  The expansion shall be limited to an area equal to fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of the building or structure at the time of the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance and such expansion shall be subject to the setback regulations for the district in which it is located. Only one expansion of a nonconforming building or structure or nonconforming use of a building or structure shall be permitted to occur.   


Section 1106: Reconstruction 
Any lawful nonconforming building or structure which has been involuntarily damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, windstorm, or other similar active cause, may be reconstructed in the same location, provided that: 
(A) 	
The reconstructed building or structure shall not exceed the height, area, or volume of the damaged or destroyed building or structure and such reconstructed building or structure shall not infringe upon the required setback distance to a greater extent than did the former building or structure. 

(B) 	
Reconstruction shall begin within one (1) year from the date of damage or destruction and shall be carried on without interruption. 


Section 1107: Change of Use 
A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use, shall not thereafter be changed back to any nonconforming use.  A nonconforming use may, by special exception, be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the Zoning Hearing Board shall find that the proposed use is less intense than the prior use.  Such intensity shall be measured by the extent of lot coverage, parking, traffic impact, noise pollution, air pollution, safety and other area and bulk regulations. 
Section 1108: Nonconforming Lots of Record 
In any district in which single-family detached dwellings are permitted, a single-family detached dwelling may, as a special exception, be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.  Such lot must be in a single and separate ownership and not have continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership.  This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet all the lot and area requirements of the district. 
Section 1109: Registration of Nonconformities 
The burden of proof that the use, lot, structure or building is a nonconformity shall be the responsibility of the property owner.  All known nonconformities shall be a matter of public record and shall constitute sufficient notice and the limitations therein express and implied to any transferee acquiring any right to use or own such property. 
Article 12: Administration and Enforcement 
Section 1201: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	
The purpose and objective of the provisions established under Article 12 of this Zoning Ordinance is to establish specific regulations and guidelines for the administration and enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
Where a conflict or discrepancy should arise concerning  the procedural requirements specified by this Zoning Ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, the West Nantmeal Township Solicitor shall review the conflict or discrepancy and advise the Board of Supervisors, Planning Commission, Zoning Officer, Engineer and/or Zoning Hearing Board of the procedural requirements that should be followed. 

(C) 	
The provisions established for administration and enforcement, as established under Article 12 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be subject to the interpretation of the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Officer.  Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of these regulations, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Zoning Hearing Board. 


Section 1202: Zoning Permits, Certificates of Use and Occupancy, and Other Permits 
(A) 	
The following general requirements shall apply to zoning permits, certificates of occupancy, as reviewed and issued by West Nantmeal Township: 

(1) 	
Persons desiring to undertake any new construction, structural or site alteration, or changes in the use of a building or lot shall apply for a permit by filling out the appropriate application form and by submitting the required fee. 

(2) 	
West Nantmeal Township shall either issue the appropriate permit or shall refuse the permit, indicating in writing the reason for refusal.  Certain construction activities, alterations or land use activities may require approval of the Board of Supervisors and/or Zoning Hearing Board. 

(3) 	
If the permit is refused by West Nantmeal Township, the applicant may appeal the decision to the designated board that has the authority to consider the appeal. 

(4) 	
After the permit has been received by the applicant, he may undertake the action that is specifically referenced on the approved permit application and other approvals that may be required to satisfy the conditions and requirements of West Nantmeal Township. 

(5) 	
Upon completion of such action, the applicant may apply to West Nantmeal Township for an occupancy permit (where such a permit is required). 

(6) 	
If West Nantmeal Township finds that the action of the applicant is in accordance with the zoning permit and any other required permit approvals, West Nantmeal Township shall issue an occupancy permit allowing the premises to be occupied. 



(B) 	
The following specific provisions shall apply to an application for a zoning permit within West Nantmeal Township: 

(1) 	
No person shall erect, alter, convert, move or add to any building, structure or sign, or alter the use of any land or structure, until West Nantmeal Township issues a zoning permit to the person or applicant for said change or construction. 

(2) 	
A zoning permit is generally not required for normal maintenance and repairs. 

(3) 	
All applications for a zoning permit shall be made in writing to West Nantmeal Township and shall be accompanied by two (2) complete sets of plans accurately drawn to scale indicating or illustrating the following information if applicable: 

(a) 	
The actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon. 

(b) 	
The exact size and location on the lot of buildings, structures or signs existing and/or proposed extensions thereto. 

(c) 	
The number of lots or dwelling units. 

(d) 	
Off-street parking spaces provided and/or loading facilities. 

(e) 	
Statement indicating the existing or proposed use. 

(f) 	
A detailed plan drawn to scale showing the structure, building, sign or other improvement, including the precise dimensions. 

(g) 	
A written agreement that the applicant is the owner of the premises on which the improvement will be conducted or that the applicant has obtained the consent of the owner or lessee of such premises to improve the property in accordance with the permit application. 

(h) 	
All other information necessary for West Nantmeal Township to determine conformance with and provide for enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(4) 	
Upon approval or denial of the zoning permit, West Nantmeal Township shall return one (1) copy of the permit application and plans to the applicant.  West Nantmeal Township shall indicate that the permit has been approved or denied by signing the application. Where appropriate, conditions of approval should be specified on the zoning permit application.  One (1) copy of such plans shall be retained by the Zoning Officer for his permanent records and one (1) copy shall be retained by West Nantmeal Township. 

(5) 	
Approval or denial of the requested zoning permit application shall be made within thirty (30) days from the date of application was considered complete by West Nantmeal Township or as specifically referenced under other prevailing codes or ordinances adopted by West Nantmeal Township. 

(6) 	
In denying a zoning permit application, West Nantmeal Township shall inform the applicant of the reasons for denial and specify the provision(s) of the Zoning Ordinance and/or other prevailing codes or ordinances that have not been satisfied. Applicants shall be informed of their rights of appeal and provided with all necessary information to pursue such appeals. 

(7) 	
A zoning permit shall expire within one (1) year from date of issuance, if the work described on the permit has not begun.  If the work described on any zoning permit has begun, said permit shall expire after one (1) year, exclusive of any time required for administration and permitting, from date of issuance thereof, within which time said work shall be completed. West Nantmeal Township may grant a one (1) year time extension onto the zoning permit if the circumstances are valid and the project can be completed. 

(8) 	
A building permit can not be issued without first obtaining a zoning permit. 



(C) 	
The following specific provisions shall apply to an application for a certificate of occupancy within West Nantmeal Township: 

(1) 	
A certificate of occupancy shall be required upon the completion of the work and improvements authorized as part of the zoning permit and/or building permit.  It shall be unlawful to use and/or occupy any structure, building and/or portions thereof in any manner until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by West Nantmeal Township. 

(2) 	
The application for certificate of occupancy shall be submitted on such form as West Nantmeal Township may prescribe. 

(3) 	
West Nantmeal Township shall inspect any structure, building, sign, improvements and/or land or portions thereof to determine compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and permit requirements.  If satisfied that the completed work is in conformity with the Zoning Ordinance and permit requirements, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 

(4) 	
Upon inspection, West Nantmeal Township shall either grant or deny the certificate of occupancy in writing, within five (5) days from the date of application or last inspection. 

(5) 	
In situations in which performance standards are imposed, no certificate of occupancy shall become permanent until after the use or facility is fully operating and only after, upon inspection by West Nantmeal Township, it is determined that the facility is in compliance with the performance standards. After said inspection, West Nantmeal Township shall notify the applicant that the facility is in full compliance with all performance standards and that the certificate of occupancy is permanent or that the facility does not comply and that the certificate of occupancy is still temporary.  Unless otherwise specified, a temporary certificate of occupancy shall not be granted for more than ninety (90) days. 

(6) 	
The certificate of occupancy shall be kept on the premises and shall be publicly displayed in a manner required by West Nantmeal Township. 



(D) 	
The following specific provisions shall apply to an application for a special use permit, seasonal permits and/or temporary permit within West Nantmeal Township: 

(1) 	
Where a special use, seasonal use or a temporary use are permitted by this Zoning Ordinance, West Nantmeal Township may issue a special use permit or a temporary use permit to the applicant. 

(2) 	
A special use permit may be issued by West Nantmeal Township for a use having a periodic, intermittent or short duration of time not exceeding thirty (30) consecutive or cumulative days within a calendar year. Such special uses shall include the following: carnivals; circuses; bazaars; fairs; municipal and civic events; the sale of food, product and similar merchandise; the sale of Christmas trees, seasonal flowers or other seasonal items excluding fireworks; and other similar activities conducted by a nonprofit or charitable organization, provided that activities are conducted on the same premises as the use and location of the principal activity of the sponsor. 

(3) 	
A seasonal or temporary use permit may be issued for a use having a short time period, which shall not exceed ninety (90) consecutive or cumulative days within a calendar year.  The seasonal or temporary use must be a permitted use specified by West Nantmeal Township. 



(E) 	
The owner of the premises occupied by a lawful nonconforming use or structure may secure a Certificate of Nonconforming Use or Structure from West Nantmeal Township.  Such certificate shall be authorized by West Nantmeal Township and shall certify to the owner his right to continue such nonconforming use or structure. 

(F) 	
Pursuant to the provisions established by West Nantmeal Township, additional permits may be required by local, regional, county, state and federal agencies, which shall be issued prior to the commencement of any improvement or site activities. 


Section 1203: Zoning Officer 
(A) 	
The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be enforced by an agent, to be appointed by the Board of Supervisors, who shall be known as the "Zoning Officer."  The Zoning Officer shall not hold any elective office and shall continue to serve West Nantmeal Township until such time as the Board of Supervisors declares otherwise. 

(B) 	
The Zoning Officer is responsible to enforce the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and shall have such duties and powers as are referenced by this Zoning Ordinance.  The Zoning Officer's duties shall include: 

(1) 
Receive, examine and process permit applications for zoning, land use, buildings and signs. 

(2) 	
To issue permits for the construction, alteration, repair, extension, replacement, occupancy, and uses of land, which are in accordance with the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
To record and file all applications for permits and accompanying plans and documents and keep them for public record. 

(4) 	
Upon the request of the Board of Supervisors, Planning Commission or the Zoning Hearing Board, present to such bodies facts, records and any similar information on specific requests to assist such bodies in reaching their decisions. 

(5) 	
To keep an official record of all business and activities, including complaints of a violation of any of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and of the action taken consequent to each such complaint. 

(6) 	
Perform all other duties, as may be required for the administration of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of this Zoning Ordinance by the Zoning Officer, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Zoning Hearing Board. 


Section 1204: Zoning Hearing Board 
(A) 	
The West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors shall appoint three (3) residents and up to three (3) alternates to serve as members of the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the provisions of West Nantmeal Township and Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(B) 	
The following provisions shall apply to the establishment of the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Hearing Board: 

(1) 	
The members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall serve three (3) year terms and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire each year. 

(2) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board shall promptly notify the Board of Supervisors of any vacancies, which may occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. 

(3) 	
The members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall not be an employee of West Nantmeal Township and shall not hold any other office within West Nantmeal Township. 

(4) 	
Any member of the Zoning Hearing Board may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors taken after the member has received fifteen (15) days of advance notice of the intent to take such a vote.  A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing. 



(C) 	
The following provisions shall apply to the organization of the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Hearing Board: 

(1) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. 

(2) 	
For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all members of the Board, but where two members are disqualified to act in a particular matter, the remaining member may act for the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(3) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf, and the parties may waive further action by the Zoning Hearing Board, as provided by West Nantmeal Township. 

(4) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board may appoint a solicitor or attorney to oversee the procedures of the hearing in accordance with the provisions established by of West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(5) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedure, consistent with the provisions of West Nantmeal Township and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(6) 	
If requested by the Board of Supervisors, the Zoning Hearing Board shall submit an annual report of its activities to the Board of Supervisors.   



(D) 	
The following provisions shall apply to expenditures and fees for the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Hearing Board: 

(1) 	
The members of the Zoning Hearing Board may receive compensation for the performance of their duties and services, which shall be established by the Board of Supervisors. 

(2) 	
Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Board of Supervisors, the Zoning Hearing Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical services. 

(3) 	
The applicant before the Zoning Hearing Board shall deposit with the designated secretary or treasurer of West Nantmeal Township an application fee deemed sufficient by West Nantmeal Township, as established by resolution, to pay the cost of the expenses for the hearing.  These costs may include compensation in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(4) 	
Funds deposited in excess of the actual cost of the requested hearing shall be returned to the applicant upon completion of the proceedings, and, in the event that the cost of the hearing exceeded the funds deposited, the applicant shall pay to the designated secretary or treasurer of West Nantmeal Township the appropriate funds equal to such excess cost.  



(E) 	
The following provisions shall apply to the general functions of the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Hearing Board: 

(1) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board shall act in strict accordance with the procedures specified within West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(2) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider applications for variances, special exceptions, appeals concerning the interpretation of this Zoning Ordinance by the Zoning Officer, and other duties that are specified by West Nantmeal Township. 

(3) 	
All appeals and applications made to the Zoning Hearing Board shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the Board of Supervisors or Zoning Hearing Board. 

(4) 	
Every appeal or application shall refer to the specific provision of this Zoning Ordinance involved and shall exactly set forth the interpretation that is claimed, the grounds for any challenges to validity of this Zoning Ordinance, the use for which a special exception is sought, or the details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds on which it is claimed that the variance should be granted. 



(F) 	
In all cases before the Zoning Hearing Board, the Board of Supervisors, Planning Commission and Zoning Officer may review and comment on the application prior to rendering a decision. 


Section 1205: Public Hearings and Procedures 
(A) 	
The first hearing shall be commenced within sixty (60) days from the date of the applicant's request, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of time.  Each subsequent hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board shall be held within forty-five (45) days of the prior hearing unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the record.  An applicant shall complete the presentation of his case in chief (the part of the hearing in which the applicant presents evidence to support his or her claim or defense) within one hundred (100) days of the first hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the Zoning Hearing Board shall assure that the applicant receives at least seven (7) hours of hearings within the one hundred (100) days, including the first hearing.  Persons opposed to the application shall complete the presentation of their opposition to the application within one hundred (100) days of the first hearing, held after the completion of the applicant's case in chief.  An applicant may, upon request, be granted additional hearings to complete his case in chief, provided the persons opposed to the application are granted an equal number of additional hearings.  Persons opposed to the application may, upon the written consent, on the 

record by the applicant and West Nantmeal Township, be granted additional hearings to complete their opposition to the application, provided the applicant is granted an equal number of hearings for rebuttal. 

(B) 	
The West Nantmeal Township Zoning Hearing Board shall give notice of the public hearing as follows: 

(1) 	
By publishing a notice once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within West Nantmeal Township.  Such notice shall state the time and place of the public hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.  The first publication shall be not more than 30 days and the second publication shall be not less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing. 

(2) 	
By mailing a notice thereof to the parties of interest at least fourteen (14) days prior to the public hearing. 

(3) 	
By mailing or issuing a notice to the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Officer, Secretary, Board of Supervisors, Planning Commission, Chester County Planning Commission (if requested) and to every person or organization who or which shall have registered with the Zoning Hearing Board for the purpose of receiving such notices. 

(4) 	
West Nantmeal Township shall mail notice of the hearing to the owner of every lot within five hundred 


(500) feet of the lot or building in question, provided that failure to give notice, either in part or in full, as stated by this subsection shall not invalidate any action by the Zoning Hearing Board. 
(5) 	
The required notices by this section shall state the location of the lot or building that is the subject of the application, as well as the general nature of the request(s) being made by the applicant(s). 

(6) 	
The Board of Supervisors may establish reasonable fees to be paid by the applicant in accordance with the provisions of West Nantmeal Township.  



(C) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct the hearings, or the Zoning Hearing Board may appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing officer. The decision or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Board, but the parties may waive decision of findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final. 

(D) 	
Parties to the hearing may include any person affected by the application who has made timely appearance or record before the Zoning Hearing Board and any other person, including civic or community organizations permitted to appear by the Zoning Hearing Board.  The Zoning Hearing Board may have power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances, in writing, on forms provided by the Board for that purpose. 

(E) 	
The Chairman or acting Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and documents requested by the parties. 

(F) 	
The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues. 

(G) 	
Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded. 

(H) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings, and a transcript of the proceedings and copies of graphic or written material received in evidence shall be made available to any party at cost. 

(I) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda or other material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present. 

(J) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer.  Each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, together with the reasons therefore.  Conclusions based on any provisions of this Zoning Ordinance or 

of any act, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found.  If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make his report and recommendations available to the parties, and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the Zoning Hearing Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the Zoning Hearing Board's decision shall be entered no later than 45 days after the decision of the hearing officer. Where the Zoning Hearing Board has power to render a decision and the Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, fails to commence, conduct or complete the required hearing as required by this Zoning Ordinance, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.  Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to urge that such decision is erroneous. 

(K) 	
A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him by certified mail not later than the day following its date.  To all other persons who have filed their names and addresses with the Board no later than the last day of the hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board shall provide by mail or otherwise brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.  


Section 1206: Zoning Variances 
(A) 
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for zoning variance applications, whereas it is alleged that the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant.  The zoning variance application shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the provisions specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.  The Zoning Hearing Board may, by rule, prescribe the form of application and may require a preliminary application to be issued and reviewed by the Zoning Officer. 

(C) 	
In all cases before the Zoning Hearing Board, the Board of Supervisors, Planning Commission and Zoning Officer may review and comment on the zoning variance application prior to the Zoning Hearing Board rendering a decision. 

(D) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a variance provided that all the following findings are made where relevant in a given case: 

(1) 	
That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such condition, and not circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located. 

(2) 	
That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property. 

(3) 	
That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant. 

(4) 	
That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare. 

(5) 	
That the variance as granted by the Zoning Hearing Board is the minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue. 



(E) 	
If a subdivision or land development plan is required to implement a variance granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, the variance shall remain valid provided that the following time frames, terms and conditions have been achieved: 

(a) 	
A complete preliminary plan shall be submitted to West Nantmeal Township within one (1) year from the date the zoning variance was granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(b) 	
The preliminary plan shall be approved by West Nantmeal Township within two (2) years from the date the zoning variance was granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(c) 	
The final plan shall be approved by West Nantmeal Township and recorded by the landowner or applicant within five (5) years from the date the preliminary plan was approved.  If required, a municipal improvements agreement shall be executed to ensure that the municipal improvements have been completed in accordance with the approved final plan. 

(d) 	
All site improvements required to implement the conditions of the zoning variance and the approved final plan shall be completed within five (5) years from the date the preliminary plan was approved by West Nantmeal Township. 



(F) 	
If a subdivision or land development plan is not required to implement a variance granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, the variance shall remain valid provided that the following time frames, terms and conditions have been achieved: 

(1) 	
If required, the landowner or applicant shall apply for the necessary permits for the site work and building improvements within two (2) years from the date the zoning variance was granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(2) 	
All site and building improvements required to implement the conditions of the zoning variance shall be completed within five (5) years from the date the zoning variance was granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. 



(G) 	
If the applicant should fail to comply with the terms and conditions specified under Sections 1206.E or 1206.F of this Zoning Ordinance, the decision and order issued by the Zoning Hearing Board shall expire and any relief granted by the zoning variance application shall become voided. 

(H) 	
Unless otherwise stipulated as part of the variance decision issued by the Zoning Hearing Board, the Board of Supervisors may consider granting a time extension in order for the landowner or applicant to comply with the provisions specified under Sections 1206.E or 1206.F of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 1207: Special Exceptions 
(A) 
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for special exception applications, as permitted under the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.  By so providing, the Zoning Hearing Board recognizes that certain uses may or may not be appropriate at every location within any specific district and, where it appears that a use permitted by special exception fails to comply with all of the definitional aspects thereof or would be contrary to the public health, safety, morals and/or welfare of the community at specific locations within a zoning district, that the use would not be permitted there.  

(B) 	
In granting any special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. The Zoning Hearing Board may, by rule, prescribe the form of application and may require a preliminary application to be issued and reviewed by the Zoning Officer. 

(C) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the comments issued by the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors, Planning Commission, Engineer, Zoning Officer and/or other agencies that could assist the Zoning Hearing Board with the special exception application. All such comments shall be made either in writing and presented as evidence during the hearing or as part of sworn testimony at the public hearing. 

(D) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the following issues prior to rendering its decision on a special exception application: 

(1) 	
That such use is consistent with the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan.  

(2) 	
That such use shall be one, which is specifically authorized as a special exception use within the zoning district wherein the applicant seeks a special exception. 

(3) 	
That the property is suitable for the use desired and that the proposed request is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies established by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
That such special exception shall only be granted subject to any applicable condition and safeguards as required by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
That such use shall not adversely affect the general character of the neighborhood and/or property values of the adjacent uses. 

(6) 	
That such use shall not adversely affect the health, safety and/or welfare of residents or property owners within the general neighborhood. 

(7) 	
That there will be no adverse effect of the proposed special exception upon the logical, efficient and economical extension of public facilities and services, including, public water, sanitary sewers, streets, police and fire protection, public schools, and all other similar facilities and services that are considered appropriate by the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(8) 	
That the proposed location of any residential or non-residential use is suitable with respect to probable effects upon highway traffic and assures adequate access arrangements in order to protect major streets and highways from undue congestion and hazard. 

(9) 	
The adequacy of sanitation and public safety provisions. 

(10) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board may impose such conditions, in addition to those required, as are necessary to assure that the intent of the Zoning Ordinance is complied with, which conditions may include, but are not limited to: harmonious design of buildings; planting and its maintenance as a sight or sound screen; the minimizing of noxious, offensive or hazardous elements; adequate standards for parking and sanitation; and other reasonable conditions. 



(E) 	
If a subdivision or land development plan is required to implement a special exception granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, the special exception shall remain valid provided that the time frame, terms and conditions have been achieved: 

(1) 	
A complete preliminary plan shall be submitted to West Nantmeal Township within one (1) year from the date the special exception was granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(2) 	
The preliminary plan shall be approved by West Nantmeal Township within two (2) years from the date the special exception was granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(3) 	
The final plan shall be approved by West Nantmeal Township and recorded by the landowner or applicant within five (5) years from the date the preliminary plan was approved.  If required, a municipal improvements agreement shall be executed to ensure that the municipal improvements have been completed in accordance with the approved final plan. 

(4) 	
All site improvements required to implement the conditions of approval for the special exception and the approved final plan shall be completed within five (5) years from the date the preliminary plan was approved by West Nantmeal Township. 



(F) 	
If a subdivision or land development plan is not required to implement a special exception granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, the special exception shall remain valid provided that the following time frames, terms and conditions have been achieved: 

(1) 	
If required, the landowner or applicant shall apply for the necessary permits for the site work and building improvements within two (2) years from the date the special exception was granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(2) 	
All site and building improvements required to implement the conditions of approval for the special exception shall be completed within five (5) years from the special exception application was approved by the Zoning Hearing Board. 



(G) 	
If the applicant should fail to comply with the terms and conditions specified under Section 1207.E or 1207.F of this Zoning Ordinance, the decision and order issued by the Zoning Hearing Board shall expire and that the approval of the special exception application shall become voided. 

(H) 	
Unless otherwise stipulated as part of the special exception decision issued by the by the Zoning Hearing Board, the Board of Supervisors may consider granting a time extension in order for the landowner or applicant to comply with the provisions specified under Sections 1207.E or 1207.F of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 1208: Conditional Uses 
(A) 	
The Board of Supervisors shall hear requests for conditional use applications, as permitted under the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.  By so providing, the Board of Supervisors recognize that certain uses may or may not be appropriate at every location within any specific district and, where it appears that a conditional use fails to comply with all of the definitional aspects thereof or would be contrary to the public health, safety, morals and/or welfare of the community at specific locations within a district, that the use would not be permitted there. 

(B) 	
In granting any conditional use, the Board of Supervisors may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
Unless otherwise required by West Nantmeal Township, a preliminary subdivision plan or preliminary land development plan shall be prepared and submitted with the conditional use application for review and consideration in accordance with the procedures and requirements specified by West Nantmeal Township. 

(D) 	
Prior to the commencement of the conditional use hearing or during the proceedings of the conditional use hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall consider the comments of the West Nantmeal Township Planning Commission, Zoning Officer, Engineer, the appointed professional consultants and/or other agencies that could assist the Board of Supervisors with the merits of the conditional use application. All such comments shall be made either in writing and presented as evidence during the hearing or as part of sworn testimony at the conditional use hearing. 

(E) 	
All of the standards for conditional uses hereinafter set forth shall, where relevant, apply to all conditional uses within West Nantmeal Township and are deemed definitional in character so that the failure to comply with any standards shall be deemed a failure to bring the applicant within that definitional aspect for which a conditional use may be granted; or, in the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, such failure to comply with the standards may be deemed a basis for the impositions of appropriate conditions to such grant.  It is further the intention of the Board of Supervisors that the standards hereinafter described shall be deemed additional standards and shall in no way impair any other applicable standard described elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance.  Where there is a conflict between the standards set forth in this article and other standards elsewhere established by this Zoning Ordinance or other applicable ordinances, it is intended that the more stringent thereof shall apply, and it is not the intent of this article to abrogate or impair any other such standards or requirements. 

(F) 	
The Board of Supervisors shall consider the following general issues and site requirements prior to rendering its decision on a conditional use application: 

(1) 	
That such use is consistent with the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan. 

(2) 	
That the property is suitable for the use desired and that the proposed request is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies established by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the proposed use within the appropriate zoning district shall be held in compliance by the applicant. 

(4) 	
The applicant shall establish by a fair preponderance of credible evidence that the use intended at the location intended shall not be contrary to the public health, safety, morals and/or public welfare. 

(5) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation that the capacity of the road system providing access to the property or lot in question has sufficient capacity to accommodate the use. 

(6) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation that the interior traffic circulation for the proposed use at the proposed location, including but not limited to acceleration and deceleration lanes where required at the proposed entrances to the location, shall be adequate to provide safe and convenient circulation for users of the facility, visitors to the facility, employees of the facility and all emergency vehicles that may require entrance thereon. 

(7) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation the facility or use provides safe and convenient pedestrian access and internal circulation within the grounds of the facility and particularly for points of access from the facility to the parking areas. 

(8) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation that adequate screening and buffering is provided between the lands in question and surrounding residential uses and residentially zoned districts to screen the facility from view and preclude any glare from lighting or noise from being ascertainable beyond the boundaries of the property. 

(9) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation that the local fire departments have the abilities to provide adequate fire protection and emergency management services for the use. 

(10) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation that adequate water supply and storage is available within the region for fire-fighting purposes without adversely impairing the uses of the water supply for ordinary purposes on the premises and shall be in compliance with all applicable governmental regulations. 

(11) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation that the existing or proposed municipal water supply facilities have sufficient capacity for the proposed use. 

(12) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation that the existing or proposed sanitary sewage disposal facilities have sufficient capacity for the proposed use. 

(13) 	
Where in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors, the use or facility may require supervision and protection, the applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation that additional security measures will be accounted for by the owner or site manager so the facility or use does not create a continuous burden on the emergency management services and providers. 



(G) 	
The following provisions shall apply for the public hearing procedures and administrative requirements for all conditional use applications within West Nantmeal Township: 

(1) 	
The Board of Supervisors shall schedule and hold a public hearing on the application pursuant to public notice within sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of the applicant's application.  The request for a hearing shall be accompanied by a completed application on required form.  The date for the scheduling of the first hearing may be extended by the applicant on the record or in writing addressed to the Board of Supervisors, in which event the date agreed upon by the applicant shall be considered timely for purposes of this subsection. 

(2) 	
As part of the conditional use hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall consider those comments issued by the West Nantmeal Township Planning Commission, Zoning Officer, Engineer, the appointed professional consultants and all other agencies providing comments, as may be authorized by West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(3) 	
The Board of Supervisors shall conduct the hearing or the Board of Supervisors may appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing officer.  The decision, or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Board of Supervisors. However, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to West Nantmeal Township, may waive decision or findings by the Board of Supervisors and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final. All hearings must be completed no later than one hundred (100) days after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief, unless extended for good cause upon application to the Court of Common Pleas. 

(4) 	
Any substantial revisions to the application or plan made by the applicant subsequent to filing of the application or plan or its review by the Planning Commission shall be subject to review and recommendation by the Planning Commission as specified by this Zoning Ordinance.  In such event, the Zoning Officer shall secure from the applicant a written extension of the date within which the Board of Supervisors must hold a public hearing pursuant to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.  If the applicant fails to execute the extension, the Board of Supervisors shall decide the conditional use application on the basis of the plan and application as originally filed. 

(5) 	
A stenographic record of the hearing shall be made by a certified court reporter, whose appearance fee shall be reimbursed through the application fee paid to West Nantmeal Township as part of the initial application.  The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by West Nantmeal Township or by any party requesting an original transcript.  In either case, the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the party or person requesting such copies. 

(6) 	
The Board of Supervisors shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the conditional use application within forty-five (45) days after the last hearing before the Board of Supervisors. Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact, reasons or conclusions based thereon.  Any conclusions based upon this Zoning Ordinance, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, or any rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found.  A copy of the decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him no later than the day following its date. 

(7) 	
If, after the conclusion of the public hearing(s), the application is amended or revised, the Board of Supervisors shall hold one or more public hearings thereon as may be necessary and shall issue a new decision thereon in conformance with the procedure established in this section.  In the event that the Board of Supervisors fail to commence the public hearing within 60 days from the date of the applicant's request for a hearing or fail to complete the hearing no later than 100 days after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief, unless extended for good cause upon application to the Court of Common Pleas, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.  When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because the Board of Supervisors failed to commence the hearings, complete the hearings, or render a decision as required by this section, the Board of Supervisors shall give public notice of the decision within ten (10) days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as required by the public notice requirements of this section.  If the Board of Supervisors shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so.  Nothing in this section shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. 



(H) 	
Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve the applicant for a conditional use approval from obtaining all other required approvals mandated by West Nantmeal Township as well as other pertinent laws, ordinances and regulations that have been adopted by local, state and federal agencies.  This may include the submission of a subdivision plan and/or land development plan to be prepared by the applicant and submitted to West Nantmeal Township for review and consideration. 

(I) 	
If a subdivision or land development plan is required to implement the approval of a conditional use application by the Board of Supervisors, the conditional use shall remain valid provided that the following time frames, terms and conditions have been achieved:: 

(1) 	
A complete preliminary plan shall be submitted to West Nantmeal Township within one (1) year from the date the conditional use application was approved by the Board of Supervisors. 

(2) 	
The preliminary plan shall be approved by West Nantmeal Township within two (2) years from the date the conditional use application was approved by the Board of Supervisors. 

(3) 	
The final plan shall be approved by West Nantmeal Township and recorded by the landowner or applicant within five (5) years from the date the preliminary plan was approved.  If required, a municipal improvements agreement shall be executed to ensure that the municipal improvements have been completed in accordance with the approved final plan. 

(4) 	
All site improvements required to implement the conditions of approval for conditional use and the approved final plan shall be completed within five (5) years from the date the preliminary plan was approved by West Nantmeal Township. 



(J) 	
If a subdivision or land development plan is not required to implement the conditional use decision, the conditional use shall remain valid provided that the following time frames, terms and conditions have been achieved:  

(1) 	
If required, the landowner or applicant shall apply for the necessary permits for the site work and building improvements within two (2) years from the date the conditional use application was approved by the Board of Supervisors. 

(2) 	
All site improvements required to implement the conditions of the conditional use zoning variance shall be completed within five (5) years from the date the conditional use application was approved by the Board of Supervisors. 



(K) 	
If the applicant should fail to comply with the terms and conditions specified under Section 1208.I or 1208.J of this Zoning Ordinance, the decision and order issued by the Board of Supervisors shall expire and that the approval of the conditional use application shall become voided. 

(L) 	
Unless otherwise stipulated as part of the conditional use decision, the Board of Supervisors may consider granting a time extension in order for the landowner or applicant to comply with the provisions specified under Sections 1208.I or 1208.J of this Zoning Ordinance 


Section 1209: Amendments 
(A) The Board of Supervisors may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the contents of this Zoning Ordinance including the Zoning Map.  Any amendment, supplement, reclassification or change may be initiated by the Board of Supervisors, Planning Commission, or by a petition to the Board of Supervisors from a property owner within West Nantmeal Township.  The Board of Supervisors, by resolution adopted at a stated or special meeting, shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the proposed change, amendment or repeal and cause notice thereof to be given as follows: 
(1) 	
By publishing a notice once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.  The first publication shall be not more than thirty (30) days or less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing.  

(2) 	
The notice shall also set forth the principal provisions of the proposed change, amendment or repeal in reasonable detail and a reference to a place in West Nantmeal Township where copies of the proposed change, amendment or repeal may be examined or purchased at a charge not exceeding the cost thereof. Full opportunity to be heard will be given to any citizen and all parties in interest attending such hearing. 

(3) 	
If the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the authorized representatives of West Nantmeal Township at points deemed sufficient along the tract to notify potentially interested citizens.  The affected tract or area shall be posted 


at least one (1) week prior to the date of the hearing.  In addition to the requirement that notice be posted along the property, if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by West Nantmeal Township at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing by first class mail to the addresses to which real estate tax bills are sent for all real property located within the area being rezoned as evidenced by tax records within the possession of West Nantmeal Township. The notice shall include the location, date and time of the public hearing.  
(B) 	
The Board of Supervisors shall refer each petition or proposal for change or amendment, whether under this article or under another article, to the Planning Commission, who shall consider whether or not such proposed change or amendment would be, in the view of the Planning Commission, consistent with and desirable in furtherance of the Comprehensive Plan upon which this Zoning Ordinance is based, as the same may be modified from time to time. The Planning Commission shall transmit its recommendations and conclusions to the Board of Supervisors within thirty (30) days.  The Board of Supervisors shall take such recommendations and conclusions into consideration in reaching its decision, but shall not be bound thereby. 

(C) 	
The Board of Supervisors shall submit the proposed zoning amendment to the Chester County Planning Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing for its review and comments.  The Board of Supervisors shall take such comments into consideration in reaching its decision, but shall not be bound thereby. 

(D) 	
The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the appropriate provisions that are established by West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(E) 	
If the zoning amendment is changed substantially or revised to include land previously not affected by it, the Board of Supervisors shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the zoning amendment. 


Section 1210: Curative Amendments 
(A) 	
A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the validity of this Zoning Ordinance, which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the Board of Supervisors with a written request that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard.  All such landowner curative amendments shall be decided as provided in accordance with the appropriate provisions that are established by West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(B) 	
West Nantmeal Township by formal action, may declare this Zoning Ordinance or portions thereof substantively invalid and propose the preparation of a municipal curative amendment to overcome such invalidity.  All such municipal curative amendments shall be decided as provided in accordance with the appropriate provisions that are established by West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(C) 	
All landowner curative amendments and/or municipal curative amendments shall be referred to the West Nantmeal Township Planning Commission and the Chester County Planning Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to the initial hearing date to provide both agencies with an opportunity to submit recommendations. 

(D) 	
The advertisement, posting and scheduling of the public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the appropriate provisions that are established by West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(E) 	
If the landowner curative amendment and/or the municipal curative amendment is enacted by the Board of Supervisors, an endorsed copy of the amendment shall be forwarded to the Chester County Planning Commission within thirty (30) day of enactment. 


Section 1212: Appeals 
(A) 	
All appeals concerning the review, application, interpretation and decisions authorized by this Zoning Ordinance shall be in accordance with the appropriate provisions that are established by West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(B) 	
All appeals concerning an alleged error in the processing or enactment of any components of this Zoning Ordinance shall be raised by appeal taken directly from the action of the Board of Supervisors to the Court of Common Pleas, which shall not be filed later than thirty (30) days from the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance.  


Section 1213: Filing Fees and Costs 
(A) 	
The Board of Supervisors shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees, charges and expenses as well as the collection procedures for zoning permits, certificates of occupancy, special exceptions, variances and appeals and other matters pertaining to this Zoning Ordinance.  The resolution or schedule of the fees shall be available for inspection in the office of the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Officer. 

(B) 	
The Board of Supervisors may alter or change the schedule of the fees by resolution in accordance with the appropriate provisions established by West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 


Section 1214: Violations, Penalties and Remedies 
(A) 	
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall, upon being found liable in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by West Nantmeal Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by West Nantmeal Township as a result thereof.  No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice.  If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, West Nantmeal Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.  Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the district justice determines otherwise as prescribed by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(B) 	
The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment. 

(C) 	
Nothing contained in this Zoning Ordinance shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or entity other than West Nantmeal Township the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
In the event any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in violation of this Zoning Ordinance, or in case any land, building or structure for which a use and occupancy permit is required is conveyed or possession otherwise transferred to a bona fide purchaser or lessee without obtaining such certificate of occupancy and delivering the same to such bona fide purchaser or lessee at or prior to conveyance or transfer of possession, whichever first occurs, the Board of Supervisors, in addition to other remedies, may institute in the name of West Nantmeal Township any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure or land or the conveyance thereof, or to prevent in or about such premises any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation. 


WEST NANTMEAL TOWNSHIP 
CHESTER COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA 
ORDINANCE NO. 111-2010 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF WEST NANTMEAL, CHESTER COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING THE WEST NANTMEAL TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE OF 1990, AS AMENDED, TO ADOPT A NEW ZONING ORDINANCE AND ZONING MAP DATED 2010 ESTABLISHING REGULATIONS, SPECIFICATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS FOR:  THE USES OF LAND, WATERCOURSES AND OTHER BODIES OF WATER, THE SIZE, HEIGHT, BULK, LOCATION, ERECTION, CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR, MAINTENANCE, ALTERATION, RAZING, REMOVAL AND USE OF STRUCTURES; THE AREAS AND DIMENSIONS OF LAND AND BODIES OF WATER TO BE OCCUPIED BY USES AND STRUCTURES INCLUDING AREAS, COURTS, YARDS AND OTHER OPEN SPACES AND DISTANCES TO BE LEFT UNOCCUPIED BY USES AND STRUCTURES; AND THE DENSITY OF POPULATION AND INTENSITY OF LAND USES, WITHIN WEST NANTMEAL TOWNSHIP, CHESTER COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AND FOR SAID PURPOSES DIVIDING WEST NANTMEAL TOWNSHIP INTO DISTRICTS AND PRESCRIBING CERTAIN UNIFORM REGULATIONS FOR EACH SUCH DISTRICTS AND PROVIDING FOR THE ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT AND AMENDMENT PROVISIONS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE. 
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED, by the Board of Supervisors of West Nantmeal Township, as follows: 
SECTION 1. The West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 and the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Map of 2010,  copies of which are attached hereto as Exhibit “A” are hereby enacted. 
SECTION 2. SEVERABILITY.  If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, or parts hereof.  It is hereby declared as the intent of the Board of Supervisors of West Nantmeal Township that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein. 
SECTION 3. REPEALER.  All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances conflicting with any provision of this Ordinance, including but not limited to the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 1999, as amended, and the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Map of 1999, are hereby repealed and replaced in their entirety with the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010 and 
1 

the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Map of 2010 which are attached hereto as Exhibit “A”. 
SECTION 4. EFFECTIVE DATE.   This Ordinance shall become effective five days after its enactment as law provides. 
ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of West Nanmeal Township on the 17th of August, 2010. 
WEST NANTMEAL TOWNSHIP  BOARD OF SUPERVISORS 
Susan L. Ward, Secretary Gary C. Elston, Chairman 
 _____________________________________ David Mast, Vice Chairman 
 ____________________________________ Nelson R. Beam, Member  
2 



West Nantmeal Township 


Subdivision and Land Development 
Ordinance of 2013 



Table of Contents – Subdivision and Land Development West Nantmeal Township 2013 
Article 1:  Title, Purpose, Control, and Interpretation ..................................................................................................1 

Section 101:  Short Title...........................................................................................................................................1 

Section 102:  Purpose................................................................................................................................................1 

Section 103:  Scope...................................................................................................................................................1 

Section 104:  Interpretation ......................................................................................................................................2 

Section 105:  Waivers and Modifications .................................................................................................................2 

Article 2:  Definitions ...................................................................................................................................................3 

Section 201:  General Interpretation. .......................................................................................................................3 

Section 202:  Specific Terms....................................................................................................................................3 

Article 3:  Processing Procedures ................................................................................................................................23 

Section 301:  General .............................................................................................................................................23 

Section 302:  Plan Classification.............................................................................................................................23 

Section 303:  Submission of Sketch Plan ...............................................................................................................24 

Section 304: Review of Sketch Plan .......................................................................................................................24 

Section 305: Submission of Preliminary Plan .........................................................................................................25 

Section 306: Review of Preliminary Plan ...............................................................................................................26 

Section 307: Submission of Final Plan....................................................................................................................27 

Section 308: Review of Final Plan..........................................................................................................................28 

Section 309: Recording of Final Plan......................................................................................................................30 

Section 310: Subdivision and Land Development Improvements Agreement ........................................................30 

Section 311: Commencement of Development .......................................................................................................31 

Section 312: Plan Amendments ..............................................................................................................................32 

Article 4:  Plan Content ..............................................................................................................................................33 

Section 401:  General .............................................................................................................................................33 

Section 402: Sketch Plan.........................................................................................................................................33 

Section 403: Preliminary Plan.................................................................................................................................34 

Section 404: Final Plan ...........................................................................................................................................37 

Section 405: Utilities Plan.......................................................................................................................................40 

Section 406: Conservation Plan ..............................................................................................................................40 

Section 407: Traffic Impact Study ..........................................................................................................................41 

Article 5:  Approval and Dedication of Improvements...............................................................................................43 

Section 501:  Required Improvements ...................................................................................................................43 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: A 
Table of Contents 
Section 502:  Conditions of Acceptance of Streets and Other Public Improvements.............................................43 

Section 503:  Public Utilities..................................................................................................................................43 

Section 504:  Inspections of Work and Materials, and Cease and Desist Order ....................................................44 

Section 505:  Improvements Guarantee .................................................................................................................45 

Section 506:  As-Built Plans ...................................................................................................................................46 

Section 507: Township Responsibility to Accept Improvements............................................................................46 

Section 508:  Release from Improvements Guarantee ...........................................................................................47 

Section 509:  Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements ...........................................................................47 

Section 510:  Maintenance Guarantee....................................................................................................................47 

Article 6:  Design Standards .......................................................................................................................................49 

Section 601:  General .............................................................................................................................................49 

Section 602:  Blocks...............................................................................................................................................50 

Section 603:  Lots...................................................................................................................................................51 

Section 604:  Monuments and Lot Pins..................................................................................................................51 

Section 605:  Sewage Treatment and Disposal ......................................................................................................52 

Section 606:  Water Supply.....................................................................................................................................53 

Section 607: Other Utilities.....................................................................................................................................56 

Section 608: Stormwater Management, Erosion and Sedimentation Control .........................................................57 

Section 609: Community Facilities and Public Open Spaces..................................................................................57 

Section 610: Landscaping and Screening................................................................................................................58 

Section 611: Construction Standards ......................................................................................................................62 

Section 612: Street Design ......................................................................................................................................64 

Section 613: Curbing Construction .........................................................................................................................72 

Section 614: Sidewalks ...........................................................................................................................................73 

Section 615: Bridges and Culverts ..........................................................................................................................73 

Section 616: Access Design ....................................................................................................................................73 

Section 617: Interior Circulation Design.................................................................................................................75 

Section 618: Mail Box Positions .............................................................................................................................76 

Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks................................................................................................77 

Section 701:  Purpose.............................................................................................................................................77 

Section 702:  General Requirements ......................................................................................................................77 

Section 703: Specific Design Requirements ...........................................................................................................77 

Article 8: Administration.............................................................................................................................................79 

Section 801: Enforcement .......................................................................................................................................79 

Section 802: Filing Fees..........................................................................................................................................79 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: B 
Table of Contents 
Section 803: Reimbursement of Professionals Review and Inspection Costs .........................................................79 

Section 804: Material Test Costs.............................................................................................................................80 

Section 805: Other Fees and Costs..........................................................................................................................80 

Section 806: Failure to Pay or Deposit Fees and Costs ...........................................................................................80 

Section 807: Penalties and Remedies......................................................................................................................80 

Section 809: Appeals...............................................................................................................................................81 

Section 810: Amendments ......................................................................................................................................81 

Section 811: Flood Plain Permits; Protection; Liability..........................................................................................81 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: C 
Table of Contents 
Article 1: Title, Purpose, Control, and Interpretation 
Section 101: Short Title 
This Ordinance shall be known as, and may be cited as the "West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land 
Development Ordinance of 2013.” 
Section 102: Purpose 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to: 
A. Provide for harmonious, orderly, efficient and integrated growth of the Township. 
B. 	Assure that land to be developed shall be of such character that it can be used safely without danger to health, peril from fire, flood, erosion, excessive noise and smoke or other menace. 
C. Provide for drainage, water supply, sewage disposal and other appropriate utility services. 
D. 	Provide for the coordination of existing streets, parks, highways and land uses with probable streets, parks, highways and land uses. 
E. 	Provide for a safe, convenient and functional system for vehicular traffic on streets of such width, grade and location as to accommodate prospective traffic as determined by existing and probable future land and building uses. 
F. 	Provide for arrangement of building lots, blocks and streets so as to afford adequate light, view and air and to facilitate fire protection. 
G. 	Assure land will be developed with due regard to topography and geologic conditions so that the natural beauty of the land, vegetation and historical structures shall be protected and enhanced. 
H. 	Provide for adequate open space for recreation, wildlife, light and air and for adequate sites for schools, parks, playgrounds, pathways/greenways and other community services, which shall be located so as to provide pedestrian and/or vehicular access to such facilities for residents of all neighborhoods. 
I. 	Secure equitable handling of subdivision and land development plans by providing uniform procedures and standards for observance of both developers and of Township officials. 
Section 103: Scope 
A. 	From and after the effective date of this Ordinance, any subdivision and/or land development in West Nantmeal Township shall be in conformity with this Ordinance and all standards and specifications adopted as part of such Ordinance. 
B. 	No lot, tract, or parcel of land shall be subdivided, and no land may be developed, and no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main, or other facilities in connection therewith, shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or travel, or for the use of occupants of any building abutting or to abut on them, except in strict accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and other applicable Township ordinances. 
C. 	In a subdivision or land development, no lot may be used or sold, no building permit may be issued, and no building or other structure may be erected unless and until a final subdivision or land development plan has been approved and duly recorded in accordance with this Ordinance, and where required the proposed 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 1 
Article 1: Title, Purpose, Control and Interpretation 
improvements have been completed or their completion has been assured by a completion guarantee pursuant to and in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 
Section 104: Interpretation 
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this Ordinance, said provisions shall be the minimum requirements for the promotion and protection of the public health, welfare and safety. Where the provisions of this Ordinance and all standards and specifications adopted under it impose greater restrictions than those of any other ordinance, statute or regulation, the provisions of this Ordinance and its standards and specifications shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute or other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation shall be controlling. 
Section 105: Waivers and Modifications 
A. 	The Board may grant a waiver or modification of the requirements of one or more provisions of this Ordinance in the following circumstances; 
(1) 	When literal compliance with such provisions is shown to the satisfaction of the Board to be unreasonable or cause undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question, 
OR 
(2) 	When an alternative standard or requirement is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Board to provide equal or better results as the provision or provisions sought to be waived or modified; provided, however, that such waiver or modification shall not be contrary to the public interest, safety and general welfare and that the purpose and intent of this Ordinance shall be observed. 
B. 	All requests for a waiver or modification shall be in writing and shall accompany and be a part of the application for subdivision or land development. The request shall state in full, where applicable, the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the pertinent provision or provisions of this Ordinance, the minimum waivers or modifications necessary, and the alternative standards or requirements proposed. 
C. 	All requests for a waiver or modification shall be referred to the Township Planning Commission for review and advisory comments and recommendations to the Board. If deemed necessary or desirable by the Board, a request for a waiver or modification may also be referred to the Chester County Planning Commission for its review and advisory comments and recommendations to the Board. 
D. 	The Board shall keep a written record of all actions on all requests for waivers or modifications. 
E. 	Requested waivers or modifications, if approved, shall be depicted and shown on the final plan. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 2 
Article 1: Title, Purpose, Control and Interpretation 
Article 2:   Definitions 

Section 201:   General Interpretation. 
A. 	Certain terms and words are defined in this Ordinance. The following guidelines shall be utilized to interpret the terminology of this Ordinance: 
(1) 
Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. 

(2) 	
Words in the singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the singular. 

(3) 
Words in the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter. 

(4) 
The words “shall”, “must” or “will” are mandatory. 

(5) 
The words “may” or “should” are permissive. 

(6) 	
The word "person" includes “individual”, “corporation”, “partnership”, “organization”, “association”, “trust”, or other similar entities. 

(7) 	
The words "used for" include "designed for", "arranged for", "intended for", "maintained for", or "occupied for". 

(8) 
The word "building" shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof". 

(9) 	
The word “structure” includes “building” and shall be construed as if followed by the phrase “or part thereof”. 

(10) 	
The word “street” includes “expressway”, “arterial”, “highway”, “thoroughfare”, “avenue”, “boulevard”, “court”, “lane” and “road”. 

(11) 	
The word “watercourse” includes “channel”, “creek”, “ditch”, “drain”, “dry run”, “spring”, “stream” and “swale”. 


Section 202:   Specific Terms 
The terms or words used in this Ordinance shall be construed as defined below. When terms or words are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context may imply. 
Abut: 	The state of being side by side, next to or adjoining one another. 
Accelerated Erosion: The removal of the surface of the land through the combined actions of man and natural processes at a rate which is greater than would occur from the natural process upon disturbed land. 
Access Drive: An improved cartway or paved service road designed to provide vehicular access between the public road and the off-street parking area for the designated use. 
Access Point: A clearly defined point of ingress and egress for vehicles at the street line. 
Accessory Building or Structure: A building or structure subordinate to the principal building or principal structure on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the principal use. 
Acre: Forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. 
Act: The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended and codified. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 3 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Act 247: The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended and codified. 
Act 537: The Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, as may be amended from time to time. 
Act 537 Plan: The West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted by the Board in accordance with Pennsylvania Act 537, as amended. 
Adjacent: The state of being side by side, next to or adjoining one another. 
ADT (Average Daily Traffic): The average number of vehicles that pass over a given point per day. 
Agent: Any person other than the developer, who, acting for the developer, submits to the Board subdivision or land development plans for the purpose of obtaining approval thereof. 
Alley: A right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to the side or rear of a lot or lots. 
Alluvium: Clay, silt sand, gravel, or similar detrital matter deposited by running water. 
Alteration(s): Any change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, joists, rafters, headers, or enclosed walls, or any enlargement or modification thereof, whether by extension on any side or by an increase in height, or the moving of such building from one location or position to another, or any other change of use of a building or a lot. All permitted alterations shall comply with the appropriate building codes adopted by West Nantmeal Township. 
Applicant: A landowner, equitable landowner, developer or authorized agent of the landowner, who has filed an application for development including his heirs, successors and assigns. 
Application for Development: Every application, whether preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of construction or development including but not limited to an application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan or for the approval of a development plan. 
Appointing Authority: The West Nantmeal Township Board. 
Architect: An architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Basement: That portion of a building that is partly or completely below the grade plane. A basement shall be considered a story above grade plane when the finished surface of the floor above the basement is as follows: more than six (6) feet above the grade plane; more than six (6) feet above the finished ground level for more than 50 percent of the total building perimeter; and/or more than twelve (12) feet above the finished ground level at any point. 
Block: A tract of land or a lot or group of lots bounded by streets, public parks, railroad rights-of-way, water courses or bodies of water, boundary lines of West Nantmeal Township, or by any combination of the above. 
Board/Board of Supervisors: The Board of Supervisors of West Nantmeal Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania. 
Building: Any combination of material forming any structure, which is erected on the ground and designed to be affixed thereto, whereas the framed components or structural parts are designed for the complete enclosure (with walls and a roof) and support for individuals, animals or property of any kind. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: 4 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Building Area: The total area taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of all primary and accessory buildings on a lot, excluding unroofed porches, paved terraces, steps, eaves and gutters, but including all 
enclosed extensions. The definition of “building area” should not be considered synonymous or be compared with the subordinate definitions for “lot area” including “lot area (building)”. 
Building Coverage: The percentage of a lot covered by principal and accessory buildings. 
Building Envelope: The area of a lot that has no building or construction restrictions such as, building set back requirements, rights-of-way, easements, floodplains, wetlands, slopes over 20 percent in grade, or similar restrictions as defined in the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance. 
Building Frontage: The front of a building considering the location of the main entrance and the public street providing access. For corner lots, the building frontage shall be established along both streets to which the building has frontage or access. 
Building Height: The vertical distance measured from the grade plane to the average roof height, as further defined by the West Nantmeal Township Building Code. 
Building Length: The longest horizontal dimension of a building, as measured in a single straight direction. 
Building Setback: The minimum distance a building or structure must be set back from the ultimate street right-of-way line (where it exists) or from the street legal right-of-way line (where the ultimate right-of-way does not exist) of the street immediately adjacent thereto. 
Building Setback Line: The line within a property establishing the minimum required distance between any building or structure, or portions thereof, to be erected or altered and a street right-of-way (except the right-of­way of a service street). The distance shall be measured at right angles from the street right-of-way line, which abuts the property, and the building setback line shall be parallel to said right-of-way line. 
Caliper – Diameter of a tree trunk as measured at six (6) inches from base. 
Cartway: The portion of a street right-of-way, whether paved or unpaved designed for vehicular use. 
Clear Sight Distance (Safe Sight Stopping Distance): 
A. 	For all purposed streets and driveways – The longest required line of unobstructed vision along a street cartway measured from a point three and one-half (3.5) feet above the centerline to an object three and one-half (3.5) feet above the proposed new intersecting pavement measured ten feet back of the existing pavement edge. Refer also to Article VI of this Ordinance. 
B. 	AASHTO’s “A policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets” – Latest edition, at the time of any application, shall govern all sight distance situations, unless the Township requires more stringent control to improve known or potentially hazardous conditions. 
Clear Sight Triangle: An area of unobstructed vision at a street intersection, as prescribed by West Nantmeal Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, which shall be measured between 30 inches above the ground elevation and 10 feet above ground elevation, which is further defined by a line of sight between points at the centerlines of a street at the point of intersection of the proposed street. 
Commercial Use: A use or activity that includes, but not limited to, retail sales, businesses, offices, personal services, banks, financial institutions, restaurants, communications, recreation, and other similar commercial uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 5 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Common Open Space: A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and water, within a development, designed and intended for use or enjoyment of all residents of the development in which it is located. 
Common Parking Area: A designated area for the parking of vehicles serving a multi-family residential development or a planned non-residential development containing more than one (1) use. 
Comprehensive Plan. The West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan, or any part thereof, as adopted by the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors. 
Conditional Use: A use in a particular zoning district which is approved by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the specific criteria set forth in the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance. 
Construction: The placement of materials and equipment in a defined area to be assembled, built, applied and/or demolished in a temporary or permanent manner, as approved by the designated officials of West Nantmeal Township. 
County: The County of Chester, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
County Planning Commission: The Chester County Planning Commission. 
Curb Line: The point where the face of the curb meets the edge of the cartway. If no curb exists, the curbline shall be considered the edge of the improved cartway. 
Curative Amendment: A proposed zoning amendment that is filed with the Board of Supervisors by any landowner/applicant who desires to challenge on substantial grounds the validity of an ordinance which prohibits or restricts the use or the development of land in which the landowner/applicant has an interest. 
Deck: An open or partially enclosed structure attached or connected to a permitted use, which is constructed in accordance with the building codes of West Nantmeal Township. 
Dedication: The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for general public use. 
Deed: A written document whereby an estate in real property is described, conveyed and recorded. 
Deed Restriction: Clauses included in a deed or other recorded document, which restricts, controls or limits the general use of a defined parcel of land or development. 
Density: The total number of residential dwelling units per acre or lot area. 
Design Standards: Minimum standards set forth at Article VI of this Ordinance providing for the design of subdivisions and land developments. 
Detention Basin: An impoundment designed to collect and retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely shortly after any given rainfall event and are dry until the next rainfall event. 
Developer: Any landowner, agent of such landowner, equitable owner, or tenant with the permission of the landowner, for whom subdivision or land development plans are being or have been made. 
Development: Any man made change to improved or unimproved land, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the installation of utilities, filling, grading, paving, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling operations. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: 6 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Development Plan: A proposal for the development of land, prepared in accordance with the provisions specified by West Nantmeal Township, including a plan for subdivision or land development, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and public facilities. 
Diameter at Breast Height (DBH): The diameter of a tree trunk, as measured forty-eight (48) inches from the ground surface. 
Drainage Facility: Any Structure or improvement designed, intended or constructed for the purpose of diverting surface or ground water from or carrying surface or ground water off streets, right-of-way, or any subdivision or land development. 
Driveway: A privately owned and improved access drive, which provides vehicular access between a public road or an approved private road into the lot or parcel of land. 
Driveway, Common: A private driveway (when permitted) serving two or more lots or properties, the use and maintenance of which is shared between or among the property owners. 
Dwelling: A building or structure or portion thereof arranged, intended, designed or used as the living quarters for one or more families living independently of each other. Such buildings as hospitals, hotels, boarding, rooming, lodging houses, nursing homes, motels and institutional residences are not included in the definition of dwelling. The following dwelling types are further defined as follows: 
Single-Family Detached Dwelling: A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied exclusively as a residence for one family and having no common wall with an adjacent building. 
Single-Family Semi-Detached Dwelling: A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied exclusively as a residence for two families, one family living on each side of a vertical common wall. 
Multi-Family Dwelling: A building arranged, designed and intended to be occupied exclusively as a residence for three or more families. Individual dwelling units may share up to three common or party walls with other units and either have a common outside access areas or have individual outside access areas. Types of such buildings shall include townhouses, apartments and/or condominiums. 
Townhouse: A building arranged, designed and intended to be occupied exclusively as a residence for one family, which is one of a group of three or more such buildings, placed side by side and separated by unpierced vertical common walls, each dwelling having at least one separate entrance from the outside. 
Apartment Building: A building on a single lot arranged, designed and intended to be occupied as a residence for two or more families, and in which the dwelling units may be separated horizontally and/or vertically. 
Condominium: Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common open space solely for the owners of those portions, created under either the Pennsylvania Unit Property Act, as amended, or the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, as amended. 
Manufactured Home: A structure that is transportable in one or more sections built on a permanent chassis, designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities, and constructed to the Federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards and rules and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. The term also includes mobile homes, park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures that are placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: 7 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Modular Home: A structure designed primarily for residential occupancy, which is wholly or partially made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly on a building site. 
Accessory Apartment for Relatives: An attached component or living area of a permitted single-family dwelling, located on a conforming lot, which is occupied by a relative of the occupants of the single-family dwelling. 
Dwelling Unit: A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Earth Disturbance Activity: A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road maintenance, land development, building construction and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials. 
Easement: A defined parcel area of land or right-of-way granted or conveyed for the limited use of land for public, quasi-public or private purposes. 
Easement, Conservation: An easement precluding future or additional development of an area of land. 
Egress: A point of exit from a property. 
Elevation: The horizontal alignment of a surface above mean sea level, as it exists in pre-development conditions or as it is proposed in post development conditions. 
Centerline Elevation: The elevation of the street at the midpoint of the street. 
First Floor Elevation: The elevation of the level of living space at the main entrance of the building. 
Garage Elevation: The elevation of the garage floor at the center of the garage door. 
Engineer: A professional engineer, licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Enlargement: An addition to the floor area of an existing building, an increase in the size of a structure, or an increase in that portion of a lot occupied by an existing use. 
Environmental Impact Assessment Report: A detailed written report that provides discussion of significant environmental impacts and provides reasonable alternatives, which would avoid or minimize adverse impacts or enhance the quality of the environment. 
Erosion: The removal of soil, rock or surface particles by the action of water, wind, ice or other agents. 
Essential Services: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by a public utility, municipality or governmental agency for general utility services including gas, electric, steam, water, sewage disposal, telephone and similar utility services, excluding telecommunication and wireless communication providers. 
Facade: The front of a building facing a public or private street or any other building face that is given special architectural treatment. 
Fence: A manmade barrier placed or arranged as a line of demarcation between lots or to enclose a lot or portion thereof. The term "fence" shall be deemed to include a wall. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: 8 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Fire Apparatus Access Road: A road that provides fire apparatus access from the fire station to a facility, building, land area, or portion thereof in accordance with the provisions of the International Fire Code. This is a general term inclusive of all other terms such as fire lane, public street, private street, parking lot lane and access roadway. 
Flood Hazard Overlay District: A conservation overlay of land and water, which have been defined within the Flood Insurance Study, as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which principally include areas located along the major creeks and waterways. The Flood Hazard Overlay District including all subordinate definitions are further defined and regulated in the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance. 
Garage, Private Residential: An accessory building or a part of a principal building used for the storage of motor vehicles owned and used by the landowners or tenants of the premises for the storage of not more than three motor vehicles. 
Governing Body: The West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors, Chester County, Pennsylvania. 
Guarantee, Improvements: Financial security approved by the Township which may be required of the applicant by the Township as a condition of final plan approval to provide for and secure to the public the completion and installation of improvements, as shown on and in accordance with the final plan and with the applicable provisions of this Ordinance. 
Guarantee, Maintenance: Financial security approved by the Township which may be required of the applicant by the Township where the Township accepts dedication of some or all improvements, following the completion and installation thereof, in order to secure the structural integrity and operation of the accepted improvements in accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final plan. 
Gutter: That portion within a street right-of-way designed for surface drainage, whether paved or otherwise. 

Height: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the ground or finished grade to the highest point of a structure, other than a building. To measure building height, refer to the definition for Building Height. 
Highway Access Point: A place of ingress/egress from or access to a street or highway created by a driveway or another street or highway. Measurement between them shall be from the centerline of one such point to the centerline of another such point. 
Historical Resource or Historical Site: A place, building, structure or site, whereas because of its local, state or national significance is considered as a historical site or resource. All such historical resources and sites are identified by: the National Register of Historical Places, the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission, and/or the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan. 
Hydric Soil: A soil that is saturated, flooded or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part. Hydric soils are identified within the Soil Survey of Chester County and the West Nantmeal Township Comprehensive Plan. 
Impervious Coverage: The percentage of lot area covered by an impervious surface. 
Impervious Surface: A surface which has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it prevents or is resistant to infiltration by water including, but not limited to, structures such as roofs, buildings, storage sheds, other solid, paved or concrete areas such as streets, driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, patios, decks, swimming pools, tennis or other paved courts, or athletic playfields comprised of synthetic turf materials. For the purposes of determining compliance with this Ordinance compacted soils or stone surfaces used for vehicle parking and movement shall be considered impervious. Existing surfaces that were designed to allow filtration (i.e. areas of porous pavement) will be considered on a case-by-case basis by the Township Engineer based on appropriate documentation and condition of the material, etc. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: 9 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Improvements: Any type of structure, paved area and/or physical changes to the land, including, but not limited to, grading, paving, stormwater management facilities, sidewalks, street signs, traffic control devices, monuments, utilities, water supply facilities and sewage disposal facilities. 
Improvements, Public: Those facilities which are designed for and available to the public, which may be offered for dedication including, but not limited to, streets, storm drainage facilities, sidewalks and utilities. 
Improvement Setback: The minimum distance an improvement must be set back from a street right-of-way and/or property line. 
Industrial Use: A use or activity that includes, but not limited to, assembling, manufacturing, distributing, processing, storing or warehousing of products and materials, and similar industrial uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Ingress: A point of entrance to a property. 
Institutional Use: A use or activity that includes, educational uses, religious uses, assisted living care facilities, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and other similar uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Interior Circulation Roads: Vehicular ways within a parking lot which provide access to the individual parking spaces and the road network. 
Jurisdictional Determination (JD) -A site survey and review performed by the United States Army Corps of Engineers to assess and officially determine whether or not a defined parcel of land or water body is subject to wetlands regulations. 
Land Development: Any of the following activities: 
A. 	The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving: 
(1) 	
a group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or 

(2) 	
the division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features. 


B. 	A subdivision of land. 
C. 	Development in accordance with the provisions established by West Nantmeal Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 
Landowner: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition). An equitable owner or lessee who has written authorization of the landowner of record shall be deemed to be a landowner for the purpose of this Ordinance. 
Landscape Architect: A landscape architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Loading Space: A defined space located within a lot or parcel of land, which has accessibility to a public street, for temporary use of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise and materials to the principal use and building contained on the lot or parcel of land. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 10 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Lot: A designated parcel, tract, or area of land, established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, regardless of size or ownership, which is occupied or capable of being occupied by buildings, structures and accessory buildings, including such open spaces as are arranged, designed or required. The term “lot” shall also mean parcel, plot, site or any similar term. 
Corner Lot: A lot situated at and abutting the intersection of two streets having an interior angle of 
intersection not greater than one hundred thirty five (135) degrees. The front yard and lot width 
requirements shall apply to each street to which the corner lot has frontage. The other yards shall be 
designated as side yards. 

Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot, the sides of which do not abut a street. 
Reverse Frontage Lots: Lots that have frontage on two public streets while restricting vehicular access 
solely from the public street which would front along the commonly identified rear of the lot. 

Through Lot: An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 

Flag Lot or Keyhole Lot: An irregularly shaped lot characterized by an elongated extension from a street 
to the principal part of the lot. The flag or keyhole shape of the lot is normally intended to provide for 
access to an otherwise land locked interior parcel. 

Lot Area (Gross): The total land area contained within the lot lines. 
Lot Area (Net): The total land area contained within the lot lines excluding the following land and water areas: 
A. 	100 percent of all areas exclusively contained within the existing and ultimate limits of street rights-of-way; 
B. 	100 percent of all areas exclusively designated as an easement to accommodate utilities and/or stormwater improvements; 
C. 	100 percent of the lands designated as the floodway; 
D. 	100 percent of the land delineated as wetlands; and 
E. 	100 percent of lands classified as Category 2 Slopes. 
Pursuant to the terms of this definition, the following formula for calculating the net lot area is hereby specified: 
GLA – 	100% of ROW – 100% of ESM – 100% of FLD – 100% of WET – 100% of C2S  = NLA 
GLA = Gross Lot Area ROW = Total area exclusively within the limits of the existing, future and ultimate street right-of-way ESM = Total area exclusively designated as an easement for utilities and/or stormwater improvements FLD = Total area exclusively within the defined limits of the floodway. WET = Total area exclusively delineated as wetlands. C2S = Total area exclusively classified as Category 2 Slopes. NLA = Net Lot Area 
The net lot area for all proposed lots shall be no smaller than the required minimum lot size for the zoning district in which the lot is located. The net lot area calculations shall utilize the order or hierarchy of features specified by the formula; whereas, land and water areas shall not be calculated or classified in more than one (1) category. If required by West Nantmeal Township, special studies, delineations and/or calculations shall be completed by the applicant in order to accurately verify the limits of the natural features. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 11 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Lot Coverage: The percentage of the net lot area covered by all impervious surfaces as determined by the Township Engineer or Zoning Officer. Refer to the definition of “impervious surface” for further clarification. 
Lot Depth: The mean average horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines. 
Lot Frontage: That portion of a lot, which fronts on a single street. 
Lot Line: The property line forming the front, rear or side boundary of a lot. 
Front Lot Line: The line separating a lot from the street line. The front lot line is also the street line. 
Rear Lot Line: The lot line which is opposite the front lot line. The rear line of any triangularly or irregularly shaped lot shall be established such that it will be at least ten (10’) feet long. 
Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
Lot of Record: A lot or parcel of ground recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Chester County, Pennsylvania. 
Lot Width: The width of a lot measured at the street line. 
Made Land: Areas within the natural soil cover that have been covered by other materials or from which the soil has been moved about or removed to provide materials for development. 
Manufactured Home Parks: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land, which has been developed and improved to contain two or more manufactured home lots for sale, lease or rent. 
Manufacture or Manufacturing Use: The assembling, creating, cleaning, fabricating, processing, testing, recycling, packaging, converting, distributing and/or repairing of raw materials with the use of labor and 
machinery of products that will be made available for sale. The term “manufacture” shall not include retail 
sales, personal services, solid waste disposal, truck distribution, mineral extraction, woodland extraction, forestry, exportation of groundwater, warehousing, or similar uses determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Marker: A metal pipe or pin at least 1 inch in diameter and at least 36 inches in length. 
Mature Tree: A deciduous tree with a diameter at breast height (DBH) greater than or equal to 12 inches or a coniferous tree at least 6 feet tall. 
Mixed-Use Commercial and Residential Developments: A combination of uses within a building or group of buildings, which includes a permitted commercial use occupying the first floor and no more than two residential apartment units occupying the second floor, as regulated in the West Nantmeal Zoning Ordinance. 
Mobile Home: A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office, or place of assembly contained in one unit, or two units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation. 
Mobile Home Lot or Site: A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home. 
Mobile Home Pad: a concrete pad at least 6 inches in thickness with at least six tie-down rings to which the mobile home shall be secured, equal in length and width to the dimensions of the mobile home to be placed thereon. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: 12 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Mobile Home Park: A parcel of contiguous parcels of land which has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes. 
Monument: A stone or concrete monument with a flat top at least four inches across and at least 36 inches in length. 
Motor Home: A self-propelled vehicular structure designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, 
recreational or vacation uses. 
MPC: The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended and codified. 

Municipality: West Nantmeal Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania. 
Municipal Use: A use owned and maintained by West Nantmeal Township for public recreation area, park, swimming pool, golf course, spectator sports, municipal offices, emergency services operation, water and sewage facilities, utilities, community centers, solid waste disposal areas, recycling centers, composting facilities, road materials and equipment storage and similar governmental or municipal uses. 
Obstruction: Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building, structure, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill or other matter, which may impede, retard or change the normal direction or path of air, water or any modes of transportation. 
Off-Street Loading: A designated area within the lot lines designed to accommodate trucks and commercial vehicles which require accessibility to the principal use of the property. 
Off-Street Parking: A designated area within the lot lines designed to accommodate automobiles and other motor vehicles which require accessibility to the principal use of the property. 
Official Map: A legally adopted map that depicts the location of existing and proposed streets, public utilities, public facilities and/or public areas, which may be adopted by the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors in accordance with the provisions of Article 4 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 
Official Zoning Map: The Zoning Map of West Nantmeal Township. 
Open Space: Land areas that are not occupied by buildings, structures, parking areas, streets, alleys or required yards. Open space shall be permitted to be devoted to landscaping, preservation of natural features, patios and 
recreational areas and facilities. This term shall not be synonymous with the term “common open space”. 
PA: The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Parent Tract: A parcel of land or lot of record, which was held by the landowner or his predecessor in title prior to the adoption of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 
Park: A tract of land designed and utilized by the general public for active and/or passive recreation purposes. 
Parking Lot: An off-street area designed solely for the parking of motor vehicles, including driveways, passageways and maneuvering space appurtenant thereto. 
Parking Perimeter: The external limits of the permitted or approved off-street parking area. 
Parking Space: A reasonably level space, available for the parking of one motor vehicle, not less than 10 feet wide, 20 feet deep, and having an area of not less than 200 square feet, exclusive of passageways or other means of circulation or access. 
Patio: An area or courtyard, which is not covered by a roof or permanent awning, and is designed for seasonal outdoor living purposes as an accessory use to the principal structure or building. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: 13 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Paved Area: The percentage of lot area covered by any and all impervious materials, such as buildings, paved parking areas, paved walks, terraces and similar surfaces, which do not normally absorb rainfall. Refer to the 
definition of “impervious surface” for further clarification. 
PennDOT: The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. 
Permit: A document issued by the proper regulatory agency authorizing the applicant to undertake certain activities as specified on the application or permit. 
Building Permit: A permit issued for a specific building, structure or land use which indicates that the proposed construction, alteration, development, reconstruction, or similar activities are in accordance with the appropriate construction provisions established by West Nantmeal Township, and authorizes an applicant to commence with the activities specified on the application or the provisions of the permit. 
Certificate of Occupancy: A statement issued and enforced by the authorized Zoning Officer and/or Building Code Official upon the completion, conversion, extension or modification of a new building or existing building indicating that the building can be lawfully occupied for the intended use or activity. 
Demolition Permit: A permit issued to demolish, remove, destroy and/or eliminate a building or structure. 
Seasonal or Temporary Permit: A permit issued for a specific building, structure or land use which indicates that the seasonal, special use or temporary activities are in accordance with the appropriate provisions established by West Nantmeal Township, and authorizes an applicant to commence with the seasonal or temporary activities for a defined period of time, not to exceed 180 cumulative days within a calendar year or as specified on the permit. 
Sign Permit: A permit issued for a specific on-premises or off-premises sign. 
Special Permit: A permit issued for a specific use and event on land owned or leased by the applicant for a defined period of time, not to exceed 180 cumulative days within a calendar year and as specified on the permit. Such permitted uses may include carnivals, circuses, bazaars, fairs, seasonal sales or other non­profit fund raisers. 
Permitted Use: A use permitted in a particular district to occupy or use land for a specific purpose in accordance with the West Nantmeal Zoning Ordinance when such use is permitted by right, special exception or conditional use. 
Person: The term shall be construed to include an individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, limited liability company, firm, trust, business trust, estate, foundation, municipality, governmental entity, public utility, other association or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. 
Plan: A proposal for development, subdivision or land development, including all covenants, grants or easements and other conditions relating to use, location and bulk of buildings, density of development, common open space and public facilities which complies with the provisions established by West Nantmeal Township. 
Plan, As-built: Engineering or site plans or drawings maintained by the contractor as he constructs the project and upon which he documents the actual locations of the improvements, building components and changes to the original contract documents. These documents, or a copy of same, are submitted to the Township at the 
completion of the project, as per the requirements of this Ordinance. Also referred to as “record plans”. 
Plan, Conservation: A plan accompanying and forming a part of the preliminary and final plans detailing the 
developer’s provisions to mitigate impacts on stream channels, major trees and other important natural features, 
and for erosion, surface water runoff, and sediment control which includes all information required under this Ordinance. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: 14 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Plan, Development: The provisions for development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or facilities, common open space and public 
facilities. The phrase “provisions of the development plan” when used herein shall mean the written and graphic 
materials referred to in this definition. 
Plan, Final Subdivision: A complete and exact subdivision plan, prepared as for official recording, to define property rights, proposed streets and other improvements in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
Plan, Preliminary Subdivision: A subdivision plan showing the salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings and approximate street and lot layout as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a final plan in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
Plan, Profile: A plan prepared by an engineer or surveyor registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania showing the vertical section of the existing and proposed grade along the centerline and right-of-way lines of any proposed street and improvements. 
Plan, Record: A final plan approved by the Township and prepared for recording by a registered engineer or surveyor, showing the ultimate right-of-way widths of streets, lot lines, easements and all other relevant information pertaining to the subdivision and/or land development as required by this Ordinance. 
Plan, Sketch: An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale, clearly indicating salient features of a tract and its surroundings and the general layout of a proposed subdivision or land development which includes all the information required under this Ordinance. 
Plan, Sketch – Agricultural Preservation Option: A sketch plan for an agricultural preservation subdivision, as noted in the Township Zoning Ordinance used to determine eligibility only. After eligibility is approved, a final subdivision plan meeting all requirements of this Ordinance shall be required. 
Plan, Utilities: A plan showing all the locations, sizes, and types of all water, gas, and electric lines, all sanitary sewer mains, profiles and laterals, all storm sewers and gradients, all street lights, fire hydrants, all service connections, and all other data pertaining to existing or proposed facilities which is prepared in accordance with this Ordinance. 
Planning Commission: The West Nantmeal Township Planning Commission, Chester County, Pennsylvania. 
Plat: The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether preliminary or final. 
Preservation or Protection: When used in connection with natural and historic resources, shall include means to conserve and safeguard these resources from wasteful or destructive use, but shall not be interpreted to authorize the unreasonable restriction of forestry, mining or other lawful uses of natural resources. 
Principal Building: A building in which a principal use on a lot is carried on. 
Principal Use: The main or primary purpose for which any land, structure or building is designed, arranged or intended, and for which they may be occupied or maintained under the terms of the West Nantmeal Zoning Ordinance. 
Professional: An occupation practiced or performed by an individual who has been formally educated or trained for such occupation and who is typically, but not necessarily, licensed or certified in such occupation. 
Public Grounds or Land Areas: All such areas including: parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other public areas; sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly owned or operated facilities; and publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: 15 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Public Meeting: A forum held pursuant to notice under the requirements of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and the “Pennsylvania Sunshine Law”. 
Recreation Area (Active): Land area containing recreational facilities, which may require visitors or participants to become involved in physical or energetic functions, primarily group functions. Active recreation areas may include, but are not limited to: athletic fields; basketball courts; baseball fields; softball fields; football fields; soccer fields; tennis courts; playgrounds; tot lots; community centers; golf courses; hockey rinks; skateboard parks, swimming pools; and volleyball courts, and other similar active recreation areas as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Recreation Area (Passive): Land area containing recreation facilities, which may require visitors or participants to become involved in quiet functions that do not require physical or energetic functions. Passive recreation areas may include, but are not limited to: open space: trails for walking or bicycling; surface water for canoeing or fishing; land preserve areas for hunting; pavilions; picnic areas; cultural centers; scenic vistas; and amphitheaters. 
Recreation Facilities: Land, water, buildings, structures, apparatuses and/or equipment, which are required to accommodate recreational uses. 
Residential Use: A use within a permitted dwelling unit, designed and utilized as the living quarters for one (1) or more families living independently of each other. Residential uses may be permitted within single family detached units, single family semi-detached units, two family attached units, mobile homes, apartment units, townhouse units, and secondary housing units, provided the type of dwelling unit is a permitted use within the zoning district to which it is located, and provided that the dwelling unit is designed to comply with the standards and specifications referenced by this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 
Retail Use: A commercial establishment devoted to the sale of products and services to patrons within an enclosed building. Retail uses may include establishments selling food, groceries, beverages, clothing, business or office supplies, entertainment items, furniture, home improvement supplies, household products, personal care supplies, building supplies, sporting goods, equipment, machines, computers, electronics, pet supplies, medical supplies, agricultural supplies, automobile supplies, firearms, and other similar retail uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Retention Basin: A structure in which stormwater is stored and not released during the storm event. Retention basins are designed for infiltration purposes and do not have an outlet. 
Review: An examination of the Sketch Plan, Preliminary Plan and/or Final Plan by any one or more of the following to determine compliance of the same with this Ordinance (including, without limitation, the administrative regulations, design standards, improvement specifications and intent hereof,) the Zoning Ordinance, and all other applicable Township ordinances, codes regulations, plans and maps: Board of Supervisors, Township Engineer, other Township officials, representatives and bodies, and the Chester County Planning Commission. 
Right-Of-Way: The width or area of land, which is dedicated or reserved to accommodate streets, utilities, stormwater management facilities, traffic control facilities, curbs, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, street lights, and other public improvements. 
Legal Right-Of-Way: The existing width or area of land, which is currently owned and maintained by West Nantmeal Township, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and/or other public agency or authority. 
Ultimate or Required Right-Of-Way: The width or area of land, which is determined necessary to reserve and/or dedicate in order to accommodate future public improvements. 
Sanitary Facilities: The required plumbing fixtures within a permitted use including a sink, toilet, bathtub or shower, which are functioning and compliant with the provisions of West Nantmeal Township. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: 16 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Sanitary Sewage Disposal System: A system designed to collect, convey, treat and dispose of sewage from users in compliance with local, county, state and federal regulations. 
On-Lot System: A sewage disposal system which collects, conveys, treats and disposes of sewage or holds sewage from only one (1) dwelling, principal use or lot. 
Community System: A sewage disposal system which collects, conveys, treats and disposes of sewage from more than one (1) source by a system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant, generally serving a neighborhood area. 
Public or Municipal System: A sewage disposal system which collects, conveys, treats and disposes of sewage from more than one (1) source by a system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant. 
Optional System Requirement: A special or unique use of land, which because of its wastewater disposal requirements may have the option to utilize on-lot sewage disposal methods or connect to a private, community, public or municipal treatment system. The selected method for wastewater collection, conveyance and treatment shall be consistent with the West Nantmeal Township Act 537 Plan, the West Nantmeal Township Sewer Use Ordinance, and Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act. 
Screen: A strip of vegetation matter sufficient to provide an effective screen, having an initial height of not less than 5 feet, a height at maturity of no less than 8 feet, and consisting of not less than 50 percent evergreen vegetation distributed throughout the length of the strip. 
Seasonal Pool: An essential and unique wetland habitat which is typically small, shallow, ephemeral water bodies, and has no permanent inlet or outlet. Seasonal pools are filled by rain and snow melt which typically dry-up for a period of time during the summer season. They are considered essential since they support a number of species that require temporary wetland habitats for survival. 
Sediment: Soil or other materials transported by, suspended in or deposited by surface water as a product of erosion. 
Sensitive Environmental Features: Natural features which perform a beneficial function, such as reducing erosion or which if disturbed may cause hazards or stress to life and property such as steep slopes. For the purposes of this Ordinance, sensitive environmental features include, but are not limited to, the following: slopes in excess of 15 percent; soils classified as highly erodible, subject to erosion or as having a high water table; wetlands; hydric soil area; mature stands of native vegetation; aquifer recharge and discharge areas; flood plains; and lands incapable of meeting percolation requirements for on-site sewage disposal systems. 
Setback Requirements: The setback requirements as established for any building or structure within the applicable Zoning District for which it is located. 
Sewage Facilities Plan: The West Nantmeal Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted by West Nantmeal Township in accordance with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537), as amended from time to time. 
Shade Tree: A deciduous tree which normally grows with a single trunk and has a canopy which screens and filters sunshine during specific seasons during the year. 
Shed: A small utility or storage building, which is classified as an accessory structure to a principal use in accordance with the provisions of the West Nantmeal Zoning Ordinance. 
Silo: A tall cylindrical structure that is typically located on a farm for non-residential uses. 
Single and Separate Ownership: The ownership of a lot by one or more persons, whereas the ownership is separate and distinct from that of any adjoining land areas. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: 17 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Slope: Topographic conditions in which the percentage of vertical to horizontal relief is computed utilizing standard rise over run calculations. 
Soil Percolation Test: A field test, conducted according to the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, that measures absorptive capacity of soil to determine whether the soil is suitable for on-site sewage disposal facilities. 
Soils, Alluvial: Soils which have been deposited by the action of flowing water. 
Solicitor: The legal consultant or attorney appointed by the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors. 
Solid Waste: Waste, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous materials. 
State: The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and its designated agencies. 
Steep Slopes: Areas of land in which the topographical conditions exceed a certain slope in pre-development conditions, as further defined in the West Nantmeal Zoning Ordinance. The following slope categories are hereby defined as part of the Steep Slope Overlay District: 
Category 1 Slopes: All land areas in which the topographical conditions have a range of slope between 15 and 25 percent in slope in pre-development conditions, as measured 100 feet in any straight-line direction. 
Category 2 Slopes: All land areas in which the topographical conditions exceed a slope of 25 percent in pre-development conditions, as measured 100 feet in any straight-line direction. 
Steep Slope Overlay District: A conservation overlay of land which has been defined in the West Nantmeal Zoning Ordinance. 
Steeple: A tall tapering architectural feature of a structure that is located on the roof of or is part of the superstructure of a permitted non-residential use. 
Stormwater: Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation in the form of rain, snow, sleet, hail or ice. 
Stormwater and Erosion Control Ordinance (SECO): The West Nantmeal Township Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Ordinance, as adopted by the Board of Supervisors and amended from time to time. 
Stormwater Management: A program of controls and measures designed to regulate the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff from a defined area or development, while promoting the protection and conservation of surface water, groundwater and groundwater recharge. 
Stormwater Management Facilities: Those controls and measures including, but not limited to, berms, terraces, bridges, dams, storm sewers, basins, infiltration systems, swales, watercourses, and floodplains used to implement the storm water management regulations of West Nantmeal Township. 
Street: A public or private right-of-way, excluding driveways, intended as a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel, furnishing access to abutting properties. The word "street" includes thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, court, drive, expressway, highway and similar terms. The functional classification of existing streets has been defined as follows: 
Expressways: Routes providing for corridor movements that represent substantial statewide, interstate, or regional travel and movements between major urban areas. Expressways contain the most heavily traveled routes (10,000 to 100,000 trips per day) including multi-lane roadways. This system provides links between developed areas and adjacent towns and cities. The system is designed for relatively high speeds 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: 18 
Article 2:  Definitions 
(50 to 65 MPH) with a minimum of interference to through traffic. Expressways facilitate truck transport by providing optimum conditions. Mobility is the principal function and accessibility should be limited to carefully planned interchanges to preserve the functional classification of expressways. 
Arterials (Minor and Major Arterial): Routes providing for corridor movements that represent substantial statewide or regional travel and movements between major urban areas. Arterial routes contain heavily traveled routes (5,000 to 25,000) including multi-lane roadways. This system provides links between developed areas and adjacent towns and cities. The system is designed for relatively high speeds (35 to 55 MPH) with a minor interference to through traffic. Arterial routes facilitate truck transport by providing favorable conditions. Mobility is the major function and accessibility should be limited to preserve the functional classification. 
Collectors (Minor and Major Collector): Routes that serve primarily regional or intra-county trips and represent those routes with shorter travel distances than arterial routes. Collector roads contain well-traveled roads (500 to 10,000 trips per day) leading to specific destinations or to expressways and arterial routes. The system is designed for moderate speeds (25 to 45 MPH) with some interference with designed intersections to permit through traffic. Depending upon its structural integrity and design, collector routes can facilitate lightweight truck transport. Mobility is a significant function and accessibility should be limited to street intersections and driveways in order to preserve the functional classification of collector roads. 
Minor Streets or Local Access Streets: Roads that primarily serve local trips and represent those routes with shorter travel distances than collector routes. Local roads contain low volume to moderately traveled roads (less than 500 trips per day) leading to collector and arterial routes. The system is designed for lower speeds (25 to 35 MPH) with interference with a number of designed intersections. Local roads are typically designed to facilitate lightweight truck transport for local deliveries. Mobility is a minor function and accessibility to street intersections, driveways and adjacent land areas is significant for local roads. 
Marginal Access Roads: Roads that serve specific land uses which are parallel or adjacent to an expressway, arterial or major collector roads. Marginal access roads are typically designed to accommodate the use(s) they directly serve. Accessibility between selective points is an essential design element with control at the point of destination. Many marginal access roads are privately owned and maintained. 
Cul-De-Sac Street: A minor street intersecting another street at one end, and terminating in a vehicular turnaround at the other end. 
Internal Street: A minor street used for circulation and access within a development involving multi-residential, commercial and/or industrial land uses. 
Service Street (Alley): A minor right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to the side or rear of two or more properties. 
Public Street: A dedicated right-of-way that is owned and maintained by West Nantmeal Township or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Private Street: A defined right-of-way that is not owned and maintained by West Nantmeal Township or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Pedestrian Path: An improved lane, sidewalk, trail or path, which is specifically designated for pedestrian use either along a street or contained within a park, common open space area, off-street parking area and/or other areas approved for community use. 
Bicycle Lane: An improved travel lane, trail or path, which is specifically designated for persons riding bicycles and other permitted non-motorized vehicles. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: 19 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Street Frontage: The lot dimension measured along the street line or right-of-way line of any one street or highway abutting a lot. 
Street Line: The limits established by the legal right-of-way line. 
Street Tree: A plantation of deciduous hardwood trees within or adjacent to a street right-of-way, such trees to be approved as to type by the Board of Supervisors, and having a caliper of not less than 2 ½ inches. 
Structure: Any manmade object having an ascertainable stationary location on land or water, whether or not affixed to the land. The term structure shall include, but not be limited to, buildings, stormwater management facilities, signs, fences, walls, towers, swimming pools, porches, garages, flagpoles, windmills, water towers, silos, solar energy collectors, and similar structures as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Permanent Structure: A structure to be utilized for a specific purpose for more than 180 days. 
Temporary Structure: A structure to be utilized for a specific purpose for less than 180 days. 
Subdivision: The division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development. The subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten (10) acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted. 
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance: The West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as adopted by the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors. 
Subdivision/Land Development Improvements Agreement: The written agreement provided under and by this Ordinance. 
Subdivision, Minor: A subdivision in which: 
1. 	
No street is to be constructed or widened; 

2. 	
No other improvement that requires a bond or escrow as a performance guarantee is to be constructed; and 

3. 	
No earthmoving activities will take place except those normal to construction of a single-family dwelling on a lot. 


Subdivision, Major: Any subdivision other than a minor subdivision and any land development that does not involve subdivision. 
Subgrade: Any finished surface or elevation of compacted fill or natural earth upon which materials of construction are placed. 
Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its previous condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial Improvement: Any repair, addition, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. 
Substantially Completed: Where, in the judgment of the Township Engineer, at least 90 percent (based on the cost of the required improvement for which financial security was posted) of improvements required as a condition for final approval have been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied, or operated for its intended use. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 20 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Subsurface Conditions: Conditions below the ground surface which may affect the design of improvements and structures including the cut slope stability and foundation stability of soils and rock types, location and extent of faults, and the ground water quantity and quality. 
Surveyor: An individual registered with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as authorized to measure the boundaries of tracts of land, establish locations, and perform the requirements of a survey. 
Swale: An artificial or natural waterway or low-lying stretch of land that gathers and conveys stormwater or runoff, and is generally vegetated for soil stabilization, stormwater pollutant removal, and infiltration. 
Topsoil: Natural and friable loam containing sufficient nitrogen, phosphorous, and potassium to support plant growth and extending in depth to the extent of penetration of feeder roots of the prevailing native grasses. 
Township: West Nantmeal Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania. 
Township Engineer: The West Nantmeal Township Engineer appointed by the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors. 
Tract: One or more lots assembled for the purposes of subdivision or land development. 
Use: The specific purpose for which land, water, signage, structures, or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended, to be utilized, occupied or maintained, or any activity, occupation, residence, business or operation, which may be carried on thereon or therein. 
Water Supply System: A system designed to transmit water from the source to users in compliance with the requirements of the appropriate state agencies and the Township. 
Watercourse – A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, whether natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water. 
Watershed -Land area that drains to a common water body. As used within this Ordinance, the term “watershed” refers to the land areas draining to the 21 regionally recognized named streams illustrated within the West Nantmeal Township Stormwater Management Ordinance. 
Wetlands -Land areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater with a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions (wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas); or areas that are defined and delineated in accordance with the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, dated January 10, 1989, and as may be amended from time to time; or as further defined and delineated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 
Wetlands and Hydric Soil Overlay District: A conservation overlay of land and water, which include areas of wetlands, hydric soils and high water table soils with hydric components, as further defined and regulated in the West Nantmeal Zoning Ordinance. 
Woodlands: An area of land in which one (1) or more contiguous acres are mostly occupied or covered by healthy mature trees (12 inches in caliper). The area of the woodlands shall be measured from the drip line of the outer trees. 
Woodland Extraction: The clear cutting of healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in caliper) to provide area for development on an individual lot. 
Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District: A conservation overlay of woodlands and forested areas which includes separate provisions for the following activities: woodland extraction and replacement; 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: 21 
Article 2:  Definitions 
forestry; timber harvesting; tree harvesting and logging; tree protection and replacement; and other activities, which are further defined and regulated in the West Nantmeal Zoning Ordinance. 
Working Drawing: A dimensional layout and construction plan for all improvements, at scale not smaller than one 1 inch equals 100 feet, prepared by, or in collaboration with, a registered engineer or surveyor, including complete information sufficient in detail to obtain bona fide bids and for construction, including such as-built corrections after construction as may be applicable. 
Yard: An open space on the same lot with a structure(s), which lies between the structure(s) and a lot line and which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as herein permitted. 
Front Yard: A yard extending the full width of the lot between the principal building and the front lot line. On lots abutting more than one public street other than an alley, the front yard requirement shall apply for every public street the lot abuts. 
Rear Yard: A yard extending the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line. 
Side Yard: A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building and the nearest side lot line. 
Zoning Map: The West Nantmeal Township Zoning Map. 
Zoning Officer: The agent or official designated by the governing body to administer and enforce the West Nantmeal Zoning Ordinance, as appointed by the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors. 
Zoning Ordinance: The West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance of 2010, as adopted by the West Nantmeal Township Board of Supervisors, as may be amended from time to time. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 Page: 22 
Article 2:  Definitions 
Article 3:  Processing Procedures 

Section 301:   General 
A. 	All subdivisions and land developments in the Township shall be submitted for approval and processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Article, other provisions of this Ordinance, and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 
B. 	All applications for approval of any subdivision and/or land development plan shall be referred to and reviewed by the Township Planning Commission and the Chester County Planning Commission; provided, however, that sketch plans need not be referred to and reviewed by the Chester County Planning Commission. 
C. 	All preliminary and final subdivision and/or land development plans shall be approved or disapproved by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Article, other provisions of this Ordinance, and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 
D. 	Except to the extent otherwise provided by law, approvals of any subdivision and/or land development, not in accordance with the procedures and requirements of this Ordinance, shall be null and void and of no effect. 
E. 	No application for approval of a subdivision and/or land development shall be accepted for filing and/or considered complete, filed, or accepted by the Township until the official application form is completed, all filing and other applicable fees are paid, the required number of copies are filed, and all required supporting information, plans and other documents which must be filed with the preliminary plan pursuant to this Ordinance are filed with the Township. 
F. 	The official application form or forms for the review and approval of subdivision and land developments shall be those forms the Board of Supervisors shall adopt from time to time by resolution. 
G. 	Whenever an application for any major subdivision and/or any land development is proposed which may affect adjacent municipalities or other governmental agencies, reviews and reports from such municipalities or other governmental agencies may be requested by the Board of Supervisors for its use in considering, reviewing and deciding the application. 
Section 302: Plan Classification 
All subdivision applications shall be classified for the purposes of procedure as either minor or major. Applicants shall apply for and secure approval in accordance with the following procedures: 
A. 	Minor Subdivision Proposal 
(1) 	Definition. A minor subdivision consists of: 
(a) 	
A subdivision involving only lot line adjustments and no development; or 

(b) 	
A subdivision in which: (i) no road (public or private) is to be constructed or widened; (ii) no other improvements (including, but not limited to, walkways, curbs, gutters, street lights, fire hydrants, shade trees, water, mains, sanitary sewers or storm drainage facilities) requiring a performance bond or escrow are to be constructed; and (iii) no earth moving activities except those incidental to construction of a single-family dwelling on each proposed lot will take place. No more than three minor subdivisions shall be approved for any parent tract or parcel of ground. When more than three minor subdivisions have been submitted or approved for any original parcel, each succeeding submission shall be submitted as a major subdivision. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 23 
Article 3:  Processing Procedures 
(2) 	Procedure 
(a) 	
Sketch Plan (optional) and; 

(b) 	
Final Plan 


B. Major Subdivision and all Land Development Proposals 
(1) 	
Definition. A major subdivision means: 

(a) 	
Any land development application; or 

(b) 	
Any subdivision proposal involving a subdivision not defined as a minor subdivision under this Ordinance. 



(2) 	
Procedure 

(a) 	
Sketch Plan (optional); 

(b) 	
Preliminary Plan; and 

(c) 	
Final Plan. 




Section 303:   Submission of Sketch Plan 
A. 	All applicants for subdivision or land development are encouraged to submit a sketch plan to the Township Planning Commission for review prior to submission of a formal application. Submission of a sketch plan does not constitute an official application for subdivision or land development, but provides the opportunity for dialogue and a more efficient review of official plan submissions. 
B. 	For information purposes, six (6) copies of the sketch plan are recommended to be submitted to the Planning 
Commission. The applicant is encouraged to include the information outlined in this Ordinance as part of a sketch plan submission. 
C. 	No fee nor application is required for submission of a sketch plan. 
D. 	The sketch plan shall be submitted at least seven calendar days prior to a regular meeting of the Township Planning Commission in order to be placed on the agenda of that meeting. 
Section 304: Review of Sketch Plan 
A. 	The Planning Commission shall consider the plan at a regularly scheduled meeting and provide informal dialogue with the applicant. Any recommendation by the Planning Commission may be deferred until the next regular meeting. 
B. 	The applicant shall be responsible for explaining the development of the land and its relationship to the extension of streets, access points, arrangement and density of proposed use, the compatibility of the proposal with the surrounding land uses, and consistency with the West Nantmeal Zoning and Subdivision and Land Development Ordinances. 
C. 	The applicant may, but need not, request further review of the sketch plan by the Board of Supervisors. Upon receiving request by the applicant, the Board may consider the sketch plan. The Board may meet with the applicant and may advise the applicant as to the concerns of the Board; provided however, the Board is not required to review the sketch plan nor submit comments to the applicant if the Board does review the plan. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 24 
Article 3:  Processing Procedures 
Section 305: Submission of Preliminary Plan 
A. 	All preliminary plans submitted pursuant to this Ordinance shall conform to the requirements of West Nantmeal Township regulations. 
B. 	All preliminary plan applications shall be submitted to the Township Secretary at least twelve (12) calendar days prior to the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission. The Township Secretary shall determine whether the application represents a complete submission. 
C. 	Preliminary plan applications shall include the following items: 
(1) 	
Two (2) copies of the official Township application for preliminary subdivision review form. 

(2) 	
A minimum of twelve (12) prints of the preliminary plan and one (1) digital copy in .PDF format and one 

(1) digital copy in .DGN, .DXF or .DWG format on compact disc (CD). 

(3) 	
A minimum of three (3) copies of all required supporting information and plans including, but not limited to, Traffic Impact Study (if required), a water supply study and any other water supply information required by this Ordinance; 

(4) 	
Payment of required application fees, engineering review fees, legal fees, and escrow deposits as determined by resolution of the Board; and 

(5) 	
Six (6) copies of the Planning Module for Land Development as required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act and/or the rules and regulations thereunder of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, concerning sewage facilities proposed to serve the subdivision and/or land development. All items of the Planning Module, except those requiring signatures of Township officials and those indicating approval or disapproval by the Township, shall be fully prepared and completed by the applicant. 


D. 	The Township Secretary shall note and stamp the date of receipt of the application, fees and any escrow deposits. The application shall not be deemed to be submitted until a complete application and required fees have been submitted. 
E. 	Upon receipt of all items comprising a complete and official submission, the Township Secretary shall accept the application and shall distribute or retain copies of the application and supporting information and plans as follows: 
(1) 	
Four (4) copies of the preliminary plan, supporting information and plans, and official Township application form to the Township Planning Commission; 

(2) 	
One (1) copy of the preliminary plan, supporting information and plans, and official Township application form to the Township Engineer; 

(3) 	
One (1) copy of the preliminary plan, County referral form, and accompanying fee to the County Planning Commission; 

(4) 	
Two (2) copies of the preliminary plan, completed Planning Module for Land Development, and appropriate fee to the County Health Department; 

(5) 	
Two (2) copies of the preliminary plan, supporting information and plans, and official Township application forms to be retained by the Township Secretary for Township records. 

(6) 	
An electronic copy PDF and an electronic copy as DGN, DXF, or DWG to the Township and copied to Township Engineer. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 25 
Article 3:  Processing Procedures 
Section 306: Review of Preliminary Plan 
A. 	Official Review Period 
(1) 	
The Township shall have 90 calendar days in which to review and take action on the preliminary plan. 

(2) 	
The 90 calendar day period shall commence on the date of the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting following the date a complete and official submission of a preliminary plan application was filed with the Township Secretary. 

(3) 	
Whenever the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission occurs more than 30 calendar days following the filing of a complete and official submission, the said ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th calendar day following the day the application is filed. 

(4) 	
An extension of the 90 calendar day review period shall occur only when requested by the applicant and approved by the Board. 


B. 	Township Planning Commission 
(1) 	The Township Planning Commission shall review all plans referred to it and shall consider any recommendations made by the Chester County Planning Commission and Conservation District, the Township Engineer, and any other persons or agencies who shall have submitted comments with respect to any such application. 
C. 	Township Engineer 
(1) 	
The review by the Township Engineer shall include, but shall not be limited to, an examination of the engineering feasibility and reasonableness of the various schemes presented for lot layout and configuration, and for the location, alignment, grade of streets, stormwater drainage, stormwater detention, erosion/sediment control, sanitary sewers, water supply, surface water drainage facilities, and easements related thereto in accordance with the standards and regulations and other provisions of this Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
The Township Engineer shall forward his/her comments regarding the plan to the Township Planning Commission, together with any related or supporting documentation and materials received. 


D. 	Board of Supervisors 
(1) 	
When a preliminary plan review has been officially submitted to the Board by the Planning Commission, such plan review shall be placed on its agenda for review or other action at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 

(2) 	
Before acting on any preliminary subdivision or land development plan, the Board may hold a public hearing thereon after public notice. 

(3) 	
In acting on the preliminary subdivision or land development plan, the Board shall review the plan and the written comments of the Planning Commission, Township Engineer, County Planning Commission, and all other reviewing agencies, to determine conformity of the application to the standards of this and any other applicable ordinance. The Board may specify conditions, changes, modifications, or additions to the application which the Board deems necessary and may make a decision to grant preliminary approval subject to such conditions, changes, modifications, or additions, citing provisions of the statute or ordinance (including, without limitation, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, this Ordinance, and the Zoning Ordinance) relied upon to support the changes, modifications, or additions. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 26 
Article 3:  Processing Procedures 
(4) 	
Whenever the Board approves a preliminary plan subject to any conditions, the applicant shall indicate whether such conditions are accepted or rejected within 15 calendar days of receipt of notice of the decision of the Board. If the applicant does not accept the conditions of approval, the plan shall be deemed denied. 

(5) 	
In the event that the preliminary plan is not approved by the Board as filed, the decision of the Board shall specify the defects found in the preliminary plan, describe the requirements which have not been met, and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of the statute or ordinance (including, without limitation, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, this Ordinance, and the zoning Ordinance) relied upon. 

(6) 	
The decision of the Board shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to the applicant at his last known address not later than 15 calendar days following the decision. The form and content of the decision shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(7) 	
Whenever the approval of a preliminary plan is subject to conditions, such conditions shall be stated in whole on the plan prior to signature by the Board. 


Section 307: Submission of Final Plan 
A. 	The final plan shall conform to the terms of approval of the preliminary plan. 
B. 	The Board may permit submission of the final plan in sections, each covering a reasonable portion of the entire proposed subdivision as shown on the approved preliminary plan, but in no case (except for the last section) shall any section include less than 25 percent of the total number of lots or units as depicted on the approved preliminary plan unless a lesser percentage is approved by the Board in its discretion. 
C. 	All final plan applications, together with and/or including the items listed below and otherwise required by this Ordinance, shall be submitted to the Township Secretary at least 12 calendar days prior to the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission. 
D. 	Final plan applications shall include the following items: 
(1) 	
Two (2) copies of the official Township application for final subdivision review form. 

(2) 	
A minimum of twelve (12) prints of the final plan and one (1) digital copy in PDF format and one (1) digital copy in DGN, DXF or DWG format on compact disc (CD). 

(3) 	
A minimum of three (3) copies of all required supporting information and plans including, but not limited to, Traffic Impact Study (if required), and a water supply study and other water supply information required by this Ordinance; 

(4) 	
Payment of required application fees, engineering review fees, legal fees, and escrow deposits, as determined by resolution of the Board; and 

(5) 	
A Planning Module for Land Development as required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act and/or the rules and regulations thereunder of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, concerning sewage facilities proposed to serve the subdivision and/or land development. All items of the Planning Module, except those requiring signatures of Township officials and those indicating approval or disapproval by the Township, shall be fully prepared and completed by the applicant. 


E. 	The Township Secretary shall note and stamp the date of receipt of the application, fees and any escrow deposits. The application shall not be deemed to be submitted until a complete application and required fees have been submitted. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 27 
Article 3:  Processing Procedures 
F. 	Upon receipt of all items comprising a complete and official submission, the Township Secretary shall accept the application and shall distribute or retain copies of the application and supporting information and plans, as follows: 
(1) 	
Four (4) copies of the final plan, supporting information and plans, and official Township application form to the Township Planning Commission; 

(2) 	
One (1) copy of the final plan, supporting information and plans, and official Township application form to the Township Engineer; 

(3) 	
One (1) copy of the final plan, County referral form and accompanying fee to the County Planning Commission; 

(4) 	
Two (2) copies of the. final plan, completed Planning Module for Land Development and appropriate fee to the County Health Department; 

(5) 	
One (1) copy of the final plan to the Chester County Conservation District at the discretion of the Township, for review of matters relating to drainage, NPDES eligibility, and soil erosion management; and 

(6) 	
Two (2) copies of the final plan, supporting information and plans, and official Township application forms to be retained by the Township Secretary for Township records. 


(7.) An electronic copy PDF and an electronic copy as DGN, DXF, or DWG to Township and copied to Township Engineer. 
G. 	Where the final plan is for minor subdivision, the Township Secretary shall forward copies of the plan to the Township Planning Commission, the County Planning Commission, the Township Engineer and, where required, to any other agency listed in Section 307.F. above. 
Section 308: Review of Final Plan 
A. 	Official Review Period: 
(1) 	
The Township shall have 90 days in which to review and take action on the final plan. 

(2) 	
The 90 day period shall commence on the date of the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting following the date a complete and official submission of a final plan application was filed. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for confirming a complete submission of the final plan and start of the 90 day period. 

(3) 	
Whenever the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission occurs more than 30 days following the filing of a complete and official submission, the said ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th day following the day the application is filed. 

(8) 	
An extension of the 90 calendar day review period shall occur only when requested by the applicant and approved by the Board. 


B. 	Township Planning Commission: 
(1) 	
The Planning Commission shall review the final plan submitted and shall consider any recommendations of the Township Engineer, and any other reviewing agency submitting comments. 

(2) 	
After such review, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall provide the Board with notice of its recommendation through transmittal of the official minutes or a separate letter. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 28 
Article 3:  Processing Procedures 
C. 	Township Engineer: 
(1) 	
The review by the Township Engineer shall include, but shall not be limited to, a comparison of the Final Plan with the approved Preliminary Plan, and an examination of the engineering feasibility and reasonableness of the various schemes presented for lot layout and configuration, and for the location, alignment, grade of streets, stormwater drainage, sanitary sewers, water supply, surface water drainage facilities, stormwater detention, erosion/sediment control, and easements related thereto in accordance with the standards and regulations and other provisions of this Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
The Township Engineer shall forward comments on the plan to the Planning Commission together with any related or supporting documentation and materials that are received. 


D. 	Board of Supervisors: 
(1) 
Upon receipt of the Planning Commission's recommendation and other 	agency reviews and supporting information, the Board shall, at one or more regular or special public meetings, review the final plan and shall within the time limitations set forth herein below, either approve or disapprove the plan. 

(2) 	
Before acting on any final subdivision or land development plan, the Board may hold a public hearing thereon after public notice. 

(3) 	
The Board shall render a decision, in writing, on all final plans, and shall communicate the decision to the applicant personally or mail the same to him at his last known address not later than 15 days following the decision. The form and content of the decision shall comply with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(4) 	
In the event that the final plan is not approved as filed, the decision of the Board shall specify the defects found in the final plan and describe the requirements which have not been met, and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of the statute or ordinance (including, but not limited to, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, this Ordinance, and the Zoning Ordinance) relied upon. 

(5) 	
Copies of the final plan as finally approved, with the appropriate endorsement of the Board shall be distributed as follows: 

(a) 	
At least three (3) copies, one of which shall be recorded in accordance with this Ordinance, to the applicant; 

(b) 	
One (1) copy to be retained by the County Planning Commission; and 

(c) 	
Two (2) copies to be retained in the Township files, together with one copy of all supporting materials. 




E. 	Every final plan approval shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1) 	
The applicant, together with the bonding company or financial institution posting escrow for the public improvements, shall execute, acknowledge and deliver to the Township a Financial Security Agreement and the applicant shall execute, acknowledge and deliver to the Township a Subdivision/Land Development Improvements Agreement in accordance with this Ordinance. 

(2) 	
The applicant shall provide an improvements guarantee in accordance with this Ordinance. 

(3) 	
The applicant agrees, if agreed to by the Board to tender a deed of dedication to the Township for such streets, any and all easements for sanitary sewers, water lines, or storm sewers, and public improvements, including street paving, sidewalks, shade trees, water mains, any fire hydrants, sanitary and storm sewers, as are required for the promotion of public welfare, after all said improvements are completed and such completion as certified as satisfactory by the Township Engineer. The Board may require that the applicant 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 29 
Article 3:  Processing Procedures 
supply a title insurance certificate from a reputable company evidencing that the property to be dedicated is clear and free of all liens before dedication of any property is accepted for the Township. 
(4) 	
If the development is to be carried out in progressive stages, each stage shall be planned so that all requirements, conditions, and the intent of this Ordinance shall be fully complied with at the completion of any stage. 

(5) 	
Whenever the applicant is providing open space as part of the subdivision or land development, a deed or agreement granting an easement in perpetuity which provides for and describes such open space and restricts the same against further subdivision or development, and which shall run to the benefit of the Township and the lot purchasers in the subdivision or land development shall be executed, acknowledged and delivered by the applicant and the land owner, or by such other person or organization acceptable to the Township. The form and contents of the deed or agreement of easement shall be in recordable form and shall be acceptable to and approved by the Township and shall be recorded with the Record Plan. 

(6) 	
The applicant shall have applied for all required permits from agencies having jurisdiction over ancillary matters necessary to effect the subdivision or land development, such as, but not necessarily limited to, PaDEP or the United States Army Corps of Engineers for wetlands and/or flood plains, the Pennsylvania Departments of Transportation and Environmental Protection, the Public Utility Commission, and the Chester County Health Department. 

(7) 	
The recording of the final plan and other documents by the applicant shall be in accordance with Section 309 of this Ordinance. 


Section 309: Recording of Final Plan 
A. 	Upon completion of the procedures outlined under this Article, all endorsements shall be indicated on the Record Plan and on at least seven (7) copies of the final plan. Such endorsements shall include: the approval endorsement of the Board, the signatures and acknowledgements of the applicant and landowner, and the signatures and certifications of the engineer and/or surveyor who prepared the final plan. 
The signatures and acknowledgements of the applicant and landowner shall include, without limitation, a certification of their respective acceptances of the plan and a statement concerning any offer of dedication of public improvements. The certification of the engineer or surveyor who prepared the plan shall include, without limitation, a certificate as to the accuracy of the subdivision and/or land development plan, that the monuments shown thereon exist as located, and that all dimensions and other physical details are correct. 
After, the endorsements have been indicated on the record plan and copies of the final plan, as provided in Section 309.A, the applicant shall record the record plan in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds in and for Chester County within ninety (90) days of the date of approval of the final plan by the Board unless the Board approves an extension of time to record the plan. Thereafter, the applicant shall provide the Township Secretary with a time stamped copy of the record plan which indicates the date of the recording and the plan number. 
B. 	Where a deed or agreement of easement is provided under this Ordinance, such deed or agreement shall also be recorded with the record plan and a time-stamped copy shall be provided to the Township Secretary. 
Section 310: Subdivision and Land Development Improvements Agreement 
A. 	Every applicant for approval of a final subdivision or land development plan shall execute and acknowledge, as hereinafter provided, and shall deliver to the Township, a Financial Security Agreement and a Subdivision/Land Development Improvements Agreement containing such terms and in such recordable and other form as shall be provided by or approved by the Township. No final plan shall be finally approved by the Board and released to the applicant for recording until these Agreements are executed, acknowledged and delivered. The Financial Security Agreement shall be executed and acknowledged by the applicant and the landowner, and by a bonding 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 30 
Article 3:  Processing Procedures 
company or financial institution which is posting the financial security for the public improvements. The Agreement shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1) 	
The applicant agrees that he will properly and accurately layout, construct and install all streets and other improvements, including, without limitation, grading, paving, sidewalks, fire hydrants, water mains, street signs, shade trees, storm and sanitary sewers, landscaping, traffic control devices, open space areas, and erosion and sediment control measures in accordance with the approved final plan and supporting or related documentation and other materials. 

(2) 	
The applicant and/or landowner guarantee completion and maintenance of all improvements by means of a type of financial security acceptable to the Township, as specified in the MPC. 

(3) 	
The applicant and/or landowner agree to have prepared a deed or deeds of dedication to the Township for such streets and for such easements for sanitary and storm sewers, sidewalks, and other public improvements, provided that the Township shall not be required to accept dedication of any such improvements if the Board believes it in the best interest of the Township not to accept dedication, or if the Board elects to accept dedication of any such improvements, that the Township shall not be obligated to finally accept the same until their completion is certified as satisfactory by the Township Engineer. 

(4) 	
Whenever an applicant proposes to establish or continue a street which is not offered for dedication to public use, and to cover those situations in which the Board declines to accept dedication of a street, the applicant and landowner, on behalf of themselves and their respective heirs, successors, and assigns, agrees to establish conditions under and by which the street shall be repaired and maintained and by which the street may be later offered for dedication and accepted by the Township, including, without limitation, the following: 

(a) 	
That an offer to dedicate the street or other facility shall be made only for the street or facility as a whole; 

(b) 	
That the Township shall not be responsible for repairing or maintaining, or having any other obligation with respect to any undedicated or dedicated street or facility, unless and until such time as the Township formally accepts dedication thereof, and that unless and until such acceptance of dedication, the applicant and landowner shall be responsible for such repair and maintenance; 

(c) 	
That the method of assessing repair and maintenance costs of undedicated and dedicated facilities and street, prior to their formal acceptance by the Township, shall be stipulated and set forth in recorded deed restrictions so as to be binding upon the applicant, landowner, and their respective heirs, successors and assigns; and 

(d) 	
That, if dedication is to be sought, the street or facility shall conform to Township specifications as shall then be current (unless otherwise provided by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code) or that the owners of the abutting lots shall, at their own expense, construct, reconstruct and/or restore the street to conform with such specifications. 




Section 311: Commencement of Development 
A. 	With the exception of soil or percolation testing, well drilling for testing purposes, and similar engineering and/or surveying activities, no construction or land disturbance activities in a subdivision or land development shall be commenced until the applicant submits to the Township secretary a time-stamped copy of the record plan and any other documents and materials required by this Ordinance to be recorded therewith. 
B. 	No building or other permit under the Zoning Ordinance shall be issued for any building or other structure in any subdivision or land development until the final plans for the subdivision or land development have been 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 31 
Article 3:  Processing Procedures 
approved and recorded as provided in this Ordinance and until the terms, conditions and other provisions of this Ordinance have been satisfied. 
C. 	No water system or sewer system, including extensions to proposed future Township systems or new systems employing sewage treatment plants, shall be constructed prior to the review and approval by the Township and the issuance of appropriate permits from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or from federal or local agencies, as required. 
Section 312: Plan Amendments 
Modifications to an approved subdivision or land development plan shall be resubmitted and reprocessed in the same manner as the original plan. All construction and all land and other site disturbance activities shall cease pending approval of the modified plan, provided, however, that activities involving the maintenance of stormwater management, sedimentation and erosion control facilities and devices shall and must be fully continued. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 32 
Article 3:  Processing Procedures 
Article 4:   Plan Content 

Section 401:   General 
All subdivision and land development plans, supporting plans and information shall be prepared by a licensed engineer, land surveyor or landscape architect in accordance with applicable licensing laws in Pennsylvania. The standards in this Article, for drafting, scale, type of drawing, and minimum information to be shown, shall be followed when submitting such plans for approval. 
Section 402: Sketch Plan 
A. 	To facilitate the fullest possible response from the Planning Commission in its review of the sketch plan and dialogue with the applicant, the applicant is encouraged to submit the following items: 
(1) 	
Name, address, telephone number, and email address of the applicant, and, if the applicant is not the owner of record, the name, address and telephone number of the record owner and the nature of the applicant's interest in the subject property whether as beneficial owner, or otherwise. 

(2) 	
Name, address, telephone number, and email address of the person who prepared the plan. 

(3) 	
Written and graphic scale (however, the plan need not be to exact scale, nor are precise dimensions required). 

(4) 	
The title: "Sketch Plan". 

(5) 	
Approximate deed tract boundaries and area of the tract in acres. 

(6) 	
North arrow, date of original preparation and all revision dates. 

(7) 	
Location map at suggested scale of 1"=2,000'. 

(8) 	
Streets on and adjacent to the tract. 

(9) 	
Significant topographical and physical features, including contours (maximum 10-foot intervals which may be taken from the latest USGS Quadrangle). 

(10) 	
General location of wooded areas, probable wetland areas, and watercourses. 

(11) 	
Proposed general lot, building, and street layout and stormwater management concept proposals. 

(12) 	
In the case of land development plans, proposed general layout, including building locations, parking areas and parking lots, and open spaces. 

(13) 	
Whether the property is located either entirely or partially within or adjacent to a designated Flood Plain District, and if so, the location of the boundaries of such Flood Plain District. 

(14) 	
Existing and proposed methods of water supply and sewage disposal and stormwater management. 

(15) 	
Zoning requirements and the degree to which the plan conforms to the same including: (1) applicable zoning districts; and (2) any variance, special exceptions, conditional uses, and/or amendments (including, without limitation, curative amendments) to the Zoning Ordinance (including the Zoning Map) which have been granted or will be required for the proposed subdivision and/or land development. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 33 
Article 4:  Plan Content 
B. 	Drafting of the sketch plan may be done using a CAD program, freehand ink, or pencil to scale on tracing paper, showing entire property boundaries. The scale shall be at the option of the applicant, but is recommended at not more than 200 feet to the 1inch. 
C. 	Photographs of the Tract to be subdivided or developed. 
Section 403: Preliminary Plan 
A preliminary plan shall consist of and be prepared in accordance with the following minimum standards: 
A. 	Drafting Standards 
(1) 	
The plan shall be drawn to a scale of no less than 1inch = 50 feet. 

(2) 	
Dimensions shall be set in feet and decimal feet, bearings in degrees, minutes, and seconds, with errors of closure not to exceed one part per ten thousand (10,000). 

(3) 	
Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the total number of sheets. 

(4) 	
The plan shall bear an adequate legend to indicate clearly which features are existing and which are proposed. 

(5) 	
The original drawing, and all submitted prints thereof, shall be made on sheets of twenty-four (24") by thirty-six inches (36"). 

(6) 	
If the preliminary plan requires more than one sheet, a master sheet at a scale not smaller than 1 inch = 400 feet showing the location of each section as it relates to the entire tract shall accompany the plan. 

(7) 	
Drafting shall be legible, not be freehand and must show the entire property boundary. 

(8) 	
Each sheet shall bear an appropriate title, north arrow, written and graphic scale, and key map showing the location within the Township of the proposed subdivision. 

(9) 	
Plan certifications by the Board, Chester County Planning Commission, Recorder of Deeds, and the Certificate of Accuracy by project professional must be affixed to the cover sheet of each plan set to be recorded. 

(10) 	
A note stating the total number of drawings in the plan set must be placed on the Cover Sheet of each application. 

(11) 	
Sensitive environmental features, as defined in this Ordinance, shall be represented using shading, tinting, and other methods of symbolization which clearly differentiate between categories and degree of hazard or constraint associated with each feature. 


B. 	Site Design and Layout Standards 
(1) 	
A location map for the purpose of locating the tract to be subdivided or developed, at a scale of 1,000 to 2,000 feet to the inch, showing the relation of the tract to adjoining property and to all streets and municipal boundaries existing within 1,000 feet of any part of the tract which is the subject of the subdivision and/or land development. 

(2) 	
A map or series of maps of existing conditions, prepared in accordance with this Ordinance with accompanying narrative as needed, showing the following: 


(a) 	Proposed subdivision or land development name or other identifying title; 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 34 
Article 4:  Plan Content 
(b) 	
Name, address, telephone number, and email address of the applicant and, if the applicant is not the owner of record, the name, address, telephone number, and email address of the owner of record and the interest of the applicant in the subject tract, whether beneficial owner or otherwise. The deed book and page number reference of the deed by which the record owner of the subject property holds title, as well as applicable Chester County tax parcel number or numbers assigned to the tract; 

(c) 	
Name, address, telephone number, email address, signature and seal of the registered professional engineer and land surveyor responsible for the plan; 

(d) 	
Zoning information with respect to the subject tract and adjacent properties including: applicable zoning districts including designated flood plain districts; any zoning district boundary lines which traverse or are within 200 feet of the tract, relevant lot area, lot width, yard, lot coverage and height requirements, with an indication as to conformance to the same; and any variances, special exceptions, conditional uses, and/or amendments (including, without limitation, curative amendments) to the Zoning Ordinance (including the Zoning Map) which have been granted or which will be required for the proposed subdivision and/or land development; 

(e) 	
The date of original preparation and all revision dates, with concise description of each revision; 

(f) 	
Bearings and distances of all boundaries of the tract and along all existing rights-of-way within and adjacent to the tract, noting all monuments or markers (pins) existing in the ground; 

(g) 	
Total acreage of the tract to the nearest square foot, and the acreage of the tract for both total (gross) and net lot area; 

(h) 	
The names and addresses of the record owners of all adjacent tracts (together with the deed book and page number references of their respective deeds by which they hold title, and the Chester County tax parcel number or numbers assigned thereto), the names of all proposed and existing adjacent subdivisions, and the locations and dimensions of any streets, right-of-way easements, and existing deed restrictions; 

(i) 	
The locations and dimensions of all existing streets, railroads, water wells, storm drains, sewers and sewage systems, stormwater management facilities, water mains and feeder lines, fire hydrants, gas, electric, and oil transmission lines, wetlands and other significant features within the property, and such driveways, intersections and utilities within 100 feet of any part of the property proposed to be developed or subdivided; 

(j) 	
The locations, widths, and condition of any public or private streets, ways or places, as the same may be shown on an adopted local, county, or state plan, if such plan exists for the area to be subdivided and or developed. 

(k) 	
Locations of all existing structures on the tract, and distance thereof from lot lines; 

(l) 	
Contour lines at vertical intervals of not more than 2 feet. Actual field surveying or aerial photo interpretation shall be required when public improvements are proposed; and 

(m) 
Location and elevation of the datum to which contour elevations refer. 	Datum used shall be a known, established bench mark. 


(3) 	A full plan of proposed subdivision or land development, prepared in accordance with this Ordinance including as a minimum: 
(a) 	A layout plan of proposed streets, accessways, entrances, exits, and rights-of-way, located to scale, showing all radii, points of curve and points of tangent on centerlines, and scaled stationing at 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 35 
Article 4:  Plan Content 
intervals of 100 feet. Names of streets, and proposed widths of rights-of-way, shoulders, and cartways with a statement of ownership, maintenance responsibilities, and any condition governing their use, shall be shown. 
(b) 	
The location and arrangement of off-street parking, driveways, and any loading facilities, indicating the number of spaces and dimensions, sidewalks and other pedestrian ways indicating the width and surfacing. 

(c) 	
Scaled locations of all lot lines, easements existing or proposed, with scale dimensions of each. Each block shall be numbered, and each lot shall be numbered consecutively in a clockwise direction and separately for each block. Proposed building setback lines shall be shown, with dimensions indicated. Lot area (gross and net), in both acres and square feet, shall be shown for each proposed lot. Wetlands must be depicted. 

(d) 	
Indication of such land to be offered or dedicated for public use and any lots which are intended for commercial or other nonresidential use with a statement of the intended use of all such lots, giving the approximate areas in each case. Proposed parks, playgrounds and other open space areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use shall include a statement of conditions governing such use, ownership and maintenance. 

(e) 	
Stormwater management systems, showing locations of inlets, sizes of pipe gradients, points of discharge, with indication of surface drainage, percent of slope, shall be indicated on all streets by arrows. These items may be shown as part of the Conservation Plan as specified in this Ordinance. 

(f) 	
Sanitary sewers, if required, with the size and material indicated, and any proposed connections with existing or new facilities shall be shown. These items shall be shown as part of the Utilities plan as specified in this Ordinance. 

(g) 	
The location, size and species of trees and screen plantings to be planted as required for buffering and screening by this Ordinance. 

(h) 	
The nature, type and location of water supply systems to serve the subdivision and/or land development, and each lot thereof. 


(4) The Preliminary Plan shall be accompanied by the following supplementary data: 
(a) 	
Tentative profiles along centerline and pavement edge of each proposed street indicated on the preliminary plan, showing existing profile dotted and proposed profile solid, at horizontal scale of 1 inch = 40 feet, with stationing corresponding with the layout plan. Locations of curbs and/or swales, stormwater inlets and culverts, and all existing pipe lines indicating, depths, where applicable, shall be shown. 

(b) 	
Typical street cross-sections, scale 1 inch = 10 feet. 

(c) 	
Where the preliminary plan covers only a portion of the land owned by the applicant , the applicant shall indicate his or her intent for the use of the remaining land which is not subject to the application. In the case of planned continued and similar development, tentative streets shall be indicated to show intended overall circulation. 

(d) 	
Where the subdivision lies partially or completely within any designated flood plain district, or wetland area, or where the same borders on any designated flood plain district, the preliminary plan shall include a map with the following information: 


(i) 	the location and elevation of proposed roads, utilities, building sites, fills, flood or erosion protection facilities; 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 36 
Article 4:  Plan Content 
(ii) 	the areas within and spot elevations of one hundred year flood elevations; and 
(iii) areas subject to special deed restrictions. 
(iv) All such maps shall show contours at intervals of two feet (2') and identify accurately the boundaries of the designated flood district. 
(e) 	
When specifically required by the Township Supervisors or the Township Planning Commission due to concerns about geologic conditions of the tract subsurface conditions shall be shown. 

(f) 	
Notes describing all proposed deed restrictions shall be shown. 

(g) 	
A utilities plan as required by and in accordance with this Ordinance. 

(h) 	
A traffic impact study as required by and in accordance with this Ordinance. 

(i) 	
A water supply study and other water supply information as required by and in accordance with the Ordinance. 


Section 404: Final Plan 
Final plans shall show all information requested by the Township Planning Commission during review of the preliminary plan (unless otherwise specified by the Board) and all information required by the Board as a condition of approval of the preliminary plan, all the information shown on the approved preliminary plan, and all additional information required by this Ordinance. A final plan shall consist of and be prepared in accordance with the following: 
A. 	Drafting Standards 
(1) 	
The plan must be submitted in the form of paper prints made from original drawings on reproducible paper or mylar and shall show the entire area for which construction approval will be requested. Drafting shall not be freehand and drawing shall contain sufficient details and specifications for actual construction. 

(2) 	
Final plans shall be made on sheets of twenty-four inches (24") by thirty-six inches (36"). Where necessary to avoid sheets larger than the maximum size prescribed above, final plans shall be drawn in two or more sections, accompanied by a key diagram showing relative locations of the sections. The scale shall not be less than 50 feet to the inch. All dimensions shall be shown in feet and hundredths of a foot. 


B. 	Site Design and Layout Standards 
(1) 	
The final plan shall contain and be prepared in accordance with the standards for a preliminary plan specified in this Ordinance, except that all data shown shall be accurately calculated with adequate dimensions, and existing contours at 2 foot intervals shall be based upon an accurate ground or aerial topographic survey. The name and seal of the registered engineer and surveyor responsible for preparation of, or who collaborated in, the preparation of the final plan shall be shown. 

(2) 	
The final plan shall indicate the following for each lot in the subdivision: 


(a) 	All straight lot lines and chords and radii of curved lot lines shall be shown and defined in feet and hundredths of a foot by distances, and in degrees, minutes and seconds either by magnetic bearings or by angles of deflection from other lot and street lines. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 37 
Article 4:  Plan Content 
(b) 	
Lot numbers, lot areas both gross and net area in both acres and square feet, and a statement of the total number of lots and parcels, together with post office addresses, as established by Board, shall be shown for each lot. 

(c) 	
A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots. A statement of restrictions of any type which exist as covenants in the deed(s) for all lots contained wholly or in part in the subdivision and, if covenants are recorded, including the deed book and page number. 

(d) 	
All proposed building setback lines and yard requirements for each lot, the proposed placement of each building, and the proposed location of on-site water and sewer facilities (where applicable). 


(3) 	
The following items shall be shown in the final plan and may be indicated as part of the utilities plan as specified by this Ordinance: 

(a) 	
All water main and laterals, with pipe sizes and with type and location of all fire hydrants, where public water or community water system is to be installed. 

(b) 	
All storm and sanitary sewer mains and laterals, with pipe gradients and sizes, and with the location, type, invert and rim elevations for all manholes, where public sewers are to be installed. 

(c) 	
All gas and electric mains and laterals or leads. (May be shown on "As-Built" Plan only, if practical.) 



(4) 	
The following items pertaining to street layout and design shall be shown on the Final Plan: 

(a) 	
Stationing, on centerlines of all streets and corresponding to those shown on the profile, shall be indicated at 50 foot intervals. 

(b) 	
Finished grades shall be shown for: (i) all rights-of-way and tops of curbs (where paving and curbs are to be installed), at all points of curvature and points of tangency, as well as at the intersection of the projected gradient of tops of curb (where curbs are to be installed) at all street intersections, slopes and ramp elevations; (ii) all rim and invert elevations of structures involved in stormwater control or sanitary sewerage; and (iii) all lot corners coincident with the street line. 

(c) 	
Location, size and species of street trees to be planted. 

(d) 	
Location and widths of all proposed curb cuts for individual driveways. 

(e) 	
Profile on centerline and rights-of-way of all streets at horizontal scale of 1 inch = 40 feet and vertical scale of 1 inch equals 4 feet, showing the following information: 

(i) 	
existing profile shall be shown dotted, and proposed profile shall be shown solid, with stationing corresponding to the horizontal plane, locating all points of vertical curvature and points of tangency. 

(ii) 	
where public sanitary sewers are to be installed: all sanitary manholes with rim and invert elevations; all pipe sizes; gradients for mains; and locations for all slants for individual house services. 






(iii) where stormwater drainage is involved profiles of all pipes; sizes and gradients; locations and rim and invert elevations of all manholes, inlets, catch basins or discharge structures; and, locations, inverts and gradients of all culverts. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 38 
Article 4:  Plan Content 
(f) 
Cross-sections, typical for each type of street, showing the following information: 

(i) 	
existing grade shown as a dashed line; finished grade shown as a solid line; one (1) typical cross-section shall be shown where street is in cut, and one (1) shall be shown where is on fill. 

(ii) 	
existing and proposed right-of-way width, and width of cartway; 


(iii) 	type, thickness and crown of paving; 
(iv) 	
type and size of curb; 

(v) 	
location of street trees; location, thickness and width of sidewalks (if to be installed); and the methods by which the street will meet the existing grade at, or beyond, the right­of-way line; and 

(vi) 	
typical location, size and depths of sewers and utilities if such are to be installed. 



(g) 	
Details as appropriate, including: 

(i) 	
typical manholes, catch basins, and inlets, with type and specifications for frames and grates or solid covers; 

(ii) 	
where storm and/or sanitary sewers are involved: all sizes and types of pipe; gradients; details of manholes; pipe bedding for crossings; and discharge details. 




(5) 	
Where the subdivision or land development is entirely or partially within a designated flood plain district: 

(a) 	
A map showing the exact location and elevation of all proposed buildings, structure, roads, and public utilities to be constructed within any designated Flood Plain District. All such maps shall show contours at intervals of 2 feet and identify accurately the boundaries of the designated Flood Plain Districts. 

(b) 	
Where any alteration or relocation of a stream or watercourse is proposed, submission of the final plan shall be accompanied by all required permits and related documentation from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and appropriate local, state or federal agencies. Additionally, documentation shall be submitted indicating that all affected adjacent municipalities have been notified of the proposed alteration or relocation. 



(6) 	
All plans, requiring access to a highway under the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, shall contain a notice that a highway occupancy permit is required pursuant to the State Highway Law, Act of June 1, 1945, P.L. 1241, No. 428, as amended, 36 P.S. §670-420, before driveway access to a State highway is permitted. The Township shall not be held liable for damages to persons or property arising out of the issuance or denial of a driveway permit by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. 


C. 	Record Plan. Such plan for recording shall conform in all respects to the approved final plan and shall be in the form of paper prints made from original drawings on reproducible paper or mylar, and shall meet all the requirements for recording set by the Chester County Recorder of Deeds, after approval by the Board, and shall show the following in addition to such other information as required by this Ordinance. 
(1) 	
An appropriate title. 

(2) 	
Courses and distances sufficient for legal description of all lines shown on the plan. The error of closure shall not be greater than one part in ten thousand (10,000). Omission of any data necessary for 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 39 
Article 4:  Plan Content 
closure shall not be permitted. All lots shall be described to the sides of rights-of-way of proposed streets so that a single deed may be drawn to the Township for possible dedication of the street and other areas by the applicant and landowner. 
(3) 	
Names of abutting owners; names, locations, widths and other dimensions of streets, including centerlines, and location tie-ins by courses and distances to the nearest intersections of all existing planned, approved or recorded streets, and easements, rights-of-way, recreational areas and other public improvements, within the land to be subdivided. 

(4) 	
Evidence that the plan is in conformity with all applicable Township ordinances and regulations. In any instance where such plans do not conform, evidence shall be presented that a waiver, modification, variance or other authorization for such non-conformity has been officially granted. 

(5) 	
Signatures of the Board, signifying approval of the plan, and signed statement by the applicant and landowner, duly acknowledged, concerning any offer of dedication. 


Section 405: Utilities Plan 
Where a separate utilities plan is more practical or has been requested by the Township, the plan shall conform to the following standards: 
A. 	Drafting shall be in accordance with standards specified in this Ordinance. 
B. 	All proposed utilities, easements or rights-of-way where provided for or owned by public or private services and any limitations on such easements or rights-of-way shall be shown. Proposed utilities and rights-of-way and points of tie-in with existing utilities shall be shown and accurately identified on the plan, and easements shall either be shown or specifically described on the plans. Easements should be located in cooperation with the appropriate public utilities. 
C. 	The plan shall show compliance with this Ordinance and approval of the respective utility company involved. 
D. 	Type, location, and area of illumination of all lighting standards, type and location of all fire plugs, manholes, inlets and other storm drainage structures; all sanitary sewers with complete data, and all other information pertaining to utilities necessary for the approval of the Board shall be shown. 
Section 406: Conservation Plan 
A. 	The conservation plan is required to accompany all major subdivision plans, as defined in this Ordinance, and all land developments. The conservation plan shall be clearly drawn to the same scale as the preliminary plan. 
B. 	The conservation plan shall be designed in accordance with and shall contain the drawings and calculations required by the West Nantmeal Township Stormwater and Erosion Control Ordinance of 2013. 
C. 	The conservation plan shall contain a map or maps prepared in accordance with this Ordinance which depict the following features as indicated: 
(1) 	
Proposed lot layout and building envelopes for each lot and, in the case of a land development, the proposed building locations. 

(2) 	
Location of the tree masses and individual trees within a tree mass having a diameter of twenty-four inches (24") or greater at a height of three and one-half (3-1/2) feet above ground; 

(3) 	
Historic resources, including without limitation, structures, ruins, sites, traces, and relationship to the bounds of any National Register Historic District. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 40 
Article 4:  Plan Content 
(4) 	
Existing structures and other improvements. 

(5) 	
Existing paths and trails. 

(6) 	
For final plan applications; site design shall be provided for any parcel which exhibits slope conditions, in the area of the parcel proposed for structures or improvements that exceed fifteen percent (15%) in order to demonstrate the ability of the parcel to accommodate the proposed use. The site design for such parcels shall include: 

(a) 	
The building location; 

(b) 	
Finished floor elevations and grading; and 

(c) 	
The location of driveways and sidewalks indicating the finished grading of these improvements. 



(7) 	
Notations indicating all trees or portions of tree masses proposed to be cleared as part of the proposed subdivision or development plan, together with reasons for such clearing. 

(8) 	
Notations indicating all proposed alterations of the natural grade, whether by cut or by fill, exceeding two feet (2'), together with reasons for such alterations. 


Section 407: Traffic Impact Study 
A. 	The Board, upon recommendation by the Township Planning Commission and Township Engineer, shall require a traffic impact study as part of the application for subdivision and land development under the following situations: 
(1) 	
Where the proposed project abuts or is within 1,000 feet of an existing hazardous street or intersection condition, as determined by the Township’s Comprehensive Plan or Act 209 Study. 

(2) 	
Any subdivision or land development proposal which may generate a potential of 300 one-way trips per day based on the standards of the Institute of Traffic Engineers. 

(3) 	
Any subdivision or land development proposal which has the potential to increase the existing average daily trips by more than 10 percent for projects accessing an arterial road, more than 25 percent for projects accessing a collector road, and more than 50 percent for projects accessing local roads. Where a project proposes accesses on roads of different function, a Traffic Impact Study shall be required when the total trip generation of the project increases the existing average daily trips on either road by the percentages listed above for the functional classification of either road. 

(4) 	
Any subdivision and land development within the Transportation Capital Plan area per the Act 209 Impact Study as adopted by the Board and amended from time to time. 


B. 	Traffic impact studies shall be prepared by a qualified traffic consultant in compliance with the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. The cost of said study shall be the total responsibility of the applicant. The study shall contain as a minimum, the following items, subject to review by the Township Engineer or Traffic Consultant to the Township: 
(1) 	
Study purpose and objective; 

(2) 	
Description and map of the study site and analysis area; 

(3) 	
Existing traffic conditions and level of service in the analysis area; 

(4) 	
Traffic generation and road access points of anticipated development adjacent to the proposed project; 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 41 
Article 4:  Plan Content 
(5) 	
Proposed project trip generation, trip distribution, including peak hour and average daily trips; 

(6) 	
Projected future traffic volumes and level of service for roadways and intersections in the analysis area; 

(7) 	
An assessment of the change in roadway operating conditions resulting from traffic generated by the proposed project; 

(8) 	
An analysis of emergency access; and 

(9) 	
Recommendations for site access and transportation improvements needed to maintain traffic flow to, from, within, and beyond the proposed project site at an acceptable and safe level of service. The Traffic Impact study shall conclude with a list of required improvements, including the estimated costs, timing, and who shall be responsible for such installation. 


C. 	The analysis area of the traffic impact study shall be determined by the Board upon recommendation of the Planning Commission in consultation with the Township Engineer, but shall include as a minimum the roadways and intersections within a one-quarter mile radius of the tract being subdivided or developed. 
D. 	The traffic impact study shall be submitted by the applicant as part of preliminary and final plans for review by the Township Engineer. The study shall comply fully with all requirements of this Ordinance and shall constitute a principal element to be considered by the Board in determining whether or not to approve the preliminary and final plans. 
(1) 	
Projects within the Transportation Service Area, as determined by the West Nantmeal Township Act 209, as amended are subject to the Transportation Capital Impact Fee Schedule. 

(2) 	
Projects outside of the Transportation Service Area that demonstrate a drop in Level of Service below a level C may require mitigation as recommended by the Planning Commission and Township Engineer, The 


Level of Services is determined by the “Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 209, published by the 
Research Board, Nation Research Council, Washington D.C., latest edition. If an existing intersection is functioning at a Level of Service D or lower prior to the development, a reduction in Level of Service is not permitted. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 42 
Article 4:  Plan Content 
Article 5:   Approval and Dedication of Improvements 

Section 501:   Required Improvements 
A. 	The applicant shall construct, install and complete, at no cost to the Township, all streets and other improvements required and proposed in the subdivision and/or land development. All work shall be performed and completed in strict accordance with the approved final plans, with the standards, specifications and requirements of this Ordinance, other applicable ordinances, and the Land Development Improvements Agreement, and, in the absence of any such standards, specifications and requirements, with the applicable provisions of the latest standards, specifications and requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and/or such other governmental agency or body which issues standards, specifications and requirements relevant to the work. 
B. 	No subdivision and/or land development plan shall be finally approved unless either the streets and other improvements have been constructed, installed and completed as aforesaid, or, in lieu of such construction, installation and completion, the applicant deposits with the Township an improvements guarantee in accordance with this Ordinance. 
Section 502:   Conditions of Acceptance of Streets and Other Public Improvements 
Notwithstanding any provision of this Ordinance to the contrary, the Board shall have no obligation to accept dedication of, and/or otherwise take over and make public, any street or other improvement in and/or abutting a subdivision and/or land development. In the event that the Board elects to consider acceptance of dedication of any improvement, the following conditions shall apply to any offer of dedication and the acceptance thereof: 
A. 	All required or proposed improvements (including those not offered for dedication), all utility mains and laterals, and monuments, as shown on the approved plan or plans (including, without limitation, the final subdivision and/or land development plan, the final utilities plan, the final conservation plan, and the final site analysis plan) shall have been constructed, installed and completed in accordance with the approved plan or plans and with all applicable specifications and requirements, all as certified by the Township Engineer. 
B. 	The approved final plan documents shall have been revised to an approved "as-built" condition, in accordance with this Ordinance, showing actual dimensions and conditions of all streets and other improvements as actually constructed, all of the foregoing to be certified by a professional engineer. 
C. 	A maintenance guarantee, with respect to the dedicated improvements, shall have been posted in accordance with the Article. 
D. 	A deed or deeds of dedication for the dedicated improvements, containing such terms and in such form as shall be acceptable to the Township Solicitor, which have (has) been prepared, executed and duly acknowledged by all owners and other holders of interest in and of the land upon which the dedicated improvements are situate along with a policy of title insurance. 
E. 	The dedication of public roads may only occur between April 1st and August 31st of any calendar year. 
Section 503: Public Utilities 
All water, gas, sewers and other utilities, and all pipes, conduits, slants, laterals and service connections and appurtenances related thereto, which are planned for installation under the cartway, shall be installed prior to the paving of the street, with service connections extended to the street line. All electrical, telephone, television and other cable laid under the cartway shall be placed in approved "pull-through" conduit. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 43 
Article 5:  Approval and Dedication of Improvements 
Section 504:   Inspections of Work and Materials, and Cease and Desist Order 
A. 	All work and materials for the construction of required improvements shall be subject to inspection by a duly authorized official of the Township, or the Township Engineer. If such inspection reveals that work and/or materials is/are not in accordance with approved plans, with the provisions of this or other applicable ordinance, with other applicable standards, specifications and requirements, with the terms of the permit issued therefor, or that erosion and sediment controls are failing to prevent accelerated erosion or waterborne sediment from leaving the site of construction, then said official is empowered to require corrections to be made, to suspend or revoke building or other applicable permits, and/or to issue a cease and desist order which may include, without limitation, any or all of the following until the cease and desist order is terminated as hereinafter provided: 
(1) 	
That no lot in the subdivision shall be conveyed. 

(2) 	
That all or a portion of the construction or other development on any lots, or any other part of the subdivision or land development, for which a building or other permit has been issued, shall cease. 

(3) 	
That no further building or other permits for any lots or other parts of the subdivision or land development shall be issued. 


B. 	Resumption of Construction. The said cease and desist order shall be terminated upon determination by the Board that the said defects or deviations in the work and/or material have been corrected. 
C. 	Schedule of Inspections. 
(1) 	
Notice shall be given to the Township Engineer at least 48 hours in advance of any construction operation to provide for required inspections. 

(2) 	
No underground pipes, structures, subgrades, or base courses shall be covered until inspected and approved by the Township Engineer. If a developer fails to comply with this regulation, he may be required to uncover such work at his expense to permit the required inspection. 

(3) 	
The following inspections by a duly authorized official of the Township shall be required. These inspections by such official shall be effected in accordance with this section and shall occur at the following intervals: 

(a) 	
Prior to clearing and rough grading (for erosion control inspection); 

(b) 
Upon completion of rough grading, but prior to placing top soil, installing permanent drainage or other site improvements, or establishing covers; 

(c) 	
Upon excavation and completion of subgrade; 

(d) 
Upon excavation, installation, and completion of drainage facilities and structures; community sewage systems, or water supply systems as applicable; 

(e) 	
Before placing stone base courses, or before initial layer of screening; 

(f) 	
Before binder course; 

(g) 	
Before wearing course; and 

(h) 	
At final inspection. 




West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 44 
Article 5:  Approval and Dedication of Improvements 
Section 505:   Improvements Guarantee 
A. 	In lieu of the construction, installation and completion of any improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a subdivision and/or development plan, the applicant shall deposit with the Township financial security in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of constructing, installing and completing the improvements and common amenities including, but not limited to, streets, walkways, curbs, gutters, street lights, fire hydrants, shade trees, street trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, stormwater detention and/or retention basins and other related drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open space improvements, and buffer or screen plantings. 
B. 	When requested by the applicant, in order to facilitate financing, the Board shall furnish the applicant with a signed copy of a resolution or a letter indicating approval of the final plan contingent upon the applicant obtaining satisfactory financial security. The final plan or record plan shall not be signed by the Board nor recorded until the Subdivision/Land Development Improvements Agreement and Financial Security Agreement, providing for the financial security, are executed as provided herein. 
C. 	Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the Board may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, Federal or Commonwealth chartered lending institution irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for the purposes of this section. 
D. 	Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or Federal or Commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by the applicant, provided that said bonding company or lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the Commonwealth. 
E. 	Such financial security shall provide for, and secure to the public, the construction, installation and completion of the improvements on or before the date fixed in the formal action of the Board approving the final subdivision and/or land development plan, or in the Subdivision/Land Development Improvements Agreement. 
F. 	The amount of financial security shall be equal to 110 percent of the cost of completion of the improvements estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion. Annually, the Board may adjust the amount of the financial security by comparing the actual cost of the improvements, which have been completed and the estimated cost for the completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day after either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the Board may require the developer to post additional security in order to assure that the financial security equals said 110 percent. Any additional security shall be posted by the applicant in accordance with this subsection. 
G. 	The amount of financial security shall be based upon an estimate of the cost of completion of the improvements, submitted by the applicant and prepared by a professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth and certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The Board, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant and the Board are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth and chosen mutually by the Board and the applicant. The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the Township and the applicant. 
H. 	If the applicant requires more than one year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the required improvements, the amount of financial security may be. increased by an additional 10 percent for each one-year period beyond the first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount not exceeding 110 percent of the cost of completing the improvements as reestablished on or about the, expiration of the preceding one-year period by using the above cost-of-completion estimating procedure. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 45 
Article 5:  Approval and Dedication of Improvements 
I. 	In the case where the subdivision or land development is projected over a period of years, the Board may authorize submission of final plans by sections or stages of subdivision or development subject to such requirements or guarantees as to improvements in future sections as the Board finds essential for the protection of any finally approved section or stage of the subdivision or development. 
J. 	As the work of installing the improvements proceeds the applicant may request the Board to release or authorize the release, from time to time, such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing addressed to the Board, and the Board shall have 45 days from receipt of such request within which to allow the Township Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Board that such portion of the work upon the improvements has been completed in accordance with the approved final plan. 
Upon such certification, the Board shall authorize release by the bonding, company or lending institution of an amount as estimated by the Township Engineer fairly representing the value of the improvements completed or, if the Board fails to act within said 45-day period, the Board shall be deemed to have approved the Release of funds as requested. The Board may, prior to final release at the time of completion and certification by the Township Engineer, require retention of 10 percent of the estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements. 
K. 	If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal authority separate and distinct from the Township, financial security to assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or municipal authority, and shall not be included within the financial security as otherwise required by this section. 
L. 	Final release of and from the improvements guarantee shall be in accordance with this Ordinance. 
Section 506:  As-Built Plans 
Within 30 days after completion and approval by the Township Engineer of all improvements, the applicant shall submit two copies of an "As-Built" plan showing the actual locations, dimensions, and conditions of streets and other improvements, including easements, and geometry and monument locations, all as certified by a registered professional engineer to be in accordance with actual construction. 
A. 	Review: The Township Engineer shall review the As-Built Plan including all corrections and shall make recommendations for any corrections that are required. 
B. 	The applicant shall submit two (2) copies of plans upon acceptance by the Township Engineer for the Township Records. 
Section 507: Township Responsibility to Accept Improvements 
A. 	The Township shall have no responsibility with respect to any open space, street, or other improvements, notwithstanding the use of the same by the public, unless dedication, in accordance with this Ordinance, of such open space, street or other improvement is accepted by ordinance or resolution duly enacted and adopted by the Board. 
B. 	The Board may require that maintenance and repair of stormwater retention and/or detention basins or other improvements, dedication of which is not offered or has not been accepted, shall be and remain the responsibilities of individual lot owners, a property owners association or similar entity, or other organization capable of carrying out such maintenance and repair responsibilities. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 46 
Article 5:  Approval and Dedication of Improvements 
Section 508:   Release from Improvements Guarantee 
A. 	When the applicant has completed all of the improvements which are the subject of the improvements guarantee, the applicant shall notify the Board in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer. The Board shall, within 10 days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the Township Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The Township Engineer shall, thereupon, file a report, in writing, with the Board, and shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the applicant by certified or registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the Township Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Board. The report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineer, the report shall contain a statement of reasons for such non-approval or rejection. 
B. 	The Board shall notify the applicant within 15 days of receipt of the Township Engineer's report in writing by certified or registered mail of the action of the Board with relation thereto. 
C. 	If the Board or the Township Engineer fail to comply with the time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements, subject to the improvements guarantee, shall be deemed to have been approved and the applicant shall be released from all liability pursuant to the improvements guarantee. 
D. 	If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Board, the applicant shall proceed to complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification, as provided hereinabove, shall be followed. 
E. 	Nothing herein shall be construed as a limitation of the applicant's right to contest or question, by legal proceedings or otherwise, any determination of the Board or the Township Engineer. 
Section 509:   Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements 
In the event that any improvements have not been constructed, installed and completed, as provided in this Ordinance, or in accordance with the approved final subdivision and/or land development plans and supplemental materials, and/or the Land Development Improvements Agreement, the Board shall have the power to enforce the financial security, provided under the improvements guarantee, or such other available corporate bond or other security, by appropriate legal and/or equitable remedies. If the proceeds of the security are insufficient to pay the cost of construction, installing or completing, or of· making repairs or corrections to, all the improvements covered by said security, the Board may, at its option, construct, install, complete, repair and/or correct part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision and/or land development, and may institute appropriate legal or equitable actions to recover monies necessary to construct, install, complete, repair and/or correct the remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable actions brought against the applicant, or both, shall be used solely for the construction, installation, completion, repair, and/or correction of the improvements covered by the security, and not for any other municipal purpose. 
Section 510: Maintenance Guarantee 
A. 	Where the Board accepts dedication of all or some of the improvements following completion (whether dedication is of fee, easement or other interest), the Board shall require the posting of maintenance security to secure the structural integrity of the .said improvements and the functioning of the same in accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the approved final plan for a term of 18 months from the date of acceptance of dedication. The maintenance security shall be of an amount equal to 15 percent of the actual cost of installing said improvement. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 47 
Article 5:  Approval and Dedication of Improvements 
B. 	Where maintenance and repair of stormwater retention and/or detention facilities, streets, and other improvements are the responsibilities of individual lot owners, a property owner's association or similar entity, or other organization capable of carrying out maintenance and repair responsibilities, the Board may require that such responsibilities be set forth in perpetual covenants or deed restrictions, running with the land and binding upon the landowner's successors in interest, and may further require that a fund for the initial maintenance and repair be established in a reasonable amount. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 48 
Article 5:  Approval and Dedication of Improvements 
Article 6:   Design Standards 

Section 601:   General 
A. 	The following standards shall apply to all subdivision and land development proposals and are intended as a minimum for the promotion of public health, safety, and welfare. 
B. 	All proposed subdivisions and land development plans shall comply fully with the applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. No lot or other parcel of land shall be created in a proposed subdivision or land development, either by inclusion or exclusion, which cannot be properly utilized for a use permitted under the Zoning Ordinance. 
C. 	Improvements to the property being subdivided and/or developed shall be provided, constructed, installed and completed as shown on the approved final plan and in accordance with Article IV and other applicable provisions of this Ordinance. 
D. 	The design of all improvements in a subdivision or land development shall be in accordance with the design specifications, standards, and requirements, as set forth in this Article and other provisions of this Ordinance and/or other applicable Ordinances, or, in the absence of the foregoing, in accordance with applicable provisions of the latest design specifications, standards, and requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and/or such other governmental agency or body which promulgates or otherwise issues design standards, specifications, and requirements relevant to the work. In the event that there are no design specifications, standards, or requirements, as aforesaid, applicable to the design of any improvements, or parts thereof, in a subdivision or land development, the design, and the specifications, standards and requirements proposed by the applicant, for such improvements, shall be subject to approval of the Township Engineer. 
E. 	All portions of a tract being subdivided shall be utilized in lots, streets, public lands or other proposed uses so that remnants and landlocked areas shall not be created. 
F. 	When only a portion of a tract or single holding is the subject of a subdivision or land development application, a sketch layout shall be included for the balance of the tract. 
G. 	Applicants shall make every effort to preserve trees, groves, waterways, scenic points, historic spots and other community assets and landmarks. 
H. 	Subdivisions and land developments shall be laid out so as to avoid the necessity for excessive cut or fill unless specifically warranted by terrain or location. 
I. 	All-purpose community water supply systems must follow the guidelines of the Delaware River Basin Commission and must be approved by the Department of Environmental Protection if applicable. If a Pennsylvania Public Utility commission franchise approval is required, evidence of such approval shall be required prior to Final Plan approval. 
J. 	Where the subdivision or land development is inaccessible to future sanitary sewers, the Supervisors shall require the applicant to obtain from the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, prior to final plan approval, certificates of approval of the sewage disposal facilities. 
K. 	Applicants shall observe and meet the ultimate rights-of-way for contiguous existing streets. Additional portions of the right-of-way for such streets shall be irrevocably offered to PADOT or to the Township at no public cost. At the time of approva1 of the subdivision or land development, such agency shall have the right to accept any offer in accordance with the law. Applicable building setback lines as specified by the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance shall be delineated as measured from the ultimate right-of-way line. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 49 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
L. 	Proposed subdivision and land developments shall be coordinated with existing nearby neighborhoods so that the community as a whole may develop harmoniously. 
M. 	Improvement construction requirements shall be completed under current Publication 408 specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, the Chester County Conservation District, or other appropriate agencies, or the specifications included herein, whichever specifications shall be more stringent. 
N. 	The applicant shall construct and install at no expense to the Township, the streets, curbs, sidewalks, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, street lights, fire hydrants, street signs, shade trees, monuments and other facilities and utilities specified in this Ordinance. Construction and installation of such facilities and utilities shall be subject to inspection by appropriate Township officials or their agents during the progress of the work and the applicant shall pay for such inspections. 
O. 	In all proposed subdivisions the lots shall have the specified lot width at the street line and shall abut a proposed or existing public or private street meeting the specifications of this Ordinance to provide safe ingress and egress. In any proposed new subdivision involving four (4) or more new residential lots or units, all such lots and/or units shall be designed so as to abut a new public or private street to provide safe ingress and egress and to reduce the number of new driveways entering existing Township roads or State highways. 
P. 	The standards of design in this Article should be used to judge the adequacy of subdivision proposals. Wherever, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the literal application of these standards in certain cases would serve to create an undue hardship, be plainly· unreasonable to the applicant, or be contrary to the public health, safety, welfare, the Township Planning Commission may recommend to the Board such reasonable waiver as will not be contrary to the public interest. The Supervisors may, at their discretion, modify or adjust the standards to permit utilization of property while securing substantial conformance with the objectives of these regulations. 
Q. 	All proposed improvements and the use of land shall be suited to the purposes for which the land is to be subdivided or developed and shall conform to the Township Zoning Ordinance and the Township Comprehensive Plan. No subdivision or land development shall be designed in a manner which is topographically unsuitable or would increase danger to health, life or property, or aggravate existing erosion or flood hazards. 
R. 	The standards included in these regulations are minimum design requirements. The Supervisors reserve the right in any case to require that development features or facilities exceed these standards if conditions so warrant. 
S. 	To the maximum possible extent, storm water shall be retained on site and ultimately percolated into the ground rather than permitted to drain off in order to minimize the flood-enhancing potential of a subdivision or land development and to maximize the recharge of ground water supplies within West Nantmeal Township. 
Section 602: Blocks 
A. 	Length: Blocks in excess of 1,600 feet in length shall not be permitted in the absence of special conditions deemed by the Board to warrant greater length. 
B. 	Width: Blocks shall have a depth of two lots in width and, except for lots located at street intersections, no single lot shall have two street frontages with the exception of corner lots and reverse frontage lots which are in accordance with this Ordinance. 
C. 	Crosswalks: In blocks over 1,000 feet in length, and when required for access to open space, a dedicated right­of-way with a minimum width of 15 feet shall be provided for a crosswalk at or near the middle of such blocks 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 50 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
in such instances as may be deemed by the Board to be necessary for the safety and convenience of the public. All crosswalks must meet accessibility standards by ANSI A117.1 or as amended for width and slope. 
Section 603:   Lots 
A. 	Lot Area and Lot Width; Building Setback Line. The minimum area, width, and building setback lines for lots shall be as provided in the area, width, and yard regulations of the Zoning Ordinance for the applicable district. 
B. 	Lot Frontage. All lots in a subdivision shall front upon a public street or a private street constructed in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, and the length of such frontage measured along the street line shall be equal to the required minimum lot width at the street line as provided by and in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance. Any proposed new subdivision involving 4 or more lots shall require lot frontage on a new public or private street. 
C. 	Reverse Frontage Lot. 
(1) 	Any proposed lots abutting a designated arterial or major collector street in the Township shall be designed as reverse frontage lots having access to an interior street with a lower function. This requirement may be waived by the Board if, in its judgment: 
(a) 	The advantages to the Township of compliance with this standard are outweighed by the inability of the applicant to meet other requirements of this Ordinance or the Zoning Ordinance; 
And 
(b) 	Compliance would be unreasonable or impractical due to the size of the proposed development, configuration of the site, and other characteristics unique to the site of the proposed development. 
(2) 	All residential lots using reverse frontage shall have a rear yard with a minimum depth of 75 feet, measured from the shortest distance from the proposed dwelling unit to the ultimate right-of-way, and shall, within such rear yard and immediately adjacent to the right-of-way, have a buffer and effective screen of at least 10 feet in width (notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance to the contrary). 
D. 	Lot Dimensions. Excessively deep lots shall be avoided where practicable, and the depth of residential lots shall generally not be less than one or more than three times the lot width. 
E. 	Lot Lines. Wherever practicable, the side lot lines shall be perpendicular to straight street lines, and radial to curved street lines and cul-de-sac turnarounds. Where feasible, lot lines shall follow municipal boundaries rather than, cross them, in order to avoid jurisdictional problems. 
F. 	Building Numbers. The numbers for all dwellings, buildings and other structures shall be assigned by the Board in accordance with Chester County Emergency Management numbering systems. 
G. 	Flag Lot(s). Flag lots shall meet the requirements of the definition of such in this Ordinance. Each proposed flag lot access strip shall be separated from any other proposed such access strip by a minimum distance of 200 feet. 
Section 604: Monuments and Lot Pins 
A. 	Monuments of 4 inch by 4 inch by 30 inch concrete shall be placed at tract perimeter corners, street intersections, angle points, beginning and ending of all curves, and at such other locations along the right-of­way lines as the Township Engineer shall designate. All such monuments shall be shown on the preliminary plan, final plan and Record plan. 
B. 	Lot pins of not less than three quarter inch (3/4”) iron pipe three feet in length shall be placed by the applicant at all lot corners and driven flush with the ground. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 51 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
C. 	All monuments and pins shall be shown on the required as-built plans. 
Section 605:   Sewage Treatment and Disposal 
A. 	General Requirements 
(1) 	
Each lot shall have approved sewage facilities in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the Chester County Health Department. 

(2) 	
All sanitary sewer facilities shall be subject to the requirements of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act and the rules and regulations there under of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection including without limitation, those at 25 Pa.Code, Chapters 71, 72, and 73, as amended and the rules and regulations of the Chester County Health Department. 

(3) 	
The applicant shall provide the highest type of sanitary sewage disposal facility consistent with existing physical, geographical; and geological conditions of the site. The highest type of facility is considered to be a facility which provides adequate protection against pollution of the environment over the lifetime of the development. 

(4) 	
All lots which cannot be connected with an operational public or operational community sanitary sewage disposal system at the time of construction of a principal building shall be provided with an on-site sanitary sewage disposal system which shall, as a minimum requirement, meet the design standards of prevailing regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the Chester County Department of Health. 

(5) 	
All subdivisions and land developments proposing individual or community subsurface or land application sewage systems shall provide either an alternative disposal area for a community sewage system or an alternative disposal area for each individual lot for on-lot disposal systems, which meet the required horizontal isolation or setback distances and other requirements under the rules and regulations of Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. The applicant shall clearly indicate these areas on the preliminary and final plan for each lot requiring such a system in the proposed subdivision or land development. 

(6) 	
In no case shall sanitary sewers and storm sewers be combined. No on-site sewage disposal system shall be connected with a capped sewer. 

(7) 	
If any individual on-lot sewage system is approved by DEP or the Chester County Health Department which results in stream discharge of a treated sewage effluent, such discharge shall be to a stream located on the lot or tract. Otherwise, off-lot easements for such effluent flow shall be obtained to the point of discharge. 


B. 	Sanitary Sewage Disposal Systems 
(1) 	
Wherever an applicant proposes that individual onsite sanitary sewage disposal systems shall be utilized, the applicant shall either install such facilities or shall require by deed restriction or other means and/or manner acceptable to the Board, as a condition of the sale or lease of each lot, that such facilities shall be installed by the purchaser of such lot or parcel at the time that the first principal building is constructed, and in accordance with these regulations. 

(2) 	
Where studies by the Township indicate that start of construction or extension of sanitary trunk, sewers to serve the property being subdivided or developed appears probable within a period of five years, the Board may require the installation and capping of sanitary sewer mains and all laterals to the street right-of-way line. All mains shall be terminated at manholes or suitably capped as directed by the Township Engineer. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 52 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
(3) 	
Where any buildings are to be occupied or conveyed prior to the extension of a sewer system to the subdivision of land development, the applicant shall, install approved on-site sewage disposal facilities or require as a condition of sale that such facilities shall be installed in accordance with this Section in addition to the provision of capped sewers as required in this Ordinance. The cost of such installation shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 

(4) 	
All sanitary sewer systems to be located in any designated flood plain district shall comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. 


C. 	Soil Suitability Analysis Requirements. 
(1) 	
Deep hole and percolation tests shall be made in accordance with the procedure required by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the Chester County Health Department. 

(2) 	
The results of the above tests shall be analyzed in relation to the physical characteristics of the tract being developed and of the general area surrounding the tract. The lot layout of the preliminary and final plan shall be based on this analysis. The analysis shall indicate that each lot to be served by on-site sanitary sewage disposal facilities is of a size and shape to accommodate' the necessary size of absorption area and alternate area at a safe isolation distance from water supply wells and proposed and existing buildings, in accordance with the isolation distance rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, as administered by the Chester County Health Department. The location of the deep hole tests, the location and size of existing and proposed-on-site sanitary sewage disposal facilities, and the location of existing and proposed buildings and water supply wells shall be shown on the preliminary and final plans. 

(3) 	
Backfilling of all percolation test holes and related test pits shall be accomplished within the time period specified in accordance with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act and/or the rules and regulations thereunder of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. All test holes must be secured overnight for safety. 


D. 	Community Systems. 
In such cases where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities are not available and onsite facilities are not approved, the applicant shall provide a complete community sanitary sewage disposal system. The design and installation of any community system shall be subject to the approval of the Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), and such systems shall be further subject to satisfactory provisions for the maintenance thereof. A copy of the approval of such, system shall be submitted with the final plan application or as soon as permitted by the DEP. 
Section 606: Water Supply 
A. 	Purpose 
The following are the purposes of this section which are not in limitation of but are in expansion of the purpose of this Ordinance set forth at Section 102: 
(1) 	
To protect the public health and welfare by monitoring and evaluating the demands of development on the water supply and fire fighting capabilities. 

(2) 	
To establish reasonable standards when applicants for subdivisions must submit a detailed study on the impact of their subdivision and/or land development on the water resources and fire fighting capabilities in the Township. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 53 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
(3) 	
To recognize that West Nantmeal Township may be designated as a Ground Water Protection Area (GPA) requiring applicants to prove they are in conformance with Delaware River Basin Commission withdrawal regulations. 

(4) 	
To otherwise ensure that subdivisions and land developments incorporate adequate provisions for a reliable, safe and adequate water supply to support intended uses within the capacity of available resources. 


B. 	General Requirements 
(1) 	
Water supply shall in all cases be in accordance with the requirements of the DEP and the Chester County Health Department. 

(2) 	
For any subdivision and land development which involves more than twenty-five (25) residential dwellings of any type or for any land development plan involving commercial and/or industrial building(s) exceeding twenty thousand square feet (20,000 sq. ft.) in gross floor area, the applicant shall provide evidence that each such dwelling unit, commercial, or industrial building shall be connected to an adequate supply of central, potable water meeting: 

(a) 	
The water quality standards established and administered by county, state and federal agencies; and 

(b) 	
The fire protection and domestic water supply standards established by this Ordinance. 



(3) 	
For any subdivision or land development proposing an average monthly water withdrawal of ten thousand gallons per day (10,000 gpd) or more from a single well, the applicant may be required to show evidence of compliance with the Delaware River Basin Commission Ground Water Protection Areas regulations, as required by this Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Any water system to be located in any designated flood plain district shall comply with the provisions of the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
In the event that water is to be provided to a subdivision or land development by means other than by private wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the subdivision or land development, the applicant shall present evidence to the Board that water to the subdivision or land development is to be supplied by a private water association, by a certificated public utility, by a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a Certificate of Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence. Such evidence shall be submitted as part of the preliminary plan submission of the subdivision or land development. 


C. 	On-Site Water Facilities. 
(1) 	On-site water systems shall be designed and, installed in accordance with all the applicable standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the Chester County Health Department. 
D. 	Central (Public), Water Facilities. 
(1) 	
Each central water system shall comply with the regulations of the Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission (PUC), where applicable, and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
If the applicant proposes that the subdivision or land development be served by a central water supply system, the applicant shall submit a proposed water supply study as evidence of sufficient water quality and quantity. The contents of this study shall include those specific items as described in the Public Water Supply Manual of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Where the water supply system occurs under the jurisdiction of the PUC, the water supply study shall also include those items of 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 54 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
information required by the PUC. Said study shall be submitted and reviewed as part of a preliminary plan submission. 
(3) 	
The design and installation of a central water system shall be subject to the review by the Township and shall be subject to the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and such system shall be further subject to satisfactory provisions for the maintenance thereof. Standards and materials for the construction of any central water supply system shall meet or exceed those requirements described in the Public Water Supply Manual of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the rules and regulations of that Department at 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 109, and shall be subject to the approval of the Township Engineer. 

(4) 	
Where a permit is required by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, it shall be presented as evidence of Department review and approval before construction commences. 

(5) 	
Fire Hydrants. Wherever a public or non-public water system is provided, the Supervisors may require, where necessary to ensure public safety, fire hydrants (or dry hydrants connected to ponds) suitable for coupling of fire fighting equipment serving the Township. The location of hydrants shall be approved by the Township and shall be located and installed in accordance with the regulations in the West Nantmeal Township Fire Code or this Ordinance, whichever is more stringent. 


E. 	Evidence of Ground Water Protected Area Compliance. If and when West Nantmeal Township is designated as a GPA, the applicant shall submit with the final plan evidence of compliance with Ground Water Protection Area (GPA) regulations. Where the rules and regulations of GPA do not apply to the subdivision or land development, the applicant shall include as evidence a statement to this effect on the final plan. Where rules and regulations of GPA do apply to the subdivision or land development, the applicant shall submit a copy of a completed and approved GPA permit to the Township with the final plan including the following: 
(1) 	
A map showing local existing wells and perennial streams; 

(2) 	
A hydrogeologist's report indicating the effects of the proposed withdrawal on existing wells, flows of perennial streams and long-term lowering of ground water levels; 

(3) 	
A log indicating the type of subsurface material found during exploration or installation of wells; 

(4) 	
Results from the pump test which must extend for 48 to 72 hours and drawdown results from local existing wells during tests; and 

(5) 	
Withdrawals in excess of one hundred thousand gallons per day (100,000 gpd) shall also indicate compliance with Article III of the Delaware River Basin Commission rules and regulations. 


F. 	Additional Regulations. Any subdivision or land development which involves more than twenty five (25) residential dwellings of any-type or any industrial-or commercial building(s) exceeding 20,000 sq. ft. in gross area may be required to provide a proposed public water supply study in accordance with the following: 
(1) 	
The applicant shall submit with the preliminary plan, five (5) copies of documentation which shall be designated as "Proposed Public Water Supply Study." 

(2) 	
The water supply study shall contain the name, address, and telephone number of the proposed public water supplier (the company, public utility, association, or municipal corporation or authority proposed by the applicant to supply water to the subdivision or land development.) In addition, there shall be provided a complete description of the source of the water supply, the quantity of water available, from the source or sources, the capacity of existing or proposed reservoirs and their locations, and other pertinent data if surface water is to be utilized. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 55 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
(3) 	
If wells are to be utilized as part of the proposed water supply system, the following shall be supplied with or as part of the water supply study: the number of wells, the pumping capacity of each well, the number of hours per day that each well pump operates, the depth of each well, depth of water table in each well, diameter of well casing, drawdown rated capacity of each well, and the maximum sustained yield from the well test, together with a copy of the well test data. 

(4) 	
The study shall outline the size of proposed water mains to be utilized for the subdivision or land development and the number and location of proposed fire hydrants within or near the development, Further, the study shall contain the number of residential customers on the existing system (if any), the number of proposed new residential, commercial or industrial customers, and the estimated number of gallons required to service both the existing (if any) and proposed system when the subdivision or land development plan is completed. 

(5) 	
Within the study, a description shall be provided outlining the service area of customers to be provided. If the utility is regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, notations shall be made as to whether the proposed subdivision or land development falls within the supplier's approved franchise area. If it is necessary to obtain PUC approval to extend a franchise area to the site to be covered, such approval shall become a condition precedent to final subdivision or land development approval. 

(6) 	
The proposed public water supply study submitted by the applicant shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer in conjunction with the preliminary plan. The Township Engineer shall make a recommendation to the Board with respect to the applicant's compliance with this section of this Ordinance. The Board reserves the right in its sole discretion to require a further independent engineering study as to the adequacy of the proposed water supply system in the event the Township Engineer recommends that a further study is warranted. The applicant shall bear the cost of such independent engineering study. A final subdivision or land development plan shall not be approved unless and until all requirements of this Ordinance are fully met. 

(7) 	
With regard to minimum water supply requirements, each residential dwelling shall be provided with a minimum domestic pressure of thirty (30) pounds per square inch at the house connection and a minimum of three hundred (300) gallons of potable water per dwelling unit per day. For each commercial or industrial use, a minimum pressure of 30 pounds per square inch shall be provided which meets all potable water supply requirements for the intended use. In addition, each commercial or industrial use must provide sufficient water for fire flow for a minimum duration of two hours of not less than 500 gallons per minute at residual pressures of 20 pounds per square inch. 

(8) 	
Fire hydrants for residential, commercial or industrial development shall be spaced at intervals as required by the Township Fire Code, or at intervals of every 600 feet within the proposed development when fire storage is required, whichever is more stringent. 

(9) 	
All required potable water shall meet the water quality standards as established by the Chester County Health Department. 


Section 607: Other Utilities 
A. 	All other utility lines including, but not limited to, electric, gas, street light supply, cable television, and telephone shall be placed underground and within appropriate easements or rights-of-way. Installation of all utilities shall be in strict accordance with the engineering standards and specifications of the Township, any duly formed municipal authority, or other public utility concerned. All such underground utilities shall be approved before the streets are constructed, where such utilities lie under the proposed cartway, and before any person is permitted to occupy any building to be served by such utilities. Utilities shall be installed before the base and screenings are put into place within the cartway, with service connections extended to the street line. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 56 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
B. 	In accordance with the provisions or Act of December 10, 1974, P.L. 852, No. 287, as amended, 73 P.S. §176 et seq., any applicant shall contact all applicable utilities and accurately determine the locations and depths of all underground utilities within the boundaries of the tract proposed for development prior to excavation. A list of the applicable utilities and their phone numbers shall appear on the plans submitted for review, and proof of contact shall be presented to the Township prior to final plan approval. 
C. 	All electrical, telephone, television and other cable laid under the cartway shall be placed in approved "pull­through" conduit. 
Section 608: Stormwater Management, Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
A. 	General Requirements 
(1) 	
No grading, excavating, removal or other movement of the topsoil and no removal or destruction of trees or other vegetative cover of the land shall commence until such time that a conservation plan as required by this Ordinance has been reviewed by the Township Planning Commission and approved by the Board, or until a determination that such plan is not necessary has been made by the Board upon recommendation of the Planning Commission. 

(2) 	
No subdivision or land development plans shall be approved unless either (i) there has been a plan approved by the Board that provides for minimizing erosion and sedimentation consistent with this Section and an improvements guarantee in accordance with the regulations of West Nantmeal Township, which will ensure the installation and completion of the required improvements, is deposited, or (ii) there has been a determination by the Board that a conservation plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation is unnecessary, according to the procedure for waivers outlined in this ordinance. 

(3) 	
Subdivision or land development plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep cut-and fill operations to a minimum, and ensure conformity with topography so as to create the least erosion potential and adequately handle surface water runoff. 

(4) 	
Stormwater Management Regulations are governed by the West Nantmeal Township Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Ordinance of 2013 which includes the provision of the Act 167 Chester County Water Resources and Conestoga Watershed Act 167, as amended. 


Section 609: Community Facilities and Public Open Spaces 
A. 	Provision shall be made for reservation and/or dedication of suitable areas for parks, playgrounds or other recreation areas (or fees in lieu of such provisions according to Resolution 168, or as amended). 
B. 	In reviewing any subdivision plan, the Planning Commission and the Board will consider the adequacy of existing open space or proposed community facilities to serve the additional dwellings proposed by the Subdivision. 
C. 	Land provided or reserved for such community facilities should be adequate to provide for active and passive open space, building sites, landscaping and off-street parking as appropriate to the use proposed. Such areas should be located in a manner to best serve the public likely to use the same and to utilize, to the greatest extent, any topographical features. 
D. 	For any subdivision exceeding 25 lots, an open space/recreational area shall be set aside on the basis of 10 percent of the gross site area. As a minimum, 60 percent of such open area shall: have slopes of less than 7 percent; be free of all flood hazards and wet soils; be free of rock outcrops; and shall generally be suitable for the intended use. Ownership and maintenance of such open space shall be determined by the Board prior to final plan approval. The Board shall not be obligated to accept open space areas, tracts or parcels. Any offer of such dedication, if accepted by the Board, shall be clearly indicated on the final plan. A fee in lieu of open space 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 57 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
(according to Resolution 168, or as amended) shall be required if the Board determines that the quality of open space proposed is inadequate. 
Section 610: Landscaping and Screening 
A. 	Screening. A screen as defined in this Ordinance shall be required in the following situations: 
(1) 	
When a proposed non-residential use in any zoning district abuts an existing residential use in any zoning district or a residential zoning district boundary (R-1, R-2 and R-3) 

(2) 	
When a residential use proposal of greater density abuts an existing residential use or residential zoning district boundary. 


B. 	Screening Requirements. A landscape screen with a minimum width of ten feet shall be installed to separate the incompatible uses. The screen shall be composed of evergreen and deciduous trees spaced in two alternating rows on 10 foot centers. The plantings shall be so placed that at maturity they will be no closer than 3 feet from any street or right-of-way line. 
(1) 	
Earthen Berm. In the event such plantings do not alone provide an effective screen, the Board, upon recommendation of the Township Planning Commission, may require plantings to be placed on an earthen berm having a height from 3 feet to 5 feet to increase the effectiveness of the screen. 

(2) 	
Use of Existing Vegetation. Wherever possible existing tree lines, stands of trees, individual trees, and specimen trees shall be preserved and incorporated into the screen. 


C. 	Landscaping. Any part or portion of a lot or tract which is not occupied by buildings nor used for loading and parking spaces and aisles, sidewalks and designated storage areas shall be landscaped in accordance with a landscape plan, prepared and approved as part of applicable subdivision/land development plan(s). The landscape plan shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect. 
(1) 	
Landscape plans shall be submitted at the time when all other required applications and/or plans are submitted (i.e., preliminary subdivision or land development plan submission, conditional use approval application where applicable, etc.). 

(2) 	
The landscape plan shall depict all proposed plantings required to compliment, screen or accentuate buildings, roads, parking areas, sidewalks, walkways, sitting areas, service or maintenance structures, courtyards, and other site features and/or structures. 

(3) 	
All landscape plans shall be designed in conformance with the provisions of West Nantmeal Township Natural and Historic Features Protection standards of the Zoning Ordinance regarding conservation of woodlands and riparian buffer areas. Applicants shall make all reasonable efforts to harmonize their plans with the conservation of existing vegetation and natural features. Care shall be exercised to protect remaining vegetation from damage during construction. 


D. 	Minimum Planting Standards. All required plantings shall meet the minimum planting standards, criteria for selection of plant material, and design standards of this Section. 
(1) 	The total number of plantings required in a subdivision or land development shall be no less than the total calculated from all columns in Table 6-1. The total number of required plantings may be dispersed throughout the tract to meet the objectives of this Section subject to the approval of the Township Engineer. Additional plantings may be provided. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 58 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
Table 6-1 
Minimum Plant Standards 


Improvement/Conditions  Deciduous Trees  Evergreen Trees  Shrubs  
per 1,000 sq. ft. gross building area, ground floor only (building "footprint")  2  1  8  
per 2,000 sq. ft., off street parking or loading area, excluding driveways less than 18 ft. wide  1  1  4  
per 100 linear ft. of new and existing public or private road frontage, measured on both sides where applicable  2  1  5  
per 100 linear ft. of existing tract boundary, where not coincident with existing or proposed road frontage  1  2  8  

(2) 	
Where calculation of the minimum number of plantings required above results in fractions of plants required, the minimum number of plants required shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 

(3) 	
Plantings used to comply with the minimum number of plantings required as above shall be: 

(a) 	
Deciduous trees -2½ inch caliper, minimum. 

(b) 	
Evergreen trees -8 feet in height, minimum. 

(c) 	
Shrubs -24-30 inches in height, minimum. 



(4) 	
Plantings and their measurement shall conform to the standards of the publication "American or U.S.A. 


Standard for Nursery Stock,” ANSI or U.S.A.S. Z60.1 of the American Association of Nurserymen, as 
amended. All plant material used on the site shall have been grown within the same USDA hardiness zone as the site, shall be free of disease, and shall be nursery grown, unless it is determined by the Township that the transplanting of trees partially fulfills the requirements of this Section. 
(5) 	Additional plantings may be provided to further the purposes of this Section. Plantings provided in excess of the minimum required need not comply with the dimensional standards herein. Use of linear measurements for purposes of calculation is not intended to specify linear arrangement of plantings. Groupings of plantings are encouraged in lieu of linear arrangement, consistent with the provisions of this Section. 
E. 	Landscape Design Standards. 
(1) 	
Consistent with the terms of this Section, the applicant shall plant trees and shrubs and make other landscape improvements (e.g., berms, fencing) as necessary to mitigate any adverse impacts, including visual impacts, which applicant's proposed subdivision or land development will have on his property, adjoining properties, and the Township in general, and otherwise address landscape issues identified through review of the required plans. 

(2) 	
Plantings and other landscape improvements shall be provided in arrangements and locations in response to specific site conditions and which best mitigate impacts of the applicant's proposed land disturbance actions. Consideration of the type, quantity and arrangement of plantings must consider the mature plant size and lifecycle. Plans shall be submitted by a professional register landscape architect with current license in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 59 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
(3) 	
Earthen Berms. If berms are used as a landscape or screening feature, plantings are to be installed on both sides of the berm, not solely at the ridgeline or top of the berm, and shall be subject to the review and approval of the Township. Side slopes shall not exceed a 4:1 ratio, and berms shall be designed to blend with adjoining property topographic conditions or similarly landscaped buffered areas rather than end abruptly at the property line. 

(4) 	
Streets Trees. Shade trees of varying species shall be planted as street trees along all streets, located five (5) feet outside of the ultimate right-of-way line, spaced not less than forty (40) feet nor more than fifty (50) feet apart, staggered where appropriate, along both sides of all existing streets adjoining the subject property and all proposed streets. 

(5) 	
No trees shall be planted closer than fifteen (15) feet from fire hydrants, street lights, or stop signs. 

(6) 	
Off-Street Parking. All off-street parking areas, except those intended solely for use by individual single family residences, shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs of varying species, in accordance with the following: 

(a) 	
Off-street parking areas shall be landscaped to reduce wind and air turbulence, heat and noise, and the glare of automobile lights; to reduce the level of carbon dioxide; to provide shade; to ameliorate storm water drainage problems; to replenish the groundwater table using bioretention islands; to provide for a more attractive setting; to protect the character and stability of residential, business, institutional, and industrial areas; and to conserve the value of land and buildings on surrounding properties and neighborhoods. 

(b) 	
Planting areas shall be placed so as to facilitate snow removal and to provide for safe movement of traffic without interference of proper surface water drainage. Planting areas shall be bordered appropriately to prevent erosion or damage from automobiles. Bollards may be used to afford protection of trees from vehicular movement. 

(c) 	
The landscaping and planting areas shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the parking lot, except where there are more than 20 spaces in which the following shall apply. 

(i) 	
Landscaped areas at least 10 feet wide shall be provided around the periphery of parking areas. Such areas shall, at a minimum, extend the full length and width of the parking areas, except for necessary access ways, to prevent the encroachment of moving vehicles into parking areas. 

(ii) 	
Landscaped islands at least 10 feet wide shall be provided between each set of two parking bays. 




(iii) Landscaped islands at the end of each parking bay shall be provided and shall be the length of two parking spaces and at least 10 feet in width. 
(iv) 
Permitted parking lots not conforming to the criteria listed above shall be planted with the same ratio of trees to parking spaces as conventional parking lots but these may be planted in more varied configurations. 

(v) 	
All parking lots shall be designed to provide for safe, reasonable pedestrian access. Parking lots with more than 50 spaces shall include paved pedestrian walkways. Pedestrian walkways may be located along or through landscaped islands or other landscaped areas adjacent to the parking lot. 


F. 	Criteria for Selection of Plant Material. Species selected by the applicant shall reflect careful evaluation of the required existing features plan and in particular the following considerations: 
(1) 	Existing and proposed site conditions and their suitability for the plant materials, based upon the site's geology, hydrology, soils, and microclimate. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 60 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
(2) 
Specific functional 	and design objectives of the plantings, which may include but not necessarily, be limited to provision for landscape buffer, visual screening, noise abatement, energy conservation, wildlife habitats, and aesthetic values. 

(3) 	
Maintenance considerations such as hardiness, resistance to insects and disease, longevity, and availability. 

(4) 	
Because of the many benefits of native plants (ease of maintenance, longevity, wildlife habitat, etc.), an applicant is strongly urged to conform to the requirements of this Section through the use of nursery grown native trees and shrubs. A suggested plant list is included in Table 6-2. 

(5) 
Species for 	shade trees, including street trees, shall be selected with particular emphasis on hardiness, growing habit for pedestrian and vehicle passage, minimal need for maintenance, and compatibility with other features of the site and surrounding environs. 

(6) 	
For the purposes of promoting disease protection, minimum maintenance, diverse natural plant associations, and long-term stability of plantings, the applicant is encouraged to choose those combinations of species which may be expected to be found together under more-or-less natural conditions on sites comparable to those where the trees and shrubs are to be planted. 

(7) 	
Plant list will be verified against the Department of Conservation of Natural Resources Invasive Plant List as amended. Any proposed plants that are listed on the Invasive Plant List must be removed from the plan. 


Table 6-2 
Suggested Plant List 


Evergreen Trees and Shrubs  
Scientific Name  Common Name  Mature Height  Native  
Juniperus virginiana  Eastern Red Cedar  50’ to 75’  Yes  
Pinus strobus  Eastern White Pine  75’ to 100’  Yes  
Rhododendron maximum  Rosebay Rhododendron  4’ to 15’  No  
Deciduous Shade Trees  
Scientific Name  Common Name  Mature Height  Native  
Acer rubrum  Red Maple  75’ to 100’  Yes  
Acer saccharum  Sugar Maple  75’ to 100’  Yes  
Carya ovata  Shagbark Hickory  75’ to 100’  Yes  
Catalpa speciosa  Northern Catalpa  40’ to 60’  No  
Fagus grandifolia  American Beech  75’ to 100’  Yes  
Fraxinus americana  White Ash  75’ to 100’  Yes  
Fraxinus pennsylvanica  Green Ash  50’ to 75’  Yes  
Gleditsia triacanthos  Thornless Honey Locust  30’ to 70’  Yes  
Liquidambar styraciflua  American Sweet Gum  75’ to 100’  Yes  
Liriodendron tulipifera  Tulip Poplar  75’ to 100’  Yes  
Phellodendron amurense  Amur Corktree  30 to 45’  No  
Platanus acerifolia  London Plane Tree  75’ to 100’  No  
Platanus occidentalis  American Sycamore  75’ to 100’  Yes  
Prunus serotina  Black Cherry  50’ to 75’  Yes  
Quercus alba  White Oak  75’ to 100’  Yes  
Quercus rubra  Northern Red Oak  60’ to 95’  Yes  
Quercus coccinea  Scarlet Oak  50’ to 75’  Yes  
Tilia americana  American Basswood  60’ to 100’  Yes  
Small Street Trees  
Scientific Name  Common Name  Mature Height  Native  
Ostrya virginiana  Ironwood  35’ to 50’  Yes  
Oxydendrum arboreum  Sourwood  35’ to 50’  Yes  

West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 61 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
Medium to Large Street Trees  
Scientific Name  Common Name  Mature Height  Native  
Acer rubrum  Red Maple  75’ to 100’  Yes  
Acer saccharum  Sugar Maple  75’ to 100’  Yes  
Fraxinus americana  White Ash  75’ to 100’  Yes  
Fraxinus pennsylvanica  Green Ash  50’ to 75’  Yes  
Juniperus virginiana  Eastern Red Cedar  50’ to 75’  Yes  
Liquidambar styraciflua  American Sweet Gum  75’ to 100’  Yes  
Prunus serotina  Black Cherry  50’ to 75’  Yes  
Quercus alba  White Oak  75’ to 100’  Yes  
Quercus coccinea  Scarlet Oak  50’ to 75’  Yes  
Small Trees and Shrubs  
Scientific Name  Common Name  Mature Height  Native  
Acer ginnala  Amur Maple  15’ to 18’  No  
Amelanchier arborea  Shadbush/Serviceberry  15’ to 20’  Yes  
Cercis canadensis  Redbud  20 to 30’  No  
Cornus florida  Flowering Dogwood  25’ to 50’  Yes  
Crataegus phaenopyrum  Washington Hawthorn  25’ to 30’  No  
Ginkgo biloba  Gingko (male only)  50’ to 80’  No  
Ilex mantana  Mountain Winterberry  30’ to 40’  No  
Ostrya virginiana  Ironwood  35’ to 50’  Yes  
Oxydendrum arboreum  Sourwood  35’ to 50’  Yes  
Vaccinium corymbosum  Highbush blueberry  6’ to 12’  Yes  
Viburnum dentatum  Arrowwood  6’ to 12’  Yes  
Viburnum obovatum  Small Leaf Viburnum  6’ to 15’  No  

G. 	Site Maintenance and Guarantee. 
(1) 	
All landscape improvements to be provided in accordance with this Section, shall be installed and maintained by accepted practices as recognized by the American Association of Nurserymen. Planting and maintenance of vegetation shall include, as appropriate, but not necessarily be limited to, provisions for surface mulch, guy-wires and stakes, irrigation, fertilization, insect and disease control, pruning, mulching, weeding, and watering. 

(2) 	
Applicant shall make arrangements acceptable to the Township that all landscape improvements installed in accordance with this Article shall be guaranteed and maintained in a healthy and/or sound condition, or otherwise be replaced with equivalent improvements, for a period of at least eighteen (18) months. After installation and prior to Township acceptance of the site improvements, representatives of the Township shall perform an inspection of the finished site for compliance with approved landscape plan(s). 

(3) 	
Installation of landscape improvements shall be guaranteed along with all other site improvements in accordance with provisions of this ordinance. The costs of landscape material and installation shall be considered in determining the amount of any performance guarantee required. At the Township's discretion, the applicant may be required to provide a letter of credit, escrow sufficient additional funds, or provide a bond with surety, for the maintenance and/or replacement of landscape improvements during the eighteen (18)-month replacement period. In addition, a letter of credit or escrow may be required for the removal and replacement of specimen vegetation damaged during construction. At its sole discretion, the Township may remedy failure to complete installation or to maintain required landscape improvements in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 


Section 611: Construction Standards 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 62 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
A. 	Stripping, Piling, Replacement or Removal of Topsoil.Construction on the tract subdivided or developed shall consist of stripping and piling of topsoil from all areas planned to be disturbed. Upon completion of other construction the entire amount of topsoil stripped shall be replaced on the tract subdivided or developed. No topsoil shall be disposed of, by sale or otherwise, off the site of the tract subdivided or developed. Subsoil may be disposed of at the option of the applicant. 
B. 	Cut and Fill Regulations. 
(1) 	
Cut and fill slopes shall be a maximum of 3:1. 

(2) 	
Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from damaging the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills. 

(3) 	
No cuts or fills shall endanger adjoining property and shall be located a minimum of five feet (5') from any adjacent property line. 

(4) 	
Fill shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding, slumping, and erosion of the soil. 

(5) 	
Fills shall not encroach upon or be placed adjacent to wetlands, natural water courses or constructed channels. 


C. 	Disposal of Debris. All debris such as tree roots, leaves, branches, stones exceeding one foot (1') in diameter, and miscellaneous construction debris, shall be removed from the site prior to finished grading and seeding of the site. 
D. 	Natural Features Protection 
(1) 	
Purpose. The purpose of this regulation is to maintain the supply of natural vegetation, prevent erosion of the topsoil on the site and surrounding properties, foster retention of ground water supply, preserve aesthetic and cultural resources of the Township, and to generally promote the health, safety, and welfare of citizens. 

(2) 	
Consideration shall be shown for all natural features such as large trees, water courses, historic areas and structures, and similar community assets, which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the remainder of the subdivision or land development. Trees shall be preserved wherever possible. 

(3) 	
If, in the opinion of the Township Planning Commission, a subdivision or land development proposes streets or building development which will unnecessarily destroy existing tree growth or other natural features whether by reason of street alignment, grading, or otherwise, the Planning Commission shall either: 

(a) 	
Refuse to recommend approval of the subdivision or land development plan; or 

(b) 	
Suggest alternate methods of subdivision or land development which would preserve as many of the existing trees as possible which measure six inches (6") caliper in diameter and above; or 

(c) 	
Recommend to the Board that as a condition of their approval the applicant be required to plant one (1) new tree of not less than two inch (2") caliper for every existing tree measuring twelve inches (12") in diameter and above which will be destroyed, such new trees to be planted on the lots and not as street trees, as directed by the Board. 



(4) 	
Where a proposed subdivision or land development necessitates the clearing of trees or portions of tree masses, applicants shall be guided by the following criteria in selecting trees and ornamentals for retention or clearing: 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 63 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
(a) 	
Aesthetic values, including autumn coloration, type of flowers and fruit, bark and crown characteristics, amount of dieback present; 

(b) 	
Susceptibility of tree to insect and disease attack and to air pollution; 

(c) 	
Species longevity; 

(d) 	
Resistance to wind and the existing soil characteristics for supporting trees; 

(e) 	
Existence of and resistance to disease, rot or other tree damage; and 

(f) 	
Protection of buildings including, but not limited to, the removal of dead and large limbs hanging over buildings. 


(5) 	Developers shall exercise care to protect trees from damage during construction. Tree removal shall be limited to the actual construction site necessary to build and to move construction equipment. 
E. 	Grading and Excavation Regulations 
(1) 	
Grading and excavation operations shall not result in the diversion of water or the deposit of sediment onto public streets. 

(2) 	
Grading and construction equipment shall not be allowed to cross flowing streams. Culverts and bridges used for stream crossings shall be designed in accordance with the Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Ordinance of West Nantmeal Township, and all applicable county and state regulations. 


Section 612: Street Design 
A. 	The following provisions shall apply to the design and construction of streets, curbs, bridges, culverts, and lot access associated with subdivision and land development applications and are intended as the minimum standards for the promotion of public health, safety and welfare. Any proposed subdivision involving or proposing four (4) or more new residential lots or units shall provide lot frontage and access to such lots by way of a proposed new public or private street. 
B. 	Street Arrangement. 
(1) 	
Location. A proposed street shall not be centered upon a boundary line of a tract to be subdivided or developed unless the owner of the adjoining property shall enter into joint or simultaneous application for the subdivision or land development of his land. Location of a proposed street abutting and parallel to a boundary line of a tract to be subdivided or developed will be discouraged. 

(2) 	
Interconnection of Streets. Residential or local streets shall be laid out so as to discourage through traffic, but provisions for street connections into and from adjacent areas may be required by the Supervisors where circulation patterns warrant such connection. 

(3) 	
Alignment Relative to Surrounding Residential Streets. Where a proposed subdivision or land development abuts an existing subdivision having a dedicated residential street dead-ending at or near a common property line, the proposed subdivision or land development shall make provision for extension of such dedicated residential street within the proposed subdivision or land development. 

(4) 	
Alignment Relative to Surrounding Collector Streets. A proposed subdivision or land development shall make provision for continuation of the width, gradient, general alignment and direction of traffic flow of an existing street. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 64 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
(5) 	
Relationship to the Site. Thoughtful and sensitive design of streets and their relationship to the site and arrangement of lots is required. Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce optimum safe access to lots, reasonable grades, proper alignment and drainage, and to provide for adequate sight distance. 

(6) 	
Future Streets. If lots resulting from original subdivision or land development are of sufficient size to permit resubdivision or further development or when a portion of the tract is not subdivided or developed, adequate street rights-of-way to permit further subdivision shall be provided to be no less than the rights­of-way required for collector, residential or local streets, as applicable. 

(7) 	
Traffic Control Signs. The applicant shall provide standard PADOT approved traffic control signs for all streets within a subdivision or land development. The proposed street signs shall be provided in accordance with this Ordinance and the locations of such signs shall be shown on the final plan. 

(8) 	
Relationship to Existing or Proposed Collector Streets. Where a subdivision or land development abuts or contains an existing or proposed collector or arterial street, the Board, to the extent permitted by law, may require dedication of additional right-of-way to meet the minimum right-of-way specified hereinafter. 

(9) 	
Grid-Iron Street Pattern. A rigid "grid-iron" pattern of straight, parallel streets which disregards topography shall be discouraged where some variation in alignment or sweeping curves with tangents would be more compatible with topography. Tangents which are up to three times the length of connecting curves are to be encouraged, but shall not be mandatory. 

(10) 
Single access streets shall not be utilized if a through street is practical. 


C. 	General Street Requirements 
(1) 	
Obstructions. No fences, hedges, free-standing walls, or planting (except approved street trees) shall be located or remain within the right-of-way of a street. 

(2) 	
Street Lights. Poles and standards for street lights with appropriate shielding and underground "parkway" cable service lines shall be furnished and installed by the applicant, when and wherever required by the Board, and shall be approved by the Board as to type and location along each right-of-way, spaced not more than 500 feet apart and each providing with 0.2-foot candles of illumination. 

(3) 	
Street Trees. Deciduous street trees shall be planted by the applicant 15 feet behind the ultimate right-of­way line, staggered, where appropriate, along both sides; spaced not less than 40 feet nor more than sixty feet (60') apart. Street tree planting shall be required along all new or existing streets where quality trees do not currently exist. Such trees must be properly balled and burlapped. Tree caliper at time of planting shall be no less than two and one-half (2-1/2") inches. Applicants may use Table 6-2 Suggested Plant List or propose alternative for approval. 

(4) 	
Fire Hydrants. Where public water supply is available, the applicant shall install fire hydrants in locations required by the West Nantmeal Township Fire Code or this Ordinance, whichever is more stringent. 

(5) 	
Street Names and Signs. Street names shall be approved by the County 911 Coordinator prior to the presentation to Board for approval. Duplication shall be avoided unless as a continuation of an existing street or projection of same. The applicant shall install sign posts, street name plates, and such other signs as approved and required by the Board. At least one (l) street name sign shall be erected at each street intersection. With respect to cul-de-sacs, the applicant shall also install, at each street intersection thereof, a "dead end" or "no outlet" sign. 


D. 	Street Design. 
(1) 	Safe Sight Stopping Distance. A minimum sight distance, measured along an unobstructed line of sight within the paved area of the road surface with the height of driver and the height of object being viewed 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 65 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
each being measured 3.5 feet above the pavement surface, shall be provided as follows, with respect to horizontal or vertical alignment: 
(a) 	
Arterial Street. Shall be in accordance with minimum standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT), but in no case less than five hundred feet (500'); and 

(b) 	
Collector Streets. Shall not be less than four hundred feet (400'); 

(c) 	
Residential or Local Streets. Shall not be less than two hundred and fifty feet (250'); 

(d) 	
Single Access Streets. Shall not be less than two hundred and fifty feet (250'). 


(2) 	
Horizontal Curves. Horizontal curves shall have a minimum radius on the centerline, as follows: 

(a) 	
Arterial Street. In accordance with minimum standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation; 

(b) 	
Collector Streets. Three hundred feet (300'); 

(c) 	
Residential or Local Streets. One hundred and fifty feet (150'); 

(d) 
Single Access Streets. One hundred feet (100'). 

(e) 	
Tangents with a maximum difference in bearing of five degrees (5°) may intersect at the centerline of intersection with cross streets; otherwise such intersections shall not be permitted and in addition, reverse curves shall be separated by tangents of not less than one hundred feet (100'), and superelevation shall be provided on collector streets having horizontal curves of less than six hundred feet (600') radius and on residential streets for less than three hundred feet (300') radius. Sweeping curves of comparatively long radius are preferable to tangents connecting curves leading in the same direction. 

(f) 	
A combination of minimum radius horizontal curve and maximum grade is not permitted. 



(3) 	
Vertical Curves. Vertical curves shall be used in all changes in gradient of more than one percent (1%), and the length at such changes shall be twenty-five feet (25') for each one percent (1%) change in grade or not less than that required for a thirty-five mile per hour (35 mph) design speed for all residential streets. All other roads shall be in accordance with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation requirements for the respective functional class of road. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 66 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
(4) Gradients. The following shall be the maximum and minimum gradients, measured on the centerline, for all vehicular traffic ways: 
Maximum  Minimum  
b.  Residential and Single Access Streets  8% (Ten percent (10%) for up to 200 feet if approved by the Board.)  1%  
c.  Collector Streets  7%  1%  
d.  Driveway entrances within street rights-of-way  4%  1%  
e.  Intersections.  4%  1%  
f.  Private driveways  10%  

E. 	Street Right-of-way, Paving and Shoulder Widths. The minimum widths of rights-of-way, cartway, and shoulders shall not be less than those widths of an existing street of which a new street is to be a continuation, but in no case less than the widths set forth below: 
(1) 	
Minimum Width of Right-of-Way, Paving and Shoulders. 

(2) 	
Additional right-of-way, shoulder, and cartway widths may be required by the Board for the following purposes: 

(a) 	
To promote public safety and convenience; 

(b) 	
To provide parking space in commercial districts and in areas of high-density residential development; 

(c) 	
To provide for turning movements, as needed; and 

(d) 	
To accommodate special topographic circumstances which may result in cut/fill slopes extending beyond the standard right-of-way in all circumstances to assure accessibility for maintenance and operations; and 

(e) 	
To provide for proper drainage and snow removal. 



(3) 	
Rights-of-way of lesser width than prescribed in this section shall not be permitted. 

(4) 	
Subdivision and land developments abutting existing streets shall provide the minimum right-of-way widths for those streets in accordance with the provisions of this section for dedication. 


Right-of-Way  Cartway  Shoulders (each)  
1  Streets  
A. Arterial Street  PennDot Standard  PennDot Standard  PennDot Standard  
B. Collector Street  60ft  24ft  10 ft  
C. Residential Street  50ft  24ft  10 ft  
2  Single Access (cul-de-sac)  50ft  24ft  10 ft  
3  Private Driveway (One­way not more than one/lot)  As required  10-12ft  Four (4) feet for driveway exceeding 100 ft in length.  

West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 67 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
(5) 	
Where a subdivision or land development abuts an existing street with a cartway or right-of-way width or alignment, which is insufficient and/or does not otherwise comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, the Board, to the extent permitted by law, shall require the dedication of land sufficient to widen the street, construct a shoulder, or correct the alignment, and shall further require the escrow of funds where deemed necessary in order to improve said cartway and its appurtenances. 

(6) 	
Proper sight lines shall be maintained at the intersections of all streets. A required clear sight triangle shall be measured along the center lines of intersecting streets to a point seventy-five feet (75') from the center of intersection where a street is controlled by a stop sign and to a point two hundred feet (200') from the center of intersection on all other streets. At the discretion of the Board, a clear sight triangle of seventy-five feet (75') may be required at the intersection of potentially dangerous or hazardous intersections of private driveways with any public street or road. 

(7) 	
All driveways must be designed and construction must be paved from the cartway to a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet of paved material past the designated right-of-way for erosion control. 


E. 	Intersections (Streets). 
(1) 	
No more than two streets shall cross at the same point. 

(2) 	
Right angle (90°) intersections shall be used whenever practical, especially when collector or residential streets empty into major collector or arterial streets. There shall be no intersection created with an angle of less than seventy-five degrees (75°), or more than one hundred and five degrees (105°). 

(3) 	
Right-of-Way. Wherever practicable right-of-way lines shall intersect at ninety degrees (90°), but in no case less than seventy-five degrees (75°), and shall be rounded by a tangential arc having a minimum radius of thirty feet (30'). 

(4) 	
Curbs. When curbs are required, curb radii shall be either concentric with rights-of-way radii or shall conform with the minimum edge of pavement curve radii as defined in this Ordinance, and the grid lines of such curb shall meet at a common point of elevation if projected. 

(5) 	
Grade. The intersection area and approach areas, within one hundred feet (100') of the center of the intersection, shall be designed with a relatively flat grade; the maximum grade on the approach leg shall not exceed two percent (2%) where practical but may average four percent (4%) in difficult terrain. Where the potential for hazardous conditions caused by ice and snow exist due to shaded conditions or northern exposures, the desirable grade on the approach leg should be one percent (1%), but in no case shall exceed two percent (2%) where practical. 

(6) 	
To the fullest extent possible, intersections with arterial and collector streets shall be located not less than one thousand feet (1,000') apart, measured centerline to centerline. Exceptions shall be those cases deemed by the Board to require close spacing without endangering the safety of the public. 

(7) 	
Streets entering from opposite sides of another street shall either be directly across from each other or offset by at least one hundred and fifty feet (150') for residential and collector streets, and three hundred feet (300') on arterial streets, measured centerline to centerline. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 68 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
(8) 
Intersection Design. The minimum edge of pavement for intersections shall be designed according to the following standards: 

(9) 	
Safe Sight Stopping Distance. A safe sight stopping distance shall be provided at all new street and driveway intersections. No wall, fence, tree, building, other structure or vegetation, or any other obstruction whatsoever, shall be erected, planted, altered and/or maintained, in this area which obstructs, or may ultimately obstruct, sight in accordance with the following standards. 

(a) 	
Safe sight stopping distance shall be measured from a point in the minor road or driveway at least ten feet (10') from the edge of the major road pavement and measured from a height of eye at 3.5 feet on the minor road to a height of object at 3.5 feet on the major road. Sight distance at intersections shall be provided in accordance with the following standards: 

(b) 	
The Board upon recommendation of the Township Engineer, may allow modifications to the foregoing standards, provided the applicant demonstrates that the standards cannot be achieved and the applicant agrees to install traffic control devices to mitigate the lack of adequate sight distance. 




Residential, Collector and, Single Access Streets  Simple  Arterial Streets  Curve Radius with Taper  
Angle of Turn  Simple Curve Radius (ft.)  Radius  Offset  Taper (Ft:ft)  
60 or 120  40  95’  3.0  15:1  
75 or 105  35  65’  3.0  15:1  
90  30  60’  4.0  15:1  

Existing Road Design Speed (mph)  Safe Intersection Sight Distance  
(1)  55  845  
(2)  45  635  
(3)  35  440  
(4)  25  250  

F. 	Single Access Streets, (Cul-de-Sac and Loop Roads). 
(1) 	General Requirements. 
(a) 	
A single access street shall not be more than one thousand feet (1,000') long and shall not furnish access to more than twenty (20) 'dwelling units unless clearly impractical due to tract dimensions or topography. The measurement of said length shall be taken between the end of the street or turnaround and the edge of the cartway of the through street to which it connects. The Board may allow additional dwelling units to be served by the street or an extension of the street length beyond the aforesaid maximum requirements upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission and after consideration of the feasibility of a through street, the land uses adjacent to the parcel, lot dimensions, topography and drainage. 

(b) 	
The Board may, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission, require the following for single access streets: 

(i) 	
Provision of constructed street stub(s) extending to the end of the tract where appropriate to provide future connection with adjoining lands. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 69 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
(ii) 	Provision of emergency access designed to the satisfaction of the Supervisors. 
(iii) Right-of-way for future interconnection. 
(c) 	
The Supervisors may require, as a condition of approval and to be noted on the plan of record, that parcels with access only by a single access street which are capable of further subdivision or land development under current zoning regulations, shall not be further subdivided and/or developed until the single access street becomes a through street. 

(d) 	
Any single access street shall have no less than two hundred fifty (250) linear feet of cartway if it is to be offered for dedication as a public street. 


(2) 	Cul-de-Sacs 
(a) 	
All standards for single access streets shall apply to cul-de-sacs. 

(b) 
Upon 	recommendation by the Planning Commission and when required by the Supervisors, the turnaround of a cul-de-sac shall extend to the boundary of the tract. The Planning Commission shall consider the existing or proposed land uses of adjoining lands and the topography, drainage and other site characteristics affecting the cul-de-sac design. 

(c) 	
Any cul-de-sac street serving more than two (2) families shall be provided with a vehicular turnaround having a minimum diameter, or a minimum side if square, of one hundred feet (100') for the right-of­way and eighty feet (80') for the cartway. 

(d) 	
Dead-end streets are prohibited unless designed as permanent cul-de-sac streets in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 

(e) 	
Whenever a future extension of the cul-de-sac is found to be practical by the Supervisors and Planning Commission, a fifty-foot (50') wide easement, extending from the cul-de-sac to an adjacent property line, shall be provided with an offer of dedication thereof, to the extent permitted by law, to allow such extension. 

(f) 	
Drainage of cul-de-sac streets shall preferably be towards the open end. 

(g) 	
The centerline grade on a cul-de-sac street shall not exceed eight percent (8%) and the grade of the diameter of the turnaround shall not exceed four percent (4%). 

(h) 	
Temporary Cul-de-Sac. Where streets are temporarily terminated at a property line or phase line with a temporary vehicular turnaround, thus forming a cul-de-sac until such time as such street is extended, all regulations pertaining to cul-de-sac streets shall apply, except that the temporary cartway turnaround need not be curbed. 


G. 	Construction of Paving. All street paving must conform to the specifications incorporated in this section and the applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications, Publication 408 as most recently published, and shall be approved by the Township Engineer prior to acceptance by the Board. All design standards, including but not limited to grades, horizontal curves, vertical curves, intersections, sight distances, and tangents shall conform to the requirements established by this Ordinance and shall be subject to the approval of the Township Engineer. 
Street paving shall have a minimum total compacted depth of ten inches, consisting of a 2-inch subbase of 2A type "C" stone, a 5-inch bituminous concrete base course, and a 3-inch bituminous surface course Superpave 9.5 mm. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 70 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
(1) 	
Subgrade. Wherever practical, the subgrade shall be in cut, or undisturbed subsoil, and in no case shall the subgrade be made of filled or undisturbed topsoil or frozen soils. All deleterious material such as tree roots, leaves, branches, trash, stones exceeding six inches (6”) in diameter, and miscellaneous construction debris shall be removed from the subgrade. Compaction shall be accomplished by sheep's-foot, smooth wheel, or rubber tired roller, at the discretion of the Township Engineer. Subgrade shall be compacted to a minimum of ninety-five percent (95%) of its determined density, tight and dry, and shall not be soft and spongy under the roller. Compaction of the subgrade shall exceed by eight inches (8") the full width of the cartway, including the width to be occupied by shoulders. The required road crown shall be built into the shaped subgrade. 

(2) 	
After the excavation for rough grading has been performed and all drains have been constructed, the subgrade shall be fine graded and shaped to the proper cross-section. It shall be brought to a firm unyielding surface by rolling the entire area with an approved three-wheel power roller having a metal weight of not less than ten tons. Solid rock, boulders, soft clay and all spongy material which will not consolidate under the roller shall be removed from the subgrade to a depth to be determined by the Township Engineer or other person designated by the Township Supervisors. The space shall be filled with suitable material from the excavation and the subgrade rerolled until it presents a smooth and firm surface of the proper shape and cross-section. 

(3) 	
Screenings. Before placement of the base course, the subgrade shall be covered with a cushion course of sand, stone screenings or cinders, at the discretion of the Township Engineer and meeting the requirements of PennDOT Publication 408.A, No. 10, of fine material and having a minimum thickness of two inches (2") after placement. Compaction of screenings layer is not required. 

(4) 	
Subbase. The subbase shall be a 2A Type "C" stone placed to a compacted thickness of two inches (2"). The subbase shall be solidly compacted to a firm and unyielding surface by rolling the entire area with a ten-ton, or larger, power roller and shall extend in width eight inches (8") beyond the width of finished surface course paving. Subbase will be checked by the Engineer for lines, grade, crown and contour before any succeeding courses are placed. Proper compaction will be determined by the Engineer based on non-movement of the material under the specified compaction equipment. 

(5) 	
Bituminous Concrete Base Course. 

(a) 	
The bituminous concrete base course shall have a compacted thickness of six (6) inches and shall extend in width eight inches beyond the width of finished surface course paving. It shall be mixed, delivered, placed and protected in accordance with the requirements of Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications, Form 408, as revised. The base course shall be primed with PA DL-2 bituminous material. The amount of primer required shall be determined by the Township Engineer. The priming of the base course shall be allowed to cure for a minimum of forty-eight hours (weather permitting) before the surface course is applied. No traffic shall be permitted to travel over the base course during the curing period. 

(b) 	
Base course 

(i) 	
Base course shall consist of five (5") inches of 3A aggregate premixed at the plant to be applied in two lifts and rolled uniformly and thoroughly with a ten-ton vibratory roller or its equivalent Rolling shall continue until the material does not creep or wave ahead of the roller wheels. Base and subbase shall be six (6") inches wider on each side than finished macadam cartway expect when curbs are installed. 

(ii) 	
After compaction of the above alternative base stone, five (5") inches of bituminous concrete base course shall be applied in two lifts which shall be thoroughly rolled and does not exhibit any creep ahead of the roller wheels. The second lift of the BCBC may be utilized as a binder course when additional asphalt is added at the plant. When this option is used, the normal binder course may be eliminated and a one and one-half (1/2") inch wearing course applied composed of ID-2A. 




West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 71 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
(6) 	
Pavement shall consist of minimum of 4 ½” inches of Superpave PG 64-22 25mm binder course and 1 1/2” Superpave PG 64-22 wearing 9.5mm or the latest material specification as approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. All construction and materials shall conform to the requirements of PennDOT Publication 408, as amended from time to time. 

(7) 	
All wearing courses shall be sealed to the concrete curb (if required) with a one-foot (1') wide Grade BM-1 or A-1 bituminous gutter seal (where applicable). 

(8) 	
Duplicate delivery slips for all materials will be required. These slips will become the property of West Nantmeal Township. 

(9) 	
Crown. All Township roads shall have a crown of one-quarter inch (1/4") per foot sloping away from the centerline unless otherwise directed by PennDOT or the Township Engineer. Crown board and straight edge shall be used for checking street construction. Maximum tolerance shall not exceed one-quarter inch (1/4") in the finished surface. 


(10)Shoulders. Earth shoulders, ten (10) feet wide shall be graded having a cross slope of three quarters (3/4) of an inch per foot away from the edge of pavement. Supporting shoulder shall be constructed on all sections or projects where a base course of pavement is to be constructed without other permanent support along the sides. All shoulder shall be thoroughly compacted and graded to provide drainage from the macadam surface. Where concrete curbing has been waived by the Board and is not to be constructed, shoulders are to be constructed adjacent to the paving of the proposed road. The width and type of construction, grade, and construction methods of these shoulders is to be determined by or must meet the approval of the Township Engineer or other person designated by the Board. 
(11)Finished Grading of Streets. The finished grading for a street or cul-de-sac shall extend the full width of the required right-of-way. The maximum slope between the right-of-way line and top of curb shall be three quarters of an inch (3/4") per foot, unless otherwise directed by the Board. 
(12)Seeding. All unpaved areas between the street line and the curb or shoulders (as the case may be) shall be covered with not less than four inches (4") of topsoil, fertilized, seeded, and mulched in manner and materials approved by the Board. 
(13)Failure to adhere to the above specifications shall give the 	Board cause to refuse to accept streets for dedication. 
Section 613: Curbing Construction 
Approved type of curbs meeting A.D.A. requirements shall be required on all streets and/or at other locations deemed necessary by the Board. Rolled concrete curb and gutters or battered face curbs, shall be constructed in accordance with the following: 
A. 	Curbing shall be rolled curb-and-gutter type [except on streets where grade exceeds six percent (6%)] for all residential, collector, and single access streets. For any street with grades exceeding six (6%) percent, an 18” vertical curb with a 7” reveal shall be formed in place. No precast curbing shall be permitted. The transition 
from one type of curb to another shall be made only at a street intersection. 
B. 	Concrete for curb construction shall be plant mix certified to three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch at twenty-eight (28) days. 
C. 	Depressed curbs at driveways shall be between one and one-half inches (1-1/2") above the finished street surface. Pipes, grates, wood planks or other materials shall not be placed in the gutter to form a driveway ramp. 
D. 	Where it is necessary to replace existing vertical curbs with depressed curbing, two ten-·foot (10') long sections of existing curb shall be removed down to the subgrade without disturbing the adjacent cartway paving. The 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 72 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
depressed curb shall then be formed and poured in place. Any portions of the cartway disturbed during curbing removal or installation shall be repaired to new condition. 
E. 	When curbing must be cut for depressed curb installation, the length of the remaining section shall be no less than four feet (4') between expansion joints and the cut shall be made in a neat manner with a power saw equipped with a proper masonry cutting blade. 
F. 	Any depressed curb sections that are unused when a subdivision or land development or phase of a subdivision or land development is completed, shall be completely removed and replaced with full section upright curbing to line and grade of adjacent curbing. Forming and pouring vertical curbing on top of an existing curb depression shall not be permitted. 
Section 614: Sidewalks 
A. 	Criteria. Paved sidewalks meeting ANSI A117.1, or successor standards adopted by the Commonwealth shall be provided when recommended by the Township Planning Commission and required by the Board of Supervisors in the following circumstances: (i) on at least one (1) side of all collector streets; (ii) within a subdivision or land development; (iii) on all streets within one thousand feet (1,000') of and leading to a school; and (iv) at such other locations deemed by the Board to be necessary for the safety and convenience of the public. 
B. 	Location. Paved sidewalks shall be placed within the street right-of-way parallel to and three feet (3') from the street line. Gradient and paving of sidewalks shall be continuous across all private driveways. Sidewalks shall be maintained by the abutting property owner. 
C. 	Construction. Where required, sidewalks shall not be less than four feet (4') in width and four inches (4") in thickness, except for crossing driveways where the minimum thickness shall be eight inches (8") and shall be constructed of plant mix certified to three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch at twenty-eight (28) days. 
D. 	Curb ramps are required at street intersections and as recommended by the Township Planning Commission or Board. The grade and construction of curb ramps shall be in compliance with the current PennDOT standards. 
Section 615: Bridges and Culverts 
Bridges and culverts and other water obstructions shall be designed in accordance with the regulations of West Nantmeal Township and shall meet the requirements and approval of the Township Engineer with regard to adequacy and location. Whenever required, a permit for such bridges, culverts and other water obstructions shall be obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and submitted to the Board who shall make appropriate notation of receipt of same upon and prior to approval of the final plan. In no case shall a bridge, culvert or other water obstruction reduce the effective width of the cartway. 
Section 616: Access Design 
To minimize traffic congestion and hazard, control street access and encourage orderly development of street or highway frontage, the following regulations shall apply: 
A. 	General 
(1) 	
Lots which abut two or more streets shall have direct access only to a street of lesser functional classification. 

(2) 	
All vehicular access points to any street shall be located at least one hundred feet (100') from any intersection of a street, measured from centerline to centerline, except for commercial uses on corner lots as provided for in this Section. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 73 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
(3) 	
Driveways on residential corner lots shall be no closer than forty feet (40') to the point of radius of the curb at the corner. 

(4) 	
Each proposed non-residential use with less than one hundred feet (100') of frontage on any one street shall have only one access to that street; and no non-residential use with one hundred feet (100') or more of frontage on any one street shall have more than two (2) accessways to that street for each four hundred feet (400') of street frontage. 

(5) 	
A common access point for two (2) or more commercial or industrial uses is encouraged where practical to minimize vehicular access points along streets other than rural and residential streets. Common access points, where permitted, shall be in accordance with this Ordinance. 

(6) 
Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to and from public streets, without undue congestion or interference with normal traffic flow within the Township. 

(7) 	
The applicant shall be responsible for the design and construction, including costs thereof, of any necessary traffic control devices and highway modifications required by the Board or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. 

(8) 	
All driveways shall be paved for the first twenty feet (20’) from the right of way. 


B. 	Access Design for Multi-Family, Commercial and Industrial Uses. Where any proposed subdivision or land development for multi-family dwellings, townhouses, mobile home park, shopping center, or industrial or commercial uses propose vehicular access to and from an arterial or collector street, all vehicular entrances and exits shall be provided with deceleration and acceleration lanes as approved by the Board and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. In no event shall vehicles be permitted to back directly into any street from an off-street parking area. Interior drives for such uses shall be in accordance with this Ordinance. 
C. 	Access Design for Single-Family Use. 
(1) 	
Driveways for Single-Family Residences. 

(a) 	
Private driveways on corner lots shall be located at least forty feet (40') from the point of intersection of the nearest street right-of-way lines. 

(b) 	
In order to provide a safe and convenient means of access, grades on private driveways should not exceed six percent (6%), unless specifically authorized by the Board, and in no case shall the grade exceed four percent (4%) for the first thirty feet (30') of driveway as measured from the road cartway. 

(c) 	
Safe Sight Stopping Distance must be measured from a point on the driveway ten feet (10') from the edge of the public road cartway upon which the driveway opens and meet the standards in this Ordinance. 

(d) 	
In order to provide safe and convenient ingress and egress, private driveway entrances shall be rounded at a minimum radius of five feet (5'), or shall have a flare constructed that is equivalent to this radius, at the point of intersection with the cartway edge (curb line). 



(2) 	
Driveways for Multiple Residences 


(a) 	Privately-owned (undedicated) driveways shall be permitted to provide access to not more than two single-family dwellings. However, in unusual circumstances, the Board may approve, in writing, the design of a portion of a subdivision in which up to four (4) single-family dwellings may be served by a private driveway. In such event, the paving width, thickness and intersection details must be approved by the Township Engineer. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 74 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
(b) 	Driveways for two or more residences will require a recorded access easement and maintenance agreement to be reviewed and approved by the Township. 
(3) 	Private Streets 
The Board shall have the sole authority in unusual circumstances to approve private streets intended for the use of more than two (2) families in a subdivision or land development, or in a commercial development where usage by the occupants requires a private street. Such driveways shall be privately owned, and the Township shall have no maintenance obligation with respect thereto; maintenance in such case shall be the responsibility of a single person or entity, such as the landlord, or a homeowners' association or similar large association. Such responsibility shall not be fragmented among co-owners or easement right owners. 
Construction specifications for private streets, shall conform to the same standards, for public streets. 
Section 617: Interior Circulation Design 
The following regulations shall apply to all uses except single-family detached dwellings, unless otherwise specified. 
A. 	Design of Access Aisles and Drives. 
(1) 	
Interior drives shall be designed to prevent blockage of vehicles entering or leaving the site. Drives may be one-way or two-way. Areas designed for loading and unloading, refuse collection, fuel delivery, and other service vehicles, and areas for the use of automobile parking or pedestrian ways, shall be arranged as to prevent blocking or interfering with accessways and shall have adequate turnaround surface so egress to the street is in a forward direction. 

(2) 	
Accessways, parking areas and loading areas shall have clearly defined parking bays and traffic circulation lanes designated by markings, curbs, barriers, and landscaped islands so that operators of vehicles intending to use such accessway areas and loading areas shall not impede traffic as a result of any confusion as to the location of entrances and exits and manner of reaching them. 

(a) 	
To assist in traffic channelization, islands shall be placed at the ends of parking bays so that the end of the bay adjacent to a driving aisle or ring road is clearly delineated. Such islands shall be landscaped, but shall be designed so as not to impair visibility needed for traffic flow and turning movements. 

(b) 	
Traffic channelization shall be planned in such a way that a main driving aisle, from which vehicles can flow off the street and into the site and parking bays, is remote from the primary building(s) so as to avoid traffic conflicts in front of the primary building(s). 

(c) 	
Parking areas shall be designed so that a vehicle within a parking area will not have to enter a street to move from one location to any other location within a parking lot. Adequate turnaround surface shall be provided so that egress to the street is in a forward direction. 



(3) 	
All interior drives and accessways shall be paved with an approved all-weather surface, and shall be graded, properly drained and maintained in good condition. Interior drives shall have a maximum grade of four percent (4%), measured along the centerline, for a distance of not less than fifty feet (50') from the street right-of-way. Beyond that point, interior roads and drives shall have a maximum grade of six percent (6%). 

(4) 	
Minimum Interior Drive Cartway Widths (with no abutting parking). 


Use  Two Lane Two-Way Drives  One Lane One-Way Drives  
Multi-Family  24 feet  15 feet  
Commercial/Office  24 feet  15 feet  

West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 75 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 

(5) 	Common or shared access driveways to parking and loading areas are encouraged for commercial, office, and industrial uses, provided that the landowners involved submit a site plan and agreement that designates an access easement for all parcels involved and which specifies shares of ownership and maintenance responsibilities corresponding to each lot. 
Section 618: Mail Box Positions 
A. 	In any residential subdivision in which a single or split driveway access is proposed to serve two or more single family residential units (shared driveway), the mailboxes serving the residences shall share a single position and shall be installed and permanently maintained together in one location. 
B. 	All mailboxes shall be set back from the paved cartway surface of the public or private street a minimum distance of 2 feet measured from the leading edge of the mailbox. The post supporting the mailbox shall in no event be closer than 3 feet from the paved cartway surface. A paved blacktop pull-off area shall be provided and maintained directly in front of each such mailbox position between the cartway and the mailbox. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 76 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 

Section 701: Purpose 
In accordance with the provisions of the MPC separate provisions regulating and controlling the design, construction, and operation of manufactured home parks are herein incorporated within this Ordinance. 
Section 702:   General Requirements 
The following general requirements shall apply to any manufactured home park: 
A. 	A manufactured home park shall be permitted as a conditional use within the C-1 Village Commercial Zoning District per Section 611 of the Zoning Ordinance of West Nantmeal Township, as amended. 
B. 	The definitions contained within the West Nantmeal Township Zoning Ordinance, and this Ordinance shall apply to any permitted manufactured home park. If conflicts exist between such ordinances, the most stringent interpretation of such definitions shall apply. 
C. 	The application procedures for review and approval of a manufactured home park shall be in accordance with Article· III of this Ordinance. Each manufactured home park or portion thereof proposed shall be submitted as a major land development plan meeting all requirements of Article III herein, and all other applicable articles of this Ordinance. 
D. 	The land development plan for each manufactured home park shall meet all requirements of Article IV, Plan Content, of this Ordinance with the exceptions that: 
(1) 	
All land within a manufactured home park shall remain in single ownership and lots shall not be designed for fee simple conveyance; 

(2) 	
All streets within a manufactured home park shall be private and shall not be offered for dedication to West Nantmeal Township; 

(3) 	
Land development agreements and performance guarantees shall be applicable to all private facilities (roads, utilities, drainage facilities, sidewalks, sanitary sewage facilities, etc.) and may be released in accordance with procedures specified in this Ordinance. 


E. 	The General Design Standards contained in Article VI of this Ordinance shall be applicable to each manufactured home park unless specifically modified within this Article. 
Section 703: Specific Design Requirements 
A. 	Each manufactured home park shall meet the following requirements: 
(1) 	
No unit can have direct access to a public street or road. 

(2) 	
Fuel Supply and Storage 


(a) 	Liquefied Petroleum Gas Systems -The design, installation, construction, and maintenance of containers and pertinent equipment for the storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gases shall conform to provisions of Act of December 27, 1951, P.L. 1793, as amended, and to the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, its successor, or other governmental agency having jurisdiction thereof. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 77 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
(b) 	
Fuel Oil Supply Systems 

(1) 	
All fuel oil supply systems provided for manufactured homes, service buildings and other structures shall be installed and maintained in conformity with the Township Building Code, other Township Ordinances or state regulations of the ordinance. 

(2) 	
All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to manufactured homes shall be securely, but not permanently, fastened in place. 

(3) 	
All fuel oil supply systems provided for manufactured homes, service buildings and other structures shall have shut-off valves located within five (5) inches of storage tanks. 

(4) 	
All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely placed and shall not be less than five (5) feet from any manufactured home exit, and not less than three (3) feet from any window. 

(5) 	
Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected against physical damage and screened from the street. 


(3) 	Fire hydrants shall be located within 600 feet of each manufactured home. 
B. 	Each manufactured home site, pad or lot shall be provided with the following: 
(1) 	
Off-street parking for at least two (2) motor vehicles shall be provided at each manufactured home site. Each parking stall shall be at least ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet and shall be of either gravel or macadam construction. In addition to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, common parking (off-street) shall be provided at the rate of one (1) space for each two (2) manufactured home units. 

(2) 	
Off-street parking shall be prohibited on internal roads and it shall be the duty of the owner or operator of the manufactured home park to enforce this provision. 

(3) 	
All manufactured home parks shall provide safe, convenient, asphalt or concrete pedestrian walkways at least four (4) feet in width as common walks connecting to a paved street and connecting the park streets and all community facilities provided for park residents. 

(4) 	
Illumination of Streets. All manufactured home park lots shall be furnished with lighting fixtures so spaced and so equipped with luminaries as will provide adequate levels of illumination throughout the park for the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians, at night. 


C. 	The street system within a manufactured home park shall consist only of private streets, as follows: 
(1) 	
The entrance roads or area connecting the park with a public street or road shall have a minimum pavement width of thirty-six (36) feet for a depth of at least one hundred (100) feet from the public street or road. 

(2) 	
The Board may modify the fifty (50) foot right-of-way requirement and the cartway width requirement based upon the needs of the manufactured home park. Such standards may be modified, but in no case will paved road widths be less than twenty-four (24) feet plus curb widths and sidewalks. 

(3) 	
Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks (parallel to streets) may be required or waived depending upon the needs of the manufactured home park, including drainage and safety considerations. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 78 
Article 7:  Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks 
Article 8: Administration 

Section 801: Enforcement 
Inspection revealing non-compliance with plans submitted under the provisions of this Ordinance, including, without limitation, conservation plan measures for erosion and sedimentation, and/or non-compliance with applicable agreements, including, without limitation, the Land Development Improvements Agreement, shall be sufficient grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of building and/or other permits by the Township until correction thereof and/or imposition of such other penalties and/or pursuit of such other remedies, including, without limitation, injunction relief, as may be provided by this Ordinance or otherwise by law. 
Section 802: Filing Fees 
Upon and together with the filing of an application for approval of a subdivision and land development plan, the applicant shall pay to the Township Secretary, to the use of the Township, such filing fees, based upon and in accordance with a schedule as shall be established from time to time by resolution of the Board, to defray the administration costs and expenses of the Township in processing the application. 
Section 803: Reimbursement of Professionals Review and Inspection Costs 
A. 	Review fees incurred by the Township to to review a subdivision and land development plan shall be charged to and paid by the applicant. Review fees shall include necessary and reasonable fees and costs charged by the Township Engineer, Township Solicitor, and/or such other professional consultants as may be engaged by the Township for review of the application and report thereon to the Township. The need for such review and report, and the selection of the consultants to perform the same, shall be determined in the sole discretion of the Board. 
B. 	Review fees shall be based upon a schedule established from time to time by resolution of the Board. Such review fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with ordinary and customary charges by the Township Engineer, Township Solicitor, and/or such other professional consultant for similar service in the community, but in no event shall the review fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the Township Engineer, Township Solicitor, and/or other professional consultant to the Township when fees or costs are not reimbursed by or otherwise imposed upon the applicant. 
C. 	The applicant, at such times as hereinafter provided, shall be required to deposit with the Township, in cash funds to be held in escrow by the Township for the exclusive use of the Township to draw upon, at its sole order, for purposes of reimbursement to itself in paying review fees, in accordance with the regulations herein. 
D. 	The initial cash deposit shall be made at the time of the filing of the application for approval of the subdivision and land development and shall be in addition to the applicable filing fee. The amount of the initial deposit shall be based upon and in accordance with a schedule established from time to time by resolution of the Board. 
(1) 
Upon incurring or receiving a statement for review fees, the Township shall bill the applicant. To the extent that the applicant does not timely and properly dispute the invoiced review fees, according to the guidelines of the MPC, the Township may draw upon the escrow deposit as may be necessary to either reimburse itself or pay, as the case may be, the amount of the fees or part thereof. 

(2) 	
To the extent that no other sums are due and owing the Township by the applicant in connection with the subdivision or land development, any portion of the escrow deposit, which remains after all review fees have been fully reimbursed to or paid by the Township there from, shall be refunded to the applicant. 

(3) 	
In the event that the applicant disputes the amount of any review fees billed by invoice of the Township, then the Township and the applicant shall follow the procedures for dispute resolution set forth in the MPC, as amended. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 79 
Article 8:  Administration 
Section 804: Material Test Costs 
The applicant shall pay to the Township, upon invoice rendered by the Township, the actual cost to the Township of the material test costs or the other fees and costs as reasonably estimated by the Township Engineer, in its sole discretion, to be necessary or desirable in connection with the review, inspection and/or approval of any subdivision and/or land development plan and/or the improvements required and/or proposed therein. 
Section 805: Other Fees and Costs 
The applicant shall pay to the Township, upon invoice rendered by the Township, all fees and costs incurred by the Township in or for the preparation, recording and/or filing of any subdivision/ land development improvement agreement, improvement guaranty, maintenance bond, escrow agreement, deed of dedication and/or such other instrument as may be deemed necessary or desirable by the Board, in its sole discretion, in connection with the review, approval, inspection, construction, and/or completion of subdivision or land development, including plans therefor, applications for approval thereof, and improvements required or proposed therein. 
Section 806: Failure to Pay or Deposit Fees and Costs 
A. 	No application for approval of a subdivision or land development plan shall be complete, considered filed, or considered as accepted by the Township until all filing fees have been fully paid and the initial deposit for review fees has been fully made, and until the other requirements of this Ordinance have been fully satisfied. 
B. 	The final plans for an approved subdivision or land development shall not be released for recording until such time as the applicant has reimbursed the Township for all fees incurred by the Township pursuant to this Article 
8. 
Section 807: Penalties and Remedies 
A. 	Preventive Remedies. 
(1) 	The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision or land development of real property in violation of this Ordinance. 
B. 	Enforcement Remedies. 
(1) 	
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500.00 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this Ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice and thereafter each date that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. 

(2) 	
The Court of Common Pleas of Chester County, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment. 

(3) 	
Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this Section. 


West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 80 
Article 8:  Administration 
C. 	Jurisdiction. District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction in enforcement proceedings brought under the regulations of this Ordinance. 
Section 809: Appeals 
Appeals from decisions and other actions of the Board with respect to any application for subdivision or land development approval shall be governed by the provisions of the MPC. 
Section 810: Amendments 
Power to Amend. This Ordinance may from time to time be amended by the Board, in accordance with the provisions of the MPC, as amended. 
Section 811: Flood Plain Permits; Protection; Liability 
The grant of a permit or approval of a plan for any proposed subdivision and/or land development located within any designated flood plain district shall not constitute a representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the Township or by any official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use, and shall create no liability upon the Township, its officials or employees. 
West Nantmeal Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2013 	Page: 81 
Article 8:  Administration 





WEST NANTMEAL STORMWATER  MANAGEMENT
and
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONROL ORDINANCE

West Nantmeal, Chester County Pennsylvania








Adopted at a Public Meeting held on

November 11	,2013
 


Table of Contents
 
ARTICLE I- GENERAL PROVISIONS	1
Section 101.  Short Title	1
Section 102. Statement of Findings	1
Section 103. Purpose	2
Section 104.  Statutory Authority	3
Section 105. Applicability	4
Section 106. Exemptions and Modified Requirements	5
Section 107. Repealer	12
Section 108. Severability	12
Section 109.  Compatibility with Other Ordinances or Legal Requirements	12
Section 110. Financial Security	12
Section 111. Waivers	13
Section 112. Erroneous Permit	13
ARTICLE  II-DEFINITIONS	14
Section 201.  Interpretation	14
Section 202.  Definitions	14
ARTICLE III - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS	25
Section 301.  General Requirements	25
Section 302.  Permit Requirements by Other Governmental Entities	28
Section 303.  Erosion and Sediment Control	28
Section 304.  Site Design Process	29
Section 305.  Water Quality and Runoff Volume Requirements	31
Section 306. Infiltration Requirements	32
Section 307.  Stream Channel Protection Requirements	35
Section 308.  Stormwater Peak Rate Control Requirements	36
Section 309. Calculation Methodology	38
Section 310.  Other Requirements	40
Section 311. Other Conveyance and System Design Standards	41
Section 312. Erosion and Sediment Control During Regulated Activities	46
ARTICLE IV -STORMWATER  MANAGEMENT (SVlM) SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS ..47 Section 401.  General Requirements	47
Section 402.  SWM Site Plan Contents	47
Section 403.  SWM Site Plan Submission	54
Section 404.  SWM Site Plan Review	55
Section 405.  Revision of SWM Site Plans	56
Section 406.  Resubmission oflnconsistent or Noncompliant  SWM Site Plans	57
ARTICLE V -PERFORMANCE  AND INSPECTION OF REGULATED  ACTIVITIES,  AND FINAL AS-BUILT PLANS	58
Section 501.  Performance and Inspection of Regulated Activities	58
Section 502.  Final As-Built Plans	58
ARTICLE VI-FEES AND EXPENSES	60
Section 601.  Township SWM Site Plan Review and Inspection Fees	60
Section 602.  Expenses Covered by Fees	60
ARTICLE VII - OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE (O&M) RESPONSIBILITIES AND EASEMENTS 	61
Section 701.  General Requirements for Protection, Operation and Maintenance of Stormwater
BMPs and Conveyances 	61
Section 702. Operation and Maintenance Plans 	62
Section 703.  Operation and Maintenance Agreements 	65
Section 704. Easements and Deed Restrictions 	65
Section 705.  Other Post-construction Responsibilities 	69
ARTICLE VIII - PROHIBITIONS 	70
Section 80I.  Prohibited Discharges 	70
Section 802.  Prohibited Connections 	71
Section 803.  Roof Drains and Sump Pumps 	71
Section 804. Alteration of BMPs 	72
ARTICLE IX -ENFORCEMENT  AND PENALTIES 	73
Section 90 I.  Public Nuisance 	73
Section 902.  Right of Entry 	73
Section 903.  Enforcement 	73
Section 904.  Suspension and Revocation of Permits and Approvals 	75
Section 905.  Penalties 	75
Section 906.  Appeals 	76
Section 907.  Effective Date 	76
 



APPENDICES
Appendix A.	Simplified Approach to Stormwater Management for Small Projects

A.	I.	Applicability, Submittal and Approval Requirements
A.2.	"Simplified Approach to Stormwater Management for Small Projects -HandbooK'
A.3.	"Simplified Approach -Stormwater Best A1anagement Practices Operation, Maintenance and Inspection Plan and Agreement" - Sample Agreement

Appendix B.	Site Design Process
Appendix C.	Runoff Coefficients and Curve Numbers Appendix D.	West Nile Virus Design Guidance
Appendix E.	"Stormwater Best A1anagement Practices and Conveyances
Operation and A1aintenance Agreement" - Sample Agreement Appendix F:	Conestoga  River Watershed  Release  Rate Map
 
ARTICLEI- GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 101.  Short Title

This Ordinance shall be known as the West Nantmeal  Township  Stonnwater Management  and Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance.

Section 102.  Statement of Findings

The Governing Body of the Township finds that:

A.	Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff  resulting  from  land  disturbance and development throughout a watershed increases flooding, flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stmmwater, undermines floodplain	management and flood reduction efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces infiltration and groundwater recharge, increases  nonpoint  source pollution to waterways, and threatens public health and safety.

B.	Inadequate plam1ing and management of stormwater runoff resulting from land disturbance and development throughout a watershed can harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion of stream beds and stream banks, thereby elevating sedimentation), destroying aquatic habitat, and elevating aquatic pollutant concentrations and loadings such  as sediments,  nutrients, heavy metals, and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss of recharge.

C.	A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including minimization of impacts of New Development, Redevelopment, and other Earth Disturbance Activities causing accelerated runoff and erosion and loss of natural infiltration, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the Township and all of the people of the Commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.

D.	Stormwater is an impmiant water resource that provides infiltration  and  groundwater recharge for water supplies and baseflow of streams, which also protects  and  maintains surface water quality.

E.	Impacts from stormwater runoff can be minimized by reducing the volume of sto1mwater generated and by using project designs that maintain the natural  hydrologic  regime  and sustain high water quality, infiltration, stream baseflow, and aquatic ecosystems. Cost­ effective and environmentally sensitive stormwater management can be achieved through the use of nonstructural Site design techniques that minimize Impervious Surfaces, reduce disturbance of land and natural resources, avoid sensitive areas (i.e., riparian buffers, floodplains, steep slopes, wetlands, etc.), and consider topography and soils to maintain the natural hydrologic regime.
 
F.	Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an essential component in successfully addressing st01mwater.

G.	Non-stormwater discharges to municipal or other storm sewer systems can contribute to pollution of the Waters of the Commonwealth.

Section 103.  Purpose

The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect public health, safety and general welfare, property and water quality by implementing drainage and stormwater management practices, criteria, and provisions included herein for land development, construction and Eaiih Disturbance Activities, to achieve the following throughout the Township:

A.	Reduce the frequency and magnitude of flooding and stormwater impacts affecting people, property, infrastructure and public services.

B.	Sustain or improve the natural hydrologic  characteristics and water quality of groundwater and surface waters.

C.	Protect natural resources, including riparian and aquatic living resources and habitats.

D.	Maintain  the  natural  hydrologic  regime  of Land  Development  Sites  and  their  receiving watersheds.

E.	Minimize land disturbance and protect and incorporate natural hydrologic features, drainage patterns,	infiltration,	and	flow	conditions	within	land	development	Site	designs.

F.	Reduce and minimize the volume of stormwater generated, and manage and release stormwater as close to the source of runoff as possible.

G.	Provide infiltration and maintain natural groundwater recharge to protect groundwater supplies and stream baseflows, prevent degradation of surface water and groundwater quality, and to otherwise protect water resources.

H.	Reduce stormwater pollutant loads to protect and improve the chemical, physical, and biological quality of ground and surface waters.

I.	Reduce scour, erosion and sedimentation of stream channels.

J.	Reduce flooding impacts and preserve and restore the natural flood-carrying capacity of streams and their floodplains.

K. Protect   adjacent   and   downgradient   lands  from  adverse  impacts  of  direct   stormwater discharges.

L.	Minimize  Impervious  Surfaces and connected  Impervious  Surfaces to promote  infiltration and reduce the volume and impacts of stonnwater runoff.
 

M.	Provide proper long-term operation and maintenance of all permanent stmmwater management  facilities, BMPs and Conveyances that are implemented  within the Township.

N.	Reduce the impacts of rnnoff from existing developed land undergoing Redevelopment while encouraging New Development and Redevelopment in urban areas and areas designated for growth.

0. Implement an illicit discharge detection and elimination  program that addresses non­ stormwater discharges.

P. Provide performance standards and design criteria based on watershed-based stonnwater management planning.

Q. Provide	standards	to	meet	certain	NPDES	stonnwater	pem1it	requirements.

R.	Meet legal water quality requirements under State law, including regulations at 25 PA Code Chapter 93, to protect, maintain, reclaim and restore the existing and designated uses of the Waters of the Commonwealth.

S.	Provide review procedures and perfo1mance standards for stormwater planning and management.

T.	Fulfill the purpose and requirements of PA Act 167 (PA Act 167, Section 3):

"(1) Encourage planning  and management of storm water runoff in each watershed which is consistent with sound water and land use practices.

(2)	Authorize a comprehensive program of stormwater management designated to preserve and restore the flood canying capacity of Commonwealth streams; to preserve to the maximum extent practicable natural storm water runoff regimes and natural course, current and cross-section of water of the Commonwealth; and to protect and conserve groundwaters and ground-water recharge areas.

(3)	Encourage local administration and management of storm water consistent with the Commonwealth's duty as trustee of natural resources and the people's constitutional right to the preservation  of natural, economic, scenic, aesthetic, recreational and historic values of the environment."

Section 104.  Statutory Authority

The Township  is empowered  or required  to regulate  land use activities that affect rnnoff  and surface and groundwater quality and quantity by the authority of:

A.	Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167) 32 P.S., Section 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water Management Act" 01ereinafter refeffed to as "the Act");
 
B.	Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. Sections 65101 et seq.; and the

C.  Act  of July 31,  1968, P.L.  805, No.  247, 53 P.S.  Section  10101, et seq., as amended,  the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 hereinafter refeJTed to as the "MPC").

Section 105.  Applicability

A.	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the provisions of Atiicle VIII, titled, "Prohibitions" shall apply to every person in the Township regardless if they are engaged in a Regulated Activity.

B.	The following activities are regulated by this Ordinance:

1.	All Regulated Activities as defined in this Ordinance including, but not limited to, New Development, Redevelopment, and Earth Disturbance Activities that are located within the Township shall be subject to regulation by this Ordinance.

2.	When a building and/or grading permit is required for any Regulated Activity on an existing parcel or approved lot created by a subdivision and/or improved as a land development project, issuance of the permit shall be conditioned upon adherence to the terms of this Ordinance.

3.	This Ordinance contains the stormwater management perfo1mance standards and design criteria that are necessary from a watershed-based perspective.  The  Township's stormwater management Conveyance and system design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.) shall continue to be regulated by the applicable municipal ordinance(s) and applicable State regulations, or as included in Section 311 of this Ordinance.

C.	Duty of Persons Engaged in a Regulated Activity

Notwithstanding any provision(s)  of this Ordinance,  including exemptions, any Landowner or any person engaged in a Regulated Activity, including but not limited to the alteration or development of land, which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics,  shall  implement such measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety, or other property. Such measures also shall include actions as are required to manage  the  rate, volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property, and water quality of Waters of the Commonwealth.

D.	Phased and Incremental Project Requirements

I. Any Regulated Activity (including but not limited to New Development, Redevelopment, or Earth Disturbance) that is to take place incrementally or in phases, or occurs in sequential projects on the same parcel or prope1iy, shall be subject to regulation by this Ordinance if the cumulative Proposed Impervious Surface or Eaith Disturbance exceeds the coJTesponding thTeshold for exemption (as presented  in Table 106.l "Thresholds for
 
Regulated  Activities that  are Exempt  from the Provisions  of this Ordinance as Listed Below").

2. The date of adoption of this Ordinance shall be the starting point from which to consider tracts as parent tracts relative to future subdivisions, and from which Impervious Surface and Earth Disturbance computations shall be cumulatively considered.

For example:

If, after adoption of this Ordinance, an Applicant proposes construction of a six hundred (600) square foot garage, that project would be exempted from the requirements of this Ordinance as noted in Table 106.1. If, at a later date, an Applicant proposes to construct a nine hundred (900) square foot room addition on the same property, the Applicant would then be required to implement the stormwater management and plan submission requirements of this Ordinance for the cumulative total of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of additional  Impervious Surface added to the prope11y since adoption of this Ordinance.

Section 106. Exemptions and Modified Requirements

A.	Requirements for Exempt Activities

1.	An exemption  from any requirement of this Ordinance shall not relieve  the Applicant from implementing all other applicable requirements of this Ordinance or from implementing such measures as are necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare, prope11y and water quality.

2.	An exemption shall not relieve the Applicant from complying with the requirements for State-designated special protection waters designated by PADEP as high quality (HQ) or exceptional value (EV) waters, or any other current or future State or municipal water quality protection requirements.

3.	An exemption under this Ordinance shall not relieve the Applicant from complying with all other applicable municipal ordinances or regulations.

B.	General Exemptions Regulated Activities that:
I. Involve less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of Proposed  Impervious  Surfaces AND less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of Earth Disturbance; or

2. Are listed in Subsection 106.C, are exempt from those (and only those) requirements of this Ordinance that are included in the sections and aiticles listed in Table 106.1. Exemptions are for the items noted in Table 106.1 only, and shall not relieve the Landowner  from other applicable requirements  of this Ordinance. Exemption  shall not
 
relieve  the  Applicant  from  implementing  such  measures  as  are  necessary  to  protect health, safety, and welfare, property, and water quality.
 
TABLE 106.1


Thresholds for Regulated Activities that are Exempt from the Provisions of this Ordinance as Listed Below (see Notes below)

















































Table 106.1 Notes:
•	Specific activities  listed  in  Subsection  106.C are exempt  from the indicated  requirements,  regardless  of size.
•	A proposed  Regulated  Activity must be less than BOTH the Proposed Impervious Surfaces and proposed Earth Disturbance thresholds to be eligible for exemption from the requirements listed in this table.
•	"Proposed In1pervious Surface" - as defined in this Ordinance.
•	"Exempt" - Regulated  Activities are exempt from the requirements of listed section(s) only; all other provisions of this Ordinance apply.
 
C.	Exemptions for Specific Activities

The following  specific Regulated  Activities  are exempt  from the requirements  of Sections 301, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, and 310, and  Article IV, Article V, Article VI and Aiiicle
VII) of this Ordinance (as shown in Table  106.1), unless otherwise noted  below. All other
conveyance  and  system  design  standards  established  by  the  Township  in  other  codes  or ordinances shall be required, and all other provisions of this Ordinance shall apply.

1.	Emergency Exemption - Emergency maintenance work performed for the protection of public health, safety and welfare. This exemption is limited to repair of the  existing facility; upgrades, additions or other improvements are not exempt. A written description of the  scope and extent of any emergency work performed shall be submitted to the Township within two (2) calendar days of the commencement of the activity. A detailed plan shall be submitted no later than thirty (30) days following commencement of the activity. If the Township finds that the work is not an emergency, then the work shall cease immediately and the requirements of this Ordinance shall be addressed as applicable.

2.	Maintenance - Any maintenance to an existing stormwater management system, facility, BMP or Conveyance made in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Municipal Engineer or Township .

3.	Existing Landscaping - Use of land for maintenance, replacement or enhancement of existing landscaping.

4.	Gardening - Use of land for gardening for home consumption.

5.	Agricultural Related Activities -

a.	Agricultural Activities (as defined in Atiicle II), when perfonned  in accordance with the requirements of25 PA Code Chapter  I 02.

b.	Conservation Practices (as defined in Aiiicle II) that do not involve construction of any new or expanded Impervious Surfaces.

6.	Forest Management - Forest management operations, which are consistent with a sound forest management plan as filed with the Township and which comply with the Pennsylvania Department ofEnviromnental Protection's management practices contained in its pnblication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidelines for Forestry" (as amended or replaced by subsequent guidance). Such operations are required to have an Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan, which meets the requirements of 25 PA Code Chapter I 02 and meets the erosion and sediment control standards of Section 303 of this Ordinance.

7.	Maintenance of Existing Paved Surfaces - Replacement of existing paved surfaces shall meet the erosion and sediment control requirements of 25 PA Code Chapter 102 and Section  303  of  this  Ordinance,  and  is  exempt  from  all  other  requirements  of  this
 
Ordinance listed in Subsection 106.C above. Resurfacing of existing paved surfaces is exempt from the requirements of this Ordinance listed above. Construction of new or additional Impervious Surfaces shall comply with all requirements of this Ordinance as indicated in Table 106.1.

8.	Municipal Roadway Shoulder Improvements - Shoulder improvements conducted within the existing roadway cross-section of municipal owned roadways, unless  an  NPDES permit is required, in which case the proposed work must comply with all requirements of this Ordinance.

9.	In-Place Replacement of Residential Dwelling Unit - The replacement m the exact footprint of an existing one- or two-family dwelling unit.

10.	In-Place Replacement, Repair, or Maintenance of Residential Impervious Surfaces - The replacement of existing residential patios, decks, driveways, pools, garages, and/or sidewalks that are accessory to an existing one- or two-family dwelling unit in the exact footprint of the existing Impervious Surface.

D.	Modified Requirements for Small Projects

Regulated Activities that involve both: (i) up to 2,000 square feet of Proposed Impervious Surfaces; and (ii) up to 10,000 square  feet of proposed Earth Disturbance, may apply the modified requirements presented in the "Simplified Approach to Stormwater Management for Small Projects" (Simplified Approach) (Appendix A) to comply with the requirements of Sections 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, and 310, and Article IV, Article V, Article VI and Aliicle VII of this Ordinance (as shown in Table 106.2). The Applicant shall first contact the Municipal Engineer: to confirm that the proposed project is eligible for use of the Simplified Approach and is not otherwise exempt from these Ordinance provisions; to determine what components of the proposed project are to be considered as  Impervious Surfaces; and to determine if other known Site or local conditions exist that may preclude the use of any techniques included in the Simplified Approach. Appendix A includes instructions and procedures for preparation, submittal, review and approval of documents required when using the Simplified Approach and shall be adhered to by the Applicant. All other provisions of this Ordinance shall apply.
 
TABLE 106.2
Thresholds for Regulated Activities that are Eligible for "Modified" Requirements for the
Provisions of this Ordinance that are Listed Below




















































Table I 06.2 Notes:
•	"Modified Requirements" - Regulated Activities listed within the Subsections of this Ordinance noted in Table l 06.2 are eligible for exemption only from the indicated sections and subsections of this Ordinance and only if the modified requirements of Subsections 106.D and/or E are met to the satisfaction of the Municipality; all other provisions of this Ordinance apply.
 
E.	Modified Requirements for Agricultural  Structures

It is the declared policy of the Commonwealth to conserve and protect and to encourage the development and improvement of its agricultural lands for the production of food and other agricultural products. Municipalities must encourage the continuity, development and viability of agricultural operations within its jurisdiction. Except as necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, Regulated Activities involving proposed new or expanded Impervious Surfaces associated with Agricultural Activities are exempt from the requirements of Sections 301, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, and 310, and A1ticle IV, Alticle V, A1ticle VI and Alticle VII of this Ordinance (and listed in Table 106.2) only when it has been demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Municipality that the proposed project will comply with all of the requirements listed belowAll other provisions of this Ordinance shall apply. To be eligible for exemption from the Ordinance provisions stated above, the proposed Regulated Activity shall:

1.	Be directly associated with an Agricultural Activity (as defined in Alticle II);
2.	Include  less  than  ten  thousand  (I0,000)  square  feet  of  proposed   new  or  expanded
Impervious Surface (excluding adjoining vehicle parking and movement areas) and not more than an additional five thousand (5,000) square feet of adjoining  vehicle parking and movement area;
3.	Be  installed  on  a  fa1m  or  mushroom  operation  that  has  a  cunent  Mushroom  Farm
Environmental Management Plan (MFEMP) reviewed and deemed adequate by the Conservation District, or an Agricultural Erosion and Sediment Control Plan or Conservation Plan (as defined in Article II) that complies with the requirements of25 PA Code  102;
4.	Dive1i runoff from the proposed new or expanded Impervious Surfaces (including vehicle parking and movement area) entirely away from animal management, waste management and crop farming areas and any other source of pollutants;
5.	Include BMP(s) that will permanently  retain at least one (1) inch of rainfall runoff from
the total area of proposed new or expanded In1pervious Surfaces and vehicle parking and movement  areas;
6.	Be designed so that any point of discharge of runoff from the proposed new or expanded Impervious Surface (excluding vehicle movement area):
a.	Is  not  directly  connected  to,  and  is not  directly  connected  to  any  constructed Conveyance that is connected  to, a municipal  Separate St01m Sewer  System or
public roadway;
b.	Is located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from any municipal Separate Storm Sewer System or public  roadway,  or any  constructed  Conveyance connected  to
any municipal Separate Storm Sewer System or public roadway.
7.	Either:
a.	Have all proposed new or expanded Impervious Surfaces and proposed vehicle parking and movement areas and BMP(s) included within the current MFEMP or current Agricultural Erosion and Sediment Control Plan or a Conservation Plan for the farm or mushroom operation;
OR
b.	Be constructed per design plans prepared and sealed by a Licensed Professional in conformance  with  the PADEP  "Best Practices  for Environmental  Protection  in  the
 
Mushroom Farm Community" (2003 or as amended), or per design plans prepared and sealed by a Licensed Professional (or Conservation District staff person designated by NRCS) that comply with USDA NRCS standards and specifications, and for which completion of construction will be certified by the Licensed (or NRCS­ designated design) Professional responsible for the design; and
8.	Not be eligible for exemption if an NPDES permit is required."

Section 107.  Repealer

The West Nantmeal Township Stormwater Management Ordinance adopted as Ordinance No. 100 on February 11, 2008 is hereby repealed and replaced by this Ordinance. Any other ordinance or ordinance provision of the Township inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.

Section 108.  Severability

If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or  invalidity  shall  not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared the intent of the Governing Body of the Township that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid provision, sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.

Section 109.  Compatibility with Other Ordinances or Legal Requirements

A.	Approvals issued and actions taken pursuant to this Ordinance do not relieve the Applicant of the responsibility to secure and comply with other required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, law, regulation, or ordinance.

B.	To the extent that this Ordinance imposes more rigorous or stringent  requirements  for stormwater management than any other  code, rule,  act, law, regulation  or  ordinance,  the specific requirements contained in this Ordinance shall take precedence.

C.	Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to affect any of the Township's requirements regarding stormwater matters that do not conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, such as local stormwater management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). The requirements of this Ordinance shall supersede any conflicting requirements in other municipal ordinances or regulations.

Section 110. Financial Security

For all activities requiring submittal of a Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan that involve subdivision or land development, the Applicant shall post financial security to the Township for the timely installation and proper construction of all sto1mwater management facilities as required by the approved SWM Site Plan and this Ordinance, and such financial security shall:
 
A.	Be equal to or greater than the full construction cost of the required facilities except to the extent that financial security for the cost of any of such improvements is required to be and is posted with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation in connection with a highway occupancy pe1mit application;

AND

B.	Be determined, collected, applied and enforced in accordance with Sections 509-511 of the MPC and the provisions of the Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (SALDO).

Section 111. Waivers

A.	General
The requirements of this Ordinance are essential and shall be strictly adhered to. For any Regulated Activity where, after a close evaluation of alternative Site designs, it proves to be
impracticable to meet any one or more of the mandatory minimum standards of this Ordinance on the Site, the Township may approve measures other than those in this Ordinance, subject to Subsections 111.B and 111.C.

B.	The Governing Body shall have the authority to waive or modify the requirements  of one or more  provisions  of  this  Ordinance  if  the  literal  enforcement  will  exact  undue  hardship because  of  peculiar  conditions  pe1iaining  to  the  land  in  question,  provided  that  such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of the Ordinance  is  observed.	Cost  or  financial  burden  shall  not  be  considered  a  hardship. Modification   may   also  be  considered   if  an  alternative   standard  or  approach   can  be demonstrated   to  provide   equal   or  better   achievement   of  the  results   intended   by  the Ordinance. A request for modification shall be in writing and accompany the SWM Site Plan submission.   The request  shall state in full the grounds  and  facts on which the request  is based, the provision or provisions of the Ordinance involved and the minimum modification necessary.

C.	PADEP Approval Required
For any proposed  Regulated  Activity  involving Eaiih Disturbance  equal to or greater than
one (I) acre, the Township may approve measures for minimum volume  and  infiltration control other than those required in this Ordinance only after consultation with and evaluation by PADEP that the alternate Site design meets State water quality requirements and does not conflict with State law, including, but not limited to, the PA Clean Streams Law, 35 P.S. Section 691.1, et seq.

Section 112. Erroneous Permit

Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading or erroneous infonnation provided by an Applicant is void without the necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use established pursuant to  such  permit  or  other authorization is unlawful.
 
ARTICLE II- DEFINITIONS

Section 201.  Interpretation

For the purposes of this Ordinance, ce1iain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:

A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.

B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances oflike kind and character.

C.	The word "person" includes an individual, paiinership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate, Township , governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. Whenever used in any section prescribing or imposing a penalty, the term "person" shall include the members of a paiinership, the officers, members, servants and agents of an association, officers, agents and servants of a corporation, and the officers of a Township .

D.	The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and "should" are pe1missive.

E.	The words "used" or "occupied" include the words  "intended,  designed,  maintained,  or arranged to be used, occupied, or maintained."

F.	The definitions in this Ordinance are for the purposes of enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance and have no bearing on other municipal regulations or ordinances.

Section 202.  Definitions

Agricultural Activity - Activities  associated with agriculture such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal-heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting or harvesting crops; or pasturing and raising of livestock; and installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an Agricultural Activity.

Applicant - A Landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an application to the Township for approval to engage in any Regulated Activity as defined in this Ordinance.

As-Built Plans (Drawings) - Engineering or Site plans or drawings that document the actual locations, dimensions and elevations of the improvements, and building components, and changes made to the original design plans. The final version of these documents, or a copy of same, are signed and sealed by a qualified Licensed Professional and submitted to the Township at the completion of the project, as per the requirements of Section 502 of this Ordinance as "final As-Built Plans''.
 
Bankfull - The channel at the top-of-bank or point from where water begins to overflow onto a floodplain.

Baseflow - Portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater; the sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from water diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other human activities.

BMP (Best Management Practice) - Activities, facilities,  designs,  measures,  or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from Regulated Activities, to provide water quality treatment, infiltration, volume reduction, and/or peak rate control, to promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this Ordinance. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one (!) of two (2) broad categories or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this Ordinance, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical  device  or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to,  a wide variety of practices and devices  from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are pe1manent appm1enances to the Site.

Buffer - See Riparian Buffer.

Carbonate Geology (or carbonate  rock formations)- See Karst.

CFS - Cubic Feet per Second.

Channel - A natural or artificial open drainage feature that conveys, continuously or periodically, flowing water and through which stormwater flows. Channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly full.

CN - Curve number.

Commonwealth -Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

Conservation District -The Chester County Conservation District.

Conservation Plan - A plan written by a plarmer certified by NRCS that identifies Conservation Practices and includes site specific BMPs for agricultural plowing or tilling activities and animal heavy use areas.

Consen'ation Practices - Practices installed on agricultural lands to improve farmland, soil and/or water quality which have been identified in a current Conservation Plan.
 
Conveyance - A natural or manmade, existing or proposed facility, feature or cham1el used for the transpo1iation or transmission of sto1mwater from one place to another. For the purposes of this Ordinance, Conveyance shall include pipes, drainage ditches, chailllels and  swales (vegetated and other), gutters, stream chailllels, and like facilities or features.

Design Storm - The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., a five (5)-year st01m) and duration (e.g., twenty-four
(24)	hours), used in the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see Return Period.

Detention (or To Detain) - Capture and temporary storage of runoff in a stormwater management facility for release at a controlled rate.

Detention Basin - An impoundment designed to collect and retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predete1mined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely sho1ily after any given rainfall event.

Detention Volume - The volume of runoff that is captured and released into the Waters of the Commonwealth at a controlled rate.
Developer -A person who seeks to undertake any Regulated Activities at a Site in the Township Diameter at Breast Height (DBH) - The outside bark diameter of a tree at breast height which
is defined as four and one half (4.5) feet (one and thiiiy-seven one-hundredths of a meter (1.37
m)) above the forest floor on the uphill side of the tree.

Disturbed Area - Land area disturbed by or where an Eaiih Disturbance Activity is occurring or has occurred.

Drainage Area - That land ai·ea contributing runoff to a single point (including but not limited to the point/line of interest used for hydrologic and hydraulic calculations) and that is enclosed by a natural or man-made ridge line.

Earth Disturbance (or Earth Disturbance Activity) - A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance; land development; building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.

Easement - A right of use granted by a Landowner to allow a grantee the use of the designated p01tion of land for a specified purpose, such as for stormwater management or other drainage purposes.

Erosion - The process by which the surface of the land, including water/stream chailllels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
 
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan - A plan required by the Conservation District or the Township to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation, and that must be prepared and approved per the applicable requirements.

FEMA - Federal Emergency Management Agency.

Flood - A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of this Commonwealth.

Floodplain - Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being a Special Flood Hazard Area.

Floodway - The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to cmTy mid discharge the one hundred (100)-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In ml area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined  the boundary of the one hundred (100)-year floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the centerline of the stream and to fifty (50) feet beyond the top of the bank of the stream on both sides.

Forest Management/Timber Operations - Planning and act1v1t1es necessary for the management of forest lands. These include timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting, Site preparation, and reforestation.

Freeboard - A vertical distance between the design high-water elevation and the elevation of the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale, or diversion berm. The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.

Geotextile - A fabric  manufactured from synthetic fiber that is used to achieve specific objectives, including infiltration, separation between different types of media (i.e., between soil and stone), or filtration.

Governing Body-the Board of Supervisors of West Nantmeal Township.

Grade/Grading - 1. (noun) A slope, usually of a road, channel, or natural ground, specified in percent and shown on plans as specified herein. 2. (verb) To finish the surface of a roadbed, the top of an embankment, or the bottom of an excavation.

Groundwater - Water that occurs in the subsurface and fills or saturates the porous openings, fractures and fissures of under-ground soils and rock units.

Groundwater Recharge - The replenishment of existing natural groundwater supplies from infiltration of rain or overland flow.

HEC-1-The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering Center (HEC) hydrologic runoff model.
 

HEC-HMS - The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering Center (HEC) - Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS).

Hotspots - Areas where prior or existing land use or activities can potentially generate highly contaminated rnnoff with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater.

Hydrologic Regime - The hydrologic system, cycle or balance that sustains the quality and quantity of stormwater, stream baseflow, storage, and groundwater supplies under natural conditions.

Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG) - A classification of soils by the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), into four (4) rnnoff potential groups. The groups range
from A soils, which are very permeable and produce little rnnoff, to D soils, which are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.

Impervious Surface - A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it prevents or is resistant to infiltration of water, including but not limited to: structures such as roofs, buildings, storage sheds; other solid, paved or concrete areas such as streets, driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, patios, decks, tellllis or other paved courts; or athletic playfields comprised of synthetic turf materials. For the purposes of determining compliance with this Ordinance, compacted soils or stone surfaces used for vehicle parking and movement shall be considered impervious. Surfaces that were designed to allow infiltration (i.e. areas of porous pavement) will be considered on a case-by-case basis by the Municipal Engineer, based on appropriate documentation and condition of the material, etc.

Infiltration - Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated downward to recharge groundwater.

Infiltration Facility - A stormwater BMP designed to collect and discharge runoff into the subsurface in a manner that allows infiltration into underlying soils and groundwater  (e.g., French drains, seepage pits, or seepage trenches, etc.).

Intermittent Stream - A defined channel in which surface water is absent during a p01tion of the year, in response to seasonal variations in precipitation or groundwater discharge.

Invert - The lowest surface, the floor or bottom of a culve1t, pipe, drain, sewer, channel, basin, BMP, or orifice.

Karst - A type of topography that is formed over limestone or other carbonate rock f01mations by dissolving or solution of the rock by water, and that is characterized by closed depressions, sinkholes, caves, a subsurface network of solution conduits and fissures through which groundwater moves, and no perennial surface drainage features.

Land Development -Any of the following activities:
 
A.	The improvement of one (1) lot or two (2) or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
I.	A group of two (2) or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed
initially or cumulatively, or a single nomesidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure, or
2.  The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or among two (2) or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features;
B.	A subdivision of land;
C.	Development  in accordance  with  Section 503(1.1)  of the  Pennsylvania  Municipalities Planning Code (as amended).

Landowner - The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if they are authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the Landowner, or other person having a proprietary interest in the land.

Licensed Professional - A Pennsylvania Registered Professional Engineer, Registered Landscape Architect, Registered Professional Land Surveyor, or Registered  Professional Geologist, or any person licensed by the Pennsylvania Depaiiment of State and qualified by law to perform the work required by the Ordinance within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

Limiting Zone - A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or underlying strata that includes one of the following:
A.	A  seasonal  high  water  table,  whether  perched   or  regional,   determined  by   direct
observation of the water table or indicated by other subsurface or soil conditions.
B.	A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to fill the voids between the fragments.
C.  A rock formation,  other  stratum, or soil condition  that is so slowly permeable  that  it effectively limits downward passage of water.

MPC-ActofJuly31,   1968, P.L.  805,No. 247,  53 P.S.  Section  10101,etseq., as amended,  the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247.

MFEMP -Musluoom Farm Environmental  Management Plan.

Maintenance - The action taken to restore or preserve the as-built functional design of any facility or system.

Municipal Engineer - A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a Municipality/Township, planning agency, or joint planning commission.

Municipality -West Nantmeal,  Chester County, Pennsylvania.

NOAA - National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
 
New Development - Any Regulated Activity involving placement or construction of new Impervious Surface or grading over existing pervious land areas not classified as Redevelopment as defined in this Ordinance.

Nonpoint Source Pollution - Pollution that enters a water body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible, confined, or discrete Conveyances.

Nonstormwater Discharges - Water flowing in stormwater collection facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a rainfall event or snowmelt.

Nonstructural Best Management Practice (BMPs) - See Best Management Practice (BMP).

NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the Federal government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act, which is delegated to PADEP in Pennsylvania.

NRCS - Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service, SCS), an agency of the U.S. Depaitment of Agriculture.

PADEP -Pennsylvania  Department  of Environmental Protection.

Parent Tract - The parcel of land from which a land development or subdivision originates, determined from the date of municipal adoption of this Ordinance.

Peak Discharge - The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm event.

PennDOT - Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.

Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual (PADEP BMP Manual) - Document Number 363-0300-002 (December 2006, and as subsequently amended).

Pervious Surface (or Pervious Area)-Any area not defined as Impervious Surface'.

Planning Commission -The Planning Commission of West Nantmeal.

Point Source - Any discernible, confined, and discrete Conveyance including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in State regulations at 25 Pennsylvania Code § 92.1.

Post-construction - Period after construction during which Disturbed Areas are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and functioning, and all proposed improvements approved by the Township are completed.

Predevelopment - Land cover conditions assumed to exist within the proposed Disturbed Area prior to connnencement of the Regulated Activity for the purpose of calculating the Predevelopment water quality volume, infiltration volume, and peak flow rates as required in this Ordinance.
 

Pretreatment - Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide storage or filtering, or other methods to trap or remove coarse materials and other pollutants before they enter the stormwater system, but may not necessarily be designed to meet the entire water quality volume requirements of this Ordinance.

Proposed Impervious Surface - All new, additional and replacement Impervious Surfaces.

Rainfall Intensity - The depth of accumulated rainfall per unit of time.

Recharge - The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration of rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated wastewater.

Redevelopment - Any Regulated Activity that involves demolition, removal, reconstruction, or replacement of existing Impervious Surface(s).

Regulated Activity -  Any Earth Disturbance Activity(ies) or any activity that involves the alteration or development ofland in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff.

Regnlated Earth Disturbance Activity - Any activity involving Eaiih Disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 92, Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.

Retention or To Retain - The prevention of direct discharge of stormwater runoff into surface waters or water bodies during or after a storm event by permanent containment in a pond or depression; examples include systems which discharge by percolation  to  groundwater, exfiltration, and/or evaporation processes and which generally have residence times of less than three (3) days.

Retention Basin - An impoundment that is designed to temporarily detain a certain amount of stormwater from a catchment area and which may be designed to permanently retain stom1water runoff from the catchment area; retention basins always contain water.

Retention Volume/Removed Runoff - The  volume  of  runoff  that  is  captured  and  not  released directly  into the  surface Waters  of the  Co111111onwealth  during or after  a storm event.

Return Period - The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one (!) time. For example, the twenty-five (25)-year return period rainfall would be expected to occur on average once every twenty-five (25) years; or stated in another way, the probability of a twenty-five (25)-year storm occurring in any one (!) year is four-one hundredths (0.04) (i.e., a four (4)% chance).

Riparian - Pe1iaining to anything connected with or inunediately adjacent to the banks of a stream or other body of water.
 
Riparian Buffer - An area of land adjacent to a body of  water and managed to maintain vegetation to protect the integrity of stream channels and shorelines, to reduce the impact of upland sources of pollution by trapping, filtering, and conve1iing sediments, nutrients, and other chemicals, and to supply food, cover and thermal protection to fish and other aquatic species and wildlife.

Runoff -Any pa1i of precipitation that flows over the land surface.

SALDO - See Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.

SCS - Soil Conservation Service, now known as the Natural Resources Conservation Service.

Sediment - Soil or other materials transpo1ied by, suspended in or deposited by surface water as a product of erosion.

Separate Storm Sewer System - A Conveyance or system of Conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or stonn drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.

Sheet Flow - A flow process associated with broad, shallow water movement on sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or concentrated.

Site - Total area of land in the Township where any proposed Regulated Activity, as defined in this Ordinance, is planned, conducted, or maintained or that is otherwise impacted by the Regulated Activity.

Soil Cover Complex Method - A method of runoff computation developed by NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to a runoff parameter called curve number (CN).

State Water Quality Requirements - The regulatory requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Pennsylvania Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.

Storm Frequency - (see Return Period).

Stormwater - Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.

Stormwater Management Facility - Any feature, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores, or otherwise affects sto1mwater nmoff quality, rate, or quantity. Typical st01mwater management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and Infiltration Facilities.

Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan - The plan prepared by the Applicant or its representative, in accordance with the requirements of A1iicle IV of this Ordinance, indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at a particular Site in accordance with this Ordinance, and including all necessary design drawings, calculations, supp01iing text, and documentation to demonstrate that Ordinance requirements have been met, herein refe1Ted to as "SWM Site Plan."
 
All references in this Ordinance to "final" or "approved" SWM Site Plans shall incorporate the approved SWM Site Plan and all subsequent approved revisions thereto.

Stream -A natural watercourse.

Structural Stormwater Management Practices - See BMP (Best Management Practices).

Subdivision - The division or re-division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land as defined in The Pem1sylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247 (as amended).

Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance - Subdivision and Land Development ordinance of West Nantmeal, Chester County, PA, as amended.

Swale - An artificial or natural waterway or low-lying stretch of land that gathers and conveys stormwater or runoff, and is generally vegetated for soil stabilization, stormwater pollutant removal, and infiltration.

SWM Site Plan - See Stormwater Management Site Plan.

TimberOperations-SeeForestManagement.

Top-of-bank - Highest point of elevation of the bank of a stream or channel cross-section at which a rising water level just begins to flow out of the channel and into the floodplain.

Township - West Nantmeal, Chester County, Pennsylvania.

Township Engineer - A professional engineer licensed  as such in the Commonwealth of Pellllsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a Township.

USDA- United States Department of Agriculture.

Watercourse - A challllel or Conveyance of surface water having a defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or inte11llittent flow.

Water Table - The upper most level of saturation of pore space or fractures by groundwater. Seasonal High Water Table refers to a water table that rises and falls with the seasons due either to natural or man-made causes.

Waters of the Commonwealth - Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands,  ponds,  springs,  and  all other bodies or channels of Conveyance of surface and underground water, or paiis thereof, whether natural or aitificial, within or on the boundaries of the Commonwealth.

'Vatershed · · Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other body of water, whether natural or aitificial.
 
Wetland - Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas.

\Voods - Any land area of at least one-quarter (0.25) acre with a natural or naturalized ground cover (excluding manicured turf grass) and that has an average density of two (2) or more viable trees per one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet with a DBH of six (6) inches or greater and where such trees existed at any time within three (3) years of the time of land development application submission of the proposed project. The land area to be considered Woods shall be measured from the outer drip lines of the outer trees.
 
ARTICLE III - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS



Section 301.  General Requirements

A.	Applicants proposing Regulated Activities in the Township which are not exempt under Section 106 shall submit a Stormwater Management Site Plan (SWM Site Plan) to the Township for review and approval in accordance with Articles III and IV. SWM Site Plans approved by the Township shall be on Site throughout the duration of the Regulated Activity.

B.	The stormwater management and runoff control criteria and standards in this Ordinance shall apply to the total proposed Regulated Activity, even if it is to take place in stages. The measurement of Impervious Surfaces shall include all of the Impe1vious Surfaces in the total proposed Regulated Activity even if the development is to take place in stages.

C.	No Regulated Activity within the Township  shall commence until:

1.	The Township   issues  approval  of a SWM Site Plan,  which  demonstrates  compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance; and

2.	The Applicant has received a letter of adequacy or approval for the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan review by the Township and the Conservation District (ifrequired), and has received all other local, State and Federal permit approvals required for the project involving the Regulated Activity.

D.	Neither submission of an SW'M Site Plan under the provisions herein nor compliance with the  provisions of this Ordinance shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to any person or prope1iy otherwise imposed by law.

E.	The Applicant shall design the Site to minimize disturbances to land, Site hydrology, and natural resources, and to maintain the natural hydrologic regime, drainage patterns and flow conditions. The Applicant shall apply the procedures set fmih in Section 304 for the overall Site design and for selection, location and design of features and BMPs to be used to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance.

F.	To the maximum extent practicable, Post-construction stormwater shall be discharged within the drainage area of the same stream or water body receiving the runoff prior to construction of the proposed Regulated Activity.

G.	For Regulated Activities with one(!) acre or more of proposed Eaiih Disturbance, existing drainage peak rate discharges up to and including the one hundred  (!00)-year storm onto or through adjacent property(ies) or downgradient prope1iy(ies), including diffuse drainage discharge, shall not be altered in any manner without written permission  from, and, where applicable as dete1mined by the Municipality, an easement and agreement with, the affected Landowner(s) for conveyance of discharges onto or through their propcrty(ics). Such discharge shall be subject to any applicable discharge criteria specified in this Ordinance.
 
H.	Areas located outside of the Site (i.e., areas outside of the Regulated Activity) that drain through a proposed Site are not subject to water quality and volume  control,  infiltration, stream channel protection, or peak flow rate control requirements (as presented in Sections 305, 306, 307, and 308). Drainage facilities located on the Site shall be designed to safely convey flows from outside of the Site through the Site.

I. If Site conditions preclude capture of runoff from limited po11ions of the Disturbed Area for achieving water quality volume control standards, stream channel protection  standards, and the 2 year storm event peak runoff rate reduction standards for New Development required by this Ordinance, the Applicant shall propose alternate methods to mitigate the bypass of the BMPs, subject to the approval of the Municipal Engineer. In no case shall resulting peak rate be greater than the Pre-development peak rate for the equivalent design storm.

J.	For all Regulated Activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and maintained during the Regulated Activities (i.e., during construction) as required to meet the purposes and requirements of this Ordinance, to meet the erosion and sediment control requirements of the Township, if applicable, and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the PA Code and the Clean Streams Law.

K.	For all Regulated Activities, pern1anent BMPs and Conveyances shall be designed, implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of this Ordinance and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the Stonn Water Management Act.

L. The design of all BMPs and Conveyances shall inco1porate sound engineering principles and practices in a manner that does not aggravate existing stormwater problems as identified by the Township. The Township reserves the right to disapprove any design that would result in construction in an  area affected by existing stormwater problem(s) or continuation of an existing stormwater problem(s).

M.	Existing wetlands, either on the Site or on an adjacent prope11y, shall not be used to meet the minimum design requirements for stormwater management or stormwater runoff quality treatment. Stormwater discharges to existing wetlands shall not degrade the quality or hydrologic integrity of the wetland.

N.	Hotspots Runoff Controls -

Specific structural or pollution prevention practices may be required, as determined to be necessary by the Municipal Engineer, to pretreat runoff from Hotspots prior to infiltration. Following is a list of examples of Hotspots:

I.	Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities;

2.	Vehicle fueling stations;

3.	Vehicle service and maintenance  facilities;
 
4.	Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities;

5.	Fleet storage areas (bus, tiuck, etc.);

6.	Industrial sites based on Standard Industrial Classification Codes;

7.	Marinas (service and maintenance areas);

8.	Outdoor liquid container storage;

9.	Outdoor loading/unloading facilities; l 0. Public works storage areas;
11.	Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials;

12.	Commercial container nursery;

13.	Contaminated  sites/brownfields;

14.	Other land uses and activities as designated by the Township.

0. Contaminated and Brownfield Sites -

\Vhere BMPs may contribute to the migration of contaminants in groundwater, the water quality and runoff volume, stream channel protection, and peak rate control standards shall be met; however, at the Municipal Engineer's discretion,  the  minimum  infiltration requirement may be reduced or eliminated commensurate with the contaminated area and the required water quality and runoff control measures may be increased to mitigate the reduced infiltration requirement for the contaminated area.

P.	Additional Water Quality Requirements -

The   Township   may   require   additional	stormwater   control   measures	for   stormwater discharges to special management areas including, but not limited to:

1.	Water bodies listed as "impaired" by PADEP.

2.	Areas of known existing flooding problems.

3.	Critical areas with sensitive resources (e.g., State designated special protection  waters, cold water fisheries, carbonate geology or other groundwater recharge areas that may be highly vulnerable to contamination, drainage areas to water supply reservoirs, etc.).

Q.	Applicants  shall  utilize  the  Pennsylvania  Stormwater  Best  l\1anagement  Practices  Manual
(PA BMP Manual), as amended or other sources acceptable to the Municipal Engineer,  for
 
testing and design standards for BMPs, and where there is a conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, the most restrictive applies.

R.	For areas underlain by karst or carbonate geology that may be susceptible to the formation of sinkholes and other karst features, the location, type, and design of infiltration BMPs shall be based on a Site evaluation conducted by a qualified Licensed Professional and based on the PA BMP Manual or other design guidance acceptable to the Municipal Engineer.

Section 302.  Permit Requirements by Other Governmental Entities

The following permit or other regulatory requirements may apply to certain Regulated Activities and shall be met prior to (or as a condition of) final approval by the Township of the SWM Site Plan and prior to commencement of any Regulated Activities, as applicable:

A.	All Regulated Activities subject to permit or regulatory requirements by PADEP under regulations at Title 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter I 02, or  erosion and sediment control requirements of the Township.

B.	Work within natural drainage ways subject to permit by PADEP under Title 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter I 05.

C.	Any BMP or Conveyance that would be located in or adjacent to surface Waters of the Commonwealth,	including wetlands, subject to permit by PADEP under Title 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 105.

D.	Any BMP or Conveyance that would be located on or discharge to a State highway right-of­ way, or require access to or from a State highway and be subject to approval by PennDOT.

E.	Culverts, bridges, storm sewers, or any other facilities which must pass or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may constitute a dam subject to permit by PADEP under Title 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 105.

Section 303.  Erosion and Sediment Control

A.	No Regulated Activity within the Township  shall commence until:

I.	The Township  receives documentation that the Applicant has received:

a.	A "letter of adequacy" from the Conservation District or other approval from PADEP in compliance with Title 25 Chapter I 02 of the Pennsylvania Code of an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan for constrnction activities, if applicable;

b.	A PADEP NPDES Constrnction Activities Permit as required under Title 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 92, if applicable;

c.	Evidence of any other permit(s) or approvals required for the Regulated Activities; and
 

2.   An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan has been approved by the Township , if required.

B.	A copy of the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and any required permit(s), as required by PADEP regulations, shall be available on the Site at all times.

C.	Additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed, at a minimum including those required in Subsection 306.M.

Section 304.  Site Design Process

The Applicant shall design the Site to minimize the disturbances to land, Site hydrology, and natural resources, and to maintain the natural hydrologic regime, drainage patterns and flow conditions. The Applicant shall demonstrate in its SWM Site Plan (as required in Subsection 402.C) that the design sequence, objectives and techniques described below were applied to the maximum extent practicable in the Site design of the Regulated Activity while complying with all other requirements of this Ordinance. The Site design shall:

A.	First, identify and delineate all existing natural resources and natural and man-made hydrologic features listed in Subsection 402.B.8 that are located within the Site, or receive discharge from, or may be impacted by the proposed Regulated Activity.

B.	Second, provide a prioritized listing of these resources and features to identify:

I.	Those to be incorporated into the Site design in a manner that provides protection from any disturbance or impact from the proposed Regulated Activity;

2.	Those to be protected from further disturbance or impact but for which the proposed Regulated Activity will provide improvement to existing conditions;

3.	Those that can be incorporated into and utilized as components of the overall Site design in a manner that protects or improves their existing  conditions  while  utilizing  their hydro logic function within the limits of their available capacity (e.g., for infiltration, evapotranspiration, or reducing pollutant loads, runoff volume or peak discharge rates, etc.) to reduce the need for or size of constructed BMPs; and

4.	Those that may be considered for alteration, disturbance or removal.

C.	Third, develop the Site design to achieve the following:

I.	Recognize and incorporate the priorities identified in Section 304.B as the basis for the proposed Site layout, grading, construction, and permanent ground cover design;

2.	Minimize Earth Disturbance (both surface and subsurface);

3.	Maximize protection of or improvement  to natural  resources  and  special  management areas;
 

4.	Minimize the disturbance of natural Site hydrology, in particular natural drainage features and patterns, discharge points and flow characteristics, natural infiltration patterns and characteristics, and natural channel and floodplain conveyance capacity;

5.	Incorporate natural hydrologic features and functions identified in Subsection 304.B into the Site design to protect and utilize those features and their hydrologic functions to reduce the need for or size of constrncted BMPs;

6.	Maximize infiltration and the use of natural Site infiltration features, patterns and conditions, and evapotranspiration features;

7.	Apply selective grading design methods to provide final grading patterns or preserve existing topography in order to evenly distribute runoff and minimize concentrated flows;

8.	Minimize the cumulative area to be covered by Impervious Surfaces and:


a.	Minimize the size of individual Impervious Surfaces,

b.	Separate large Impervious Surfaces into smaller components,

c.	Disconnect runoff from one Impervious Surface to another, and


d.	Utilize porous materials in place of impervious wherever practicable;

9.	Minimize the volume and peak discharge rates of stormwater generated;

I0. Avoid or minimize stormwater rnnoff pollutant loads and receiving stream channel erosion;

11.	Locate infiltration and other BMPs:

a.	At or as near to the source of generation as possible, and


b.	At depths that are as shallow as possible;

12.	Prioritize the selection and design ofBMPs as follows:

a.	Nonstrnctural and vegetation BMPs, then

b.	Structural (surface and subsurface) BMPs;

13.	For flow volumes requiring conveyance from the source of generation to a BMP for management, give preference to open channel conveyance techniques that provide infiltration and water quality benefits, and landscaped-based management in common open space areas, where practicable; and
 
14. Consider additional guidance for inco1porating natural hydrology into the Site and BMP designs, methods and techniques  that  support the objectives  of Subsections  304.B  and
304.C. Appendix B presents  additional  discussion of natural  hydrology  site design and
sources   of   information	for   "Conservation   Design",	"Low   Impact	Design",	and "Sustainable  Design".

D.	The procedures set forth above shall be utilized to the maximum extent practicable for the overall Site design and selection, location  and design of features and BMPs to be used to comply with the requirements of Sections 305, 306, 307 and 308.

Section 305.  'Vater Quality and Runoff Volume Requirements

To control Post-construction stormwater impacts from Regulated Activities and meet State water quality requirements, BMPs shall be provided in the Site design that replicate Predevelopment stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions, such that Post-construction stom1water discharges do not degrade the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of the receiving waters. The Applicant shall comply with the following water quality and runoff volume requirements  for all Regulated Activities, including all New Development and Redevelopment activities:

A.	The Post-construction total runoff volume shall not exceed the Predevelopment total runoff volume for all storms equal to or less than the two (2)-year, twenty-four (24)-hour duration precipitation (design storm). The water quality and runoff volume to  be  managed  shall consist of any runoff volume generated by the proposed Regulated Activity over and above the Predevelopment total runoff volume and shall be captured and permanently retained or infiltrated on the Site. Permanent retention options may include, but are not limited to, reuse, evaporation, transpiration,  and infiltration.

B.	For modeling purposes, the Predevelopment ground cover conditions  shall  be determined using the conesponding ground cover assumptions presented in Subsection 309.D of this Ordinance.

C.	The design of the facility outlet shall provide for protection from clogging and unwanted sedimentation.

D.	BMPs that moderate the temperature of sto1mwater shall be used to protect the temperature of receiving waters.

E.	Water quality improvement shall be achieved in conjunction  with achieving the infiltration requirements of Section 306. The infiltration volume required under Section 306 may be included as a component of the water quality volume. If the calculated water quality and runoff volume is greater than the volun1e infiltrated, then the difference between the two (2) volumes shall be managed for water quality and rnnoff volume control through other techniques or practices but shall not be discharged from the Site.

F.	Runoff from the Disturbed Area shall be treated for water quality prior to entering existing waterways  or  water  bodies.  If a stormwater  management  practice  does not  provide  water
 
quality treatment, then water quality BMPs shall be utilized to provide pre-treatment prior to the runoff entering the stormwater management practice.

G. The Township may require additional water quality and runoff control measures for stormwater discharging to special management areas such as those  listed  in  Subsection 301.P.

H.	When the Regulated Activity contains or is divided by multiple drainage areas, the water quality and runoff volume shall be separately addressed for each drainage area.

I.	Weighted averaging of runoff coefficients shall not be used for manual computations or input data for water quality and runoff volume calculations.

J.	Areas located outside of  the Site  (i.e., areas outside of the Regulated Activity) may be excluded from the calculation of the water quality and runoff volume requirements.

K.	Water quality and volume control practices shall be selected and designed to meet the criteria of Subsection 304.C that apply to water quality and volume control.


Section 306. Infiltration Requirements


Providing for infiltration consistent with the natural hydrologic regime is required to compensate for the reduction in the recharge that occurs when the ground surface is distmbed or Impervious Surface is created or expanded. The Applicant shall achieve the following infiltration requirements:

A.	Wherever possible, infiltration should be designed to accommodate the entire water quality and runoff volume required in Section 305.

B.	For Regulated Activities involving New Development, the volume of a minimum of one (1)­
inch of runoff from all Proposed Impervious Surfaces shall be infiltrated.

C.	For Regulated Activities involving Redevelopment, whichever is less of the following volume options shall be infiltrated:

1.	The  volume  of a  minimum  of one  (1)-inch  of runoff  from  all Proposed  Impervious Surfaces;
OR
2.	The total water quality and runoff volume required in Section 305 of this Ordinance.

D.	If the requirements of Subsections 306.B or 306.C cannot be physically accomplished, then the Applicant shall be responsible for demonstrating with data or calculations to the satisfaction of the Municipal Engineer why this infiltration volume cannot be physically accomplished on the Site (e.g., shallow depth to bedrock or limiting zone, open voids, steep slopes, etc.) and what alternative volume can be infiltrated; however in all cases at least the first one-half (0.5) inch of runoff volume should be infiltrated.
 

E.	Only if a mm1mum of at least one-half (0.5) inch infiltration requirement cannot be physically accomplished on the Site, shall a waiver from Section 306 be considered by the Township.

F.	If Site conditions preclude capture of runoff from p01tions of the Impervious Surfaces, the infiltration volume for the remaining area shall be increased an equivalent amount to offset the loss.

G.	When a project contains or is divided by multiple watersheds, the infiltration volume shall be separately addressed for each watershed.

H.	Existing Impervious Surfaces located in areas outside of the Site (i.e., outside of the Regulated Activity) may be excluded from the calculation of the required infiltration volume.

I.	A detailed soils evaluation of the Site shall be conducted by a qualified professional and at a minimum shall address soil permeability, depth to bedrock, and subgrade stability.  The general process for designing the infiltration BMP shall be conducted by a qualified Licensed Professional and shall be consistent with the PA BMP Manual (as amended) (or other guidance acceptable to the Municipal Engineer) and in general shall:

1.	Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made features within the Site to determine general areas of suitability for infiltration practices. In areas where development on fill material is under consideration, conduct geotechnical  investigations of sub-grade stability; infiltration may not be ruled out without conducting these tests.

2.	Provide field tests such as double ring infiltrometer or other hydraulic conductivity tests (at the elevation of the proposed infiltration surface) to determine the appropriate hydraulic conductivity rate. Standard septic/sewage percolation  tests are not acceptable for design pmposes.

3.	Design the Infiltration Facility for the required retention (infiltration) volume based on field-determined infiltration capacity (and apply safety factor as per applicable design guidelines) at the elevation of the proposed infiltration surface.

4.	On-lot infiltration features are encouraged; however, it shall be demonstrated to the Municipal Engineer that the soils are conducive to infiltration on the identified lots.

J.	Infiltration BMPs shall be selected based on suitability of soils and Site conditions and shall be constructed on soils that have the following characteristics:

I.	A minimum depth of twenty-four (24) inches between the bottom of the BMP and the top of the Limiting Zone. Additional  depth may be required in areas underlain by karst or carbonate geology (see Subsection 306.N).

2. An infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional st01mwater volume and drain completely as determined by field tests conducted by the Applicant.
 

3. The Infiltration Facility shall completely drain the retention (infiltration) volume within three (3) days (seventy-two (72) hours) from the end of the design storm.

K.	All infiltration practices shall:

1. Be selected and designed to meet the criteria of Subsection 304.C that are applicable to infiltration;

2.	Be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from all buildings and features with sub-grade elements (e.g., basements, foundation walls, etc.) and be set back at least ten (10') feet from property lines or right-of-way, unless otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer;

3.	For any infiltration practice that collects runoff from shared or multiple features and that is located within fifty (50) feet of a building or feature with sub-grade elements (e.g., basements, foundation walls, etc.), the bottom elevation shall be set below the elevation of the sub-grade element.

4.	All infiltration practices shall be installed with a minimum of fifty (50') feet from water supply well and septic disposal areas.

L.	Infiltration Facilities shall, to the  maximum  extent  practicable,  be  located  to  avoid introducing contaminants to groundwater:

1.	When a Hotspot is located in the area draining to a proposed infiltration facility, an evaluation of the potential of groundwater contamination from the proposed infiltration facility shall be performed, including a hydrogeologic investigation (if necessary) by a qualified Licensed Professional to dete1mine what, if any, pre-treatment or additional design considerations are needed to protect groundwater quality.

2.	When located within a "well head protection area" of a public water supply well, infiltration practices shall be in confo1mance with the applicable approved source water protection assessment or source water protection plan.

3.	The Applicant shall provide appropriate  safeguards against  groundwater  contamination for land uses that may cause groundwater contamination should there be a mishap or spill.

M.	During Site construction, all infiltration practice components shall be protected from compaction due to  heavy equipment operation or storage of fill or construction material. Infiltration areas shall also be protected from sedimentation. Areas that are accidentally compacted or graded shall be remediated to restore soil composition and porosity. Adequate documentation to this effect shall be submitted to the Municipal Engineer for review. All areas designated for infiltration shall not receive runoff until the contributory drainage area has achieved final stabilization.
 
N.	Where sediment transport in the stmmwater runoff is anticipated to reach the infiltration system, appropriate permanent measures to prevent or collect sediment  shall be  installed prior to discharge to the infiltration system.

0. Where roof drains are designed to discharge to infiltration practices, they shall have appropriate measures to prevent clogging by unwanted debris (for example, silt, leaves and vegetation). Such measures shall include but are not limited to leaf traps, gutter guards and cleanouts.

P.   All infiltration practices shall have appropriate positive overflow controls.

Q. No sand, salt or other pat1iculate matter may be applied to a porous surface material for winter ice conditions.

R.	The following  procedures and materials shall be required during the constrnction of all subsurface facilities:

1.	Excavation for the Infiltration Facility shall be performed with equipment that will not compact the bottom of the seepage bed/trench or like facility.

2.	The bottom of the bed and/or trench shall be scarified prior to the placement of aggregate.

3.	Only clean aggregate with documented porosity, free of fines, shall be allowed.

4.	The tops, bottoms and sides of all seepage beds, trenches, or like facilities shall  be covered with drainage fabric. Fabric shall be non-woven fabric acceptable to the Municipal Engineer.

5.	Stormwater shall be distributed throughout the entire seepage bed/trench or like facility and provisions for the collection of debris shall be provided in all facilities.

Section 307.  Stream Channel Protection Requirements

For Regulated Activities involving New Development with one (1) or more acres of Eatih Disturbance, the Applicant shall comply with the following stream challllel  protection requirements to minimize stream challlle! erosion and associated water quality impacts to the receiving waters:

A.	The peak flow rate of the Post-constrnction two (2)-year, twenty-four (24)-hour design stonn shall be reduced to the Predevelopment peak flow rate of the one (1)-year, twenty-four (24)­ hour duration precipitation, using the SCS Type II distribution.

B.	To the maximum extent practicable, and unless otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer, the Post-construction one (1)-year, twenty-four (24)-hour stmm flow shall be detained for a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours and a maximum not to exceed seventy-two
(72) hours from a point in time when the maximum volume of water from the one (1)-year, twenty-four  (24)-hour storm is stored in a proposed  BMP (i.e., when the maximum  water
 
surface elevation is achieved in the facility). Release of water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the inve1t of the orifice is at the invert of the proposed BMP).

C.	For modeling purposes, the Predevelopment ground cover conditions shall be detennined using the corresponding ground cover assumptions presented in Subsection 309.D of this Ordinance.

D.	The minimum orifice size in the outlet structure to the BMP shall be three (3) inches in diameter unless  otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer, and a trash rack shall be installed to prevent clogging. For Sites with small drainage areas contributing to the BMP that do not provide enough runoff volume to allow a twenty-four (24) hour attenuation with the three (3)-inch orifice, the calculations shall be submitted showing this condition.

E.	When the calculated orifice size is below three (3) inches, gravel filters (or other methods) are recommended to discharge low-flow rates subject to the  Municipal  Engineer's satisfaction. When filters are utilized, maintenance provisions shall be provided to ensure filters meet the design function.

F.	All proposed stormwater facilities shall make use of measures to extend the flow path and increase the travel time of flows in the facility.

G.	When a Regulated Activity contains or is divided by multiple drainage areas, the peak flow rate control shall be separately addressed for each drainage area.

Section 308.  Stormwater Peak Rate Control Requirements

The Applicant shall  comply with the following peak flow rate control requirements for all Regulated Activities including those that involve New Development and Redevelopment as applicable:

A. Parcels that are located in the Conestoga River watershed shall be designed to have a Post­ Construction Peak Flow less than or equal to 30% of PreDevelopment Peak Flow Conditions as dictated by Conestoga River Act 167 Section 302.B and C;

B. Post-construction peak flow rates from any Regulated Activity NOT located in the Conestoga River watershed shall not exceed the Predevelopment peak flow rates as shown for each of the design storms specified in Table 308.1.
 
TABLE308.1
Peak Rate Control Standards

(Peak Flow Rate of the Post-construction Design Storm
Shall be Reduced to the Peak Flow Rate of the Corresponding Predevclopment Design Storm Shown in the Table)



POST-CONSTRUCTION  DESIGN STORM
FREQUENCY (24-Hour Duration)	PREDEVELOPMENT DESIGN STORM
	. New Development Ree:ulated  Activities	·	·      Redevelopment
Ree:ulated  Activities
2-Year	I-Year	2-Year
5-Year	5-Year	5-Year
IO-Year	IO-Year	IO-Year
25-Year	25-Year	25-Year
50-Year	50-Year	50-Year
100-Year	100-Year	100-Year

C.	For modeling purposes, the Predevelopment ground cover conditions shall be determined using the conesponding ground cover assumptions presented in  Subsection 309.D of this Ordinance.

D.	For Regulated Activities involving only Redevelopment, no peak flow rate controls are required when and only if the total Proposed Impervious Surface area is at least twenty percent (20%) less than the total existing Impervious Surface area to be disturbed by the Regulated Activity. In all cases where this requirement is  not met, the Redevelopment Regulated Activity shall achieve the peak flow rate controls presented in Table 308.1, using the Redevelopment Ground Cover Assumptions presented in Subsection 309.D.

E.	Only the area of the proposed Regulated Activity  shall  be  subject  to  the peak  flow rate control standards of this Ordinance. Undisturbed areas for which the discharge point has not changed are not subject to the peak flow rate control standards.

F.	Areas located outside of the  Site (i.e., areas outside of the Regulated Activity) that drain through a proposed Site are not subject to peak flow rate control requirements. Drainage facilities located on the Site shall be designed to safely convey flows from outside of the Site through the Site.

G.	When a Regulated Activity contains or is divided by multiple drainage areas, the peak flow rate controls shall be separately addressed for each drainage area.

H. The effect of structural and non-structural stormwater management practices implemented as pait of the overall Site design may be taken into consideration when calculating total storage volume and peak flow rates.

I. Regulated Activities located within the Conestoga River watershed shall achieve the applicable peak flow release rate control requirements presented in the approved PA Act 167
 
Plan for that watershed as presented in the Conestoga River Watershed Release Rate Map in Appendix F of this Ordinance.

Section 309. Calculation Methodology

A.  Stormwater runoff from all Regulated Activity Sites with a drainage area of greater than five
(5) acres shall be calculated using a generally accepted calculation technique(s) that is based on the NRCS Soil Cover Complex Method. Table 309.1 sununarizes acceptable computation methods. The method selected for use shall be based on the individual limitations and suitability of each method for a pmticular Site. The use of the Rational Method to estimate peak discharges for drainage areas greater than five (5) acres shall be permitted  only upon approval by the Municipal Engineer.

TABLE309.1

ACCEPTABLE  COMPUTATION  METHODOLOGIES  FOR SWM SITE PLAN

.·

METHOD	.

DEVELOPED BY

.	•.	

APPLICABILITY
. ·.	.
TR-20
(or commercial computer package based on TR-20)	
USDANRCS	Applicable where use of full hydrology computer model is desirable or necessary.

TR-55
(or commercial computer package based on TR-55)	
USDANRCS	Applicable for land
development plans where limitations described in  TR- 55 are met.

HEC-1I HEC-HMS	
US Army Corps of Engineers	Applicable where use of a full hydrologic computer model is desirable or necessary.
Rational Method
(or commercial computer package based on Rational Method)	
Emil Kuichling (1889)	
For Sites up to five (5) acres, or as approved by the Township.

Other Methods	
Varies	Other computation
methodologies approved by the Township .


B. All calculations using the Soil Cover Complex Method shall  use  the appropriate  design rainfall depths for the various return period storms consistent with this Ordinance. Rainfall depths used shall be obtained from NOAA Atlas 14 values consistent with a pa1tial duration series. When stormwater calculations are performed for routing procedures or infiltration, water quality and runoff volume functions, the duration of rainfall shall be twenty-four (24) hours.
 
C.	All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities consistent with appropriate times-of-concentration (duration) and storm events with rainfall  intensities obtained from NOAA Atlas 14 partial duration series estimates, or the latest version of the PennDOT Drainage Manual (PDM Publication 584). Times-of-concentration shall  be calculated based on the methodology recommended in the respective model used. Times of concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be computed using Manning's equation.

D.	The Applicant shall utilize the following ground cover assumptions for all Predevelopment water quality and runoff volume, infiltration volume and peak flow rate calculations:

1.	For  Regulated  Activities	involving  New  Development,  the  following  ground  cover assumptions shall be used:

a.	For areas that are Woods (as defined in Article II of this Ordinance), Predevelopment calculations shall assume ground cover of"Woods in good condition''.


b.	For all other areas (including all Impervious  Surfaces), Predevelopment  calculations shall assume ground cover of "meadow".


2.	For   Regulated	Activities	involving	Redevelopment,	the   following	ground	cover assumptions shall be used:


a.	For areas that are Woods (as defined in Article II of this Ordinance), Predevelopment calculations shall assume ground cover of"Woods in good condition''.


b.	For areas that are not Woods or not Impervious  Surfaces,  Predevelopment calculations shall assume ground  cover of"meadow".


c.	For areas that are Impervious Surfaces, Predevelopment calculations shall assume at least twenty percent (20%) of the existing Impervious Surface area to be disturbed as "meadow" ground cover.


3.	The  Applicant   shall  detetmine   which   stormwater   standards  apply  to  the  proposed Regulated Activity as follows:


a.	Stormwater standards for New Development shall apply to all proposed Regulated Activities that involve only New Development  activities as defined in this Ordinance.

b.	Stormwater standards for Redevelopment shall apply to all proposed Regulated Activities that involve only Redevelopment activities as defined in this Ordinance.

c.	At the discretion of the Municipal Engineer, Regulated Activities that involve a combination of both New Development and Redevelopment activities, as defined in this Ordinance, may either:

1.	Apply the  stormwater  standards (Redevelopment  or New Development)  that are
 
associated with the activity that involves the greatest amount of land area; or


11. Apply the Redevelopment and New Development stormwater standards to the coITesponding Redevelopment and New Development  portions of the proposed Regulated   Activity.

E.	Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both Predevelopment and proposed (Post-construction) conditions to be used in the Soil Cover Complex Method shall be obtained from Table C-1 in Appendix C of this Ordinance.

F.	Runoff coefficients (C) for both Predevelopment and proposed (Post-construction) conditions for use in the Rational Method shall be obtained from Table C-2 in Appendix C of this Ordinance.

G.	Weighted averaging of runoff coefficients shall not be used for manual computations or input data for water quality and runoff volume calculations.

H.	Hydraulic computations to determine the capacity of pipes, culve1is, and storm sewers shall be consistent with methods and computations contained in the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic Design Series Number 5 (Publication  No.  FHWA-NHI-01-020 HDS No. 5, as amended). Hydraulic computations to determine the capacity of open channels shall be consistent with methods and computations contained in the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic Engineering Circular Number 15 (Publication No.  FHWA-NHI- 05-114 HEC 15, as amended). Values for Manning's roughness coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table C-3 in Appendix C of the Ordinance.

I.	Runoff calculations shall include the following assumptions:

I.	Average antecedent moisture conditions (for the Soil Cover Complex  Method  only for example, TR-55, TR-20).

2.   A type II distribution storm (for the Soil Cover Complex Method only for example, TR- 55, TR-20).



Section 310.  Other Requirements

A.	Any BMP intended to hold standing water for four (4) days or longer shall be designed to incorporate biologic controls consistent with the West Nile Guidance found in Appendix D, PADEP document  363-0300-001 "Design Criteria - Wetlands Replacement/Monitoring" (as amended), (or contact the Pennsylvania State Cooperative Wetland Center or the Penn State Cooperative Extension Office for design information.)

B.	Any sto1mwater basin required or regulated by this Ordinance designed to store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen embankment shall be designed to provide an emergency spillway to safely convey flow up to and including the one hundred (100)-year proposed conditions. The height of embankment shall provide a minimum two (2.0) feet of Freeboard  above the
 
maximum pool elevation computed when the facility functions for the one hundred (100)­ year proposed conditions inflow. Should any BMP require a dam safety permit under PA Chapter 105 regulations, the facility shall be designed in accordance with and meet the regulations of PA Chapter 105 concerning dam safety. PA Chapter 105 may require the safe conveyance of storms larger than one hundred (100)-year event.

C.	Any drainage Conveyance facility and/or channel not  governed by PA  Chapter  105 regulations shall be designed to convey, without damage to the drainage facility or roadway, runoff from the twenty-five (25)-year storm event. Larger storm events (fifty (50)-year and one hundred (100)-year storms) shall also be safely conveyed in the direction of natural flow without creating additional damage to any drainage facilities, nearby structures, or roadways.

D.	Conveyance facilities to or exiting from stormwater management facilities (i.e.,  detention basins) shall be designed to convey the design flow to or from the facility.

E.	Roadway crossings or structures located within designated floodplain areas shall be able to convey runoff from a 100-year design  storm consistent with Federal Emergency Management	Agency National Flood Insurance Program - Floodplain Management Requirements.

F.	Any facility located within a PennDOT right-of-way shall comply with PennDOT minimum design standards and permit submission and approval requirements.

G.	Adequate erosion protection and energy dissipation shall be provided along all open channels and at all points of discharge. Design methods shall be consistent with the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic Engineering Circular Number 11 (Publication No. FHWA-IP-89- 016, as amended) and the PADEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (Publication No. 363-2134-008, as  amended), or other design guidance acceptable to the Municipal  Engineer.



Section 311. Other Conveyance and System Design Standards

A.	Stormwater Conveyance - Swales

A.	Open ditches shall be avoided but properly designed, graded, and  turfed  drainage swales shall be permitted in lieu of storm sewers in commercial and industrial areas and, where approved by the Township Engineer, in residential areas.

B.	Swales shall be designed not only to carry the required discharge without excessive erosion, but also  to increase the time of concentration, reduce peak discharge and velocity, and permit the water to percolate into the soil. Permanent open swales shall be designed to convey a one hundred (100) year storm event computed from the Manning's  Equation.

C.	Open swales shall be stabilized with vegetation or other materials in accordance with Title  25  Chapter  102  Rules  and  Regulations  of  the  Pennsylvania   Depmiment  of
 
Environmental  Protection.  Slopes  for  swale  banks  shall  not  exceed  one  (1)  foot vertical for every four (4) feet horizontal.

B.	Stormwater Conveyance - Closed Conveyance including Inlets, Manholes, etc.

A.	Stonn sewers, as required, shall be placed under or immediately at the back of the shoulder, when parallel to the street within the right-of-way. When located in undedicated land, they shall be placed within an easement not less than 20 feet wide as approved by the Township Engineer.

B.	Stonn sewers shall have a minimum diameter of 15 inches for reinforced concrete pipe and a minimum grade of 1/2%. High Density Polyethylene Pipe (HDPE) may be proposed	and installed under manufacturer's specification and with specific permission by the Township Engineer. All pipe may be subject to video inspection upon completion of installation and prior to acceptance of public improvements. Changes in alignment shall be by straight sections connected by inlets or manholes.

C.	Storm sewer sizes shall be selected in accordance with storm intensity frequency of 25 years in all residential subdivisions or land developments unless othetwise specified by the Township Engineer. All stonn piping shall be in accordance with PennDOT Specifications. Piping shall be saw-cut at ends, as needed, and not  hanunered  or broken.

D.	Inlets and manholes shall be spaced at intervals not exceeding 300 feet, and shall be located wherever branches are connected or sizes are changed, and wherever there is a change in alignment or grade. For drainage lines of at  least  thitiy-six  (36)  inches diameter, inlets and manholes may be spaced at intervals of four hundred (400) feet.

E.	Inlets, manholes, covers, and frames shall conform to Pennsylvania Depaiiment of Transportation specifications. At street intersections,  inlets  shall  be  placed  in  the tangent and not the curved portion of the curbing.

F.	Curb inlets shall be located at curb tangents on the uphill side of street intersections and at intervals along the curb line to control the maximum amount of encroachment of runoff on the roadway pavement so that same does not exceed a width of four (4) feet during the design stonn event. Design and location of curb inlets shall be approved by the Township. The maximum amount of flow through an intersection may not exceed one (1) inch.

G.	The capacity of all stormwater pipes shall be calculated utilizing the Manning's Equation for open channel flow as applied to closed conduit flow. The Manning's roughness coefficient shall be 0.13 for all concrete pipe. In cases where pressure flow may occur, the hydraulic grade line shall be calculated throughout the sto1m sewer system to verify that at least one ( 1) foot of freeboai·d will be provided in all inlets and manl1oles for the design storm event.
 
H.	The capacity of all inlets shall be based on a maximum surface flow to the inlet of 3.5 cfs, calculated based on the design storm event. The maximum flow to inlets located in low points (such as sag ve1tical cmves) shall include the overland flow directed to the inlet as well as all bypass runoff from upstream inlets. The bypass flow from upstream inlets shall be calculated using inlet efficiency curves included in PellllDOT. Design Manual, Part 2, latest edition. If the surface flow to an inlet exceeds 3.5 cfs, additional inlets shall be provided upstream of the inlet to intercept the excessive surface flow.

I. Stormwater systems shall be designed to produce a minimum velocity of 3.0 feet per second when flowing full. The maximum pem1issible velocity shall be 10.0 feet per second. Pipe slopes shall not be less than 0.5%.

J.	Open end pipes must be fitted with concrete endwalls and wing walls in accordance with PellllDOT Standards.

K. All st01m sewer pipes shall be laid to a minimum depth of one ( 1) foot from subgrade to crown of pipe.

L.	Trench backfill within any paved area including the Township Right of Way, Township cartway or private roadways must be backfilled to the base of the road section with 2A per PellllDOT 408 backfill  and  compaction  standards.  Trenches within open space or grassed may be backfilled with select fill beyond the proper pipe bedding. Alternative pipe bedding may be approved in areas of excessive moisture or if proposed  by the applicant according to the manufacturers specifications. All pipe backfill details must be approved by the Township Engineer.

M.	Modified inlet boxes shall be used when required in accordance with the PellllDOT RC Standards. Pipes shall not be allowed to enter the corner of boxes. The crown of the pipe shall be at least twelve (12") inches below the top of the precast inlet or manhole box.

C.	Bridges and culve1ts shall have ample waterway to can-y expected flows, based on a minimum st01m frequency of I00 years. Bridge and/or culve1t construction shall be in accordance with the Pennsylvania Department of Transpo1tation specifications  and  shall meet the requirements of the Pennsylvania Depaitment of Environmental  Protection. Culve1ts shall be provided with wing walls and constructed for the full width of the right-of­ way. The ca1tway area over the bridge shall be 24 inches wider, on either side, than the road connecting with the bridge, or if the character of the road is expected to change for future planning, the caitway of the bridge shall be made to anticipate this condition. On either side of the bridge caitway, the bridge railing must be set back from the edge of the final cartway a minimum of eight feet and this area may be used to place sidewalks, present or future.

D.	Detention or retention basins for the control of stonnwater peak discharges shall meet the following requirements:

A.	Basins shall be installed prior to any earthmoving or land disturbances which they will serve. The phasing of their construction shall be noted in the nan-ative and on the plan.
 

B.	Soils used for the construction of basins shall have low-erodibility factors ("K" factors).

C.	Detention basins designed to hold the excess volume of runoff from a two-year storm should be located on soils with a moderate to high percolation rate in order to encourage recharge and reduce potential for stagnant water  conditions.  Where  soils with moderate to high percolation rates are found at higher elevations of a site, such detention facilities may require incorporation into building lot  layout. Drainage easements and deed restrictions against the alteration of such detention areas shall be executed to the satisfaction of the Board.

D.	Energy dissipaters and/or level spreaders shall be installed at points where pipes or drainage ways discharge to or from basins. Generally, outlet pipes designed to cany the predevelopment, two-year storm flow will be permitted to discharge to a stream with only an energy dissipater. Storms of a ten-year or greater intensity should be spread across floodplains by level spreaders; rock material found on the site is suggested for their construction.

E.	The following slope restrictions shall apply to basins:
a.	Exterior slopes of compacted  soil shall not exceed one foot vertical for three feet   horizontal,   and   may   be   fmther   reduced   if  the   soil  has   unstable
characteristics.
b.	Interior side slopes of the basin shall not exceed one foot ve1tical in three feet horizontal except, with approval of the Township:

1.	Where maximum water depth will not exceed three feet; or
11.  ·when a two-inch rainfall  in one hour will not fill the basin in one
hour; or
111.    Where  concrete,  stone,  or  brick  walls  are  used  with  side  slopes
proposed to be steeper than one foot vertical in three feet horizontal,
in which case the basin shall be fenced by a permanent wire fence 42 inches in height and a ramp of durable, nonslip materials for maintenance vehicles shall be provided for access into the basin.
1v.  Minimum  basin  interior  slope  shall  be  two  percent  (2%)  unless
designed as an infiltration basin.

F.	Outlet structures within basins which will control peak discharge flows and distribute the flows by pipes to discharge areas shall be constructed of concrete, coates (e.g., polymer, bituminous) galvanized steel, or aluminum and shall have childproof, nonclogging trash racks overall design openings exceeding 12 inches in  diameter, except those openings designed to carry perennial stream flows. Where spillways will be used to control peak discharges in excess of the ten-year storm, the control weirs shall be constructed of concrete of sufficient mass and structural stability to withstand the pressures of impounded waters and outlet velocities. Concrete outlet aprons shall be designed as level spreaders and shall extend at a minimum to the toe of the basin slope. The incorporation  of large stones found on the site into the concrete apron to
 
provide  a  more  natural  appearance  1s  suggested.  Construction  shall  comply  with PennDOT Form 408 Specification.

G.	Inlet and outlet structures will be located at maximum distances from one another. The Township Engineer may require a rock filter berm or rock-filled gabions between inlet and outlet areas when the distance is deemed insufficient for sediment trapping. All inlets shall either be located above the bottom of the basin or shall discharge to areas of the basin which slope downward to lower elevations of the basin.

H.  Detention or retention basin be1ms shall have a minimum ten-foot (!O') top width.

I.	Detention or retention basin berms shall be provided with an impervious clay core and shall be keyed into the existing ground surface at least one and one-half(l-1/2') feet.

J.	Detention basin outlet pipes shall be provided with two (2) concrete anti-seep collars per pipe. Detention basin outlet pipes shall be reinforced concrete pipe.

K.	Detention basin emergency spillways shall be constructed of a stabilized, non-erodible material with maximum three to one (3: 1) side slopes.

L.	The discharge (or outfall) as well as the emergency spillway, dam breast areas, or water storage area of a detention basin shall be located at least a minimum distance from the original property line of the parcel being developed or any new property lines that are created; according to the following table:

 
1	acre drainage area
2	to 4 acre drainage area
4 to 10 acre drainage area
Over 10 acres
 
25 Feet
50 Feet
75 Feet
100 Feet
 

M.	Storm retention basins, if used, shall be described by metes and bounds, which area shall be known as an easement for maintenance and access and shall be deed restricted against removal or modification without the express consent of West Nantmeal Township.

N.	Temporary and permanent grasses or stabilization measures shall be established on the sides of all emthen basins within 15 days of initial construction. Their maintenance and repair shall be the direct responsibility of the developer during the site preparation process, prior to a formal maintenance guarantee being established as per section 703 of this chapter.

E.	The grading of driveway entrances shall be so designed that normal stormwater flow along the street gutter or roadside swale shall not be intenupted thereby, and that stormwater runoff from driveways shall not be discharged directly into the cartway.
 
F.	When utilizing  the  SCS Method  for  West  Nantmeal  Township  use the following  rainfall depths for a 24 hour, Type II, stonn;


 
Iyear 2 year
10 year
25 year
50 year
100 year
 
2.6 inches
3.2 inches
5 inches
5.6 inches
6.3 inches
7.2 inches
 


Section 312. Erosion and Sediment Control During Regulated Activities

A.	No Regulated Activities within West Nantmeal Township shall commence until West Nantmeal Township receives an approval from the Conservation District of an erosion and sediment control plan for construction activities, if applicable.

B.	DEP has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan  for  any  eaiih disturbance  activity  of five thousand  (5,000)  square feet or more, under  25 Pennsylvania Code  § I02.4(b).

C.	In addition, under 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 92, a DEP "NPDES Construction Activities" Permit is required for Regulated Activities.

D.	Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for Regulated Activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or Chester Conservation District must be provided to West Nantmeal Township. The issuance of an NPDES Construction Permit (or permit coverage under the statewide General Pe1mit (PAG-2)) satisfies the requirements of subsection 403.A.

E.	A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required pe1mit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available on the project site at all times.

F.	Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to maintain maximum infiltration capacity.

G.	Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until the entire drainage area contributo1y to the infiltration BMP has achieved final stabilization.
 
ARTICLE IV - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS



Section 401.  General Requirements

For any Regulated Activity, unless exempt per the provisions of Section 106:

A.  Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM Site Plan is required.

B.	No Regulated Activity shall commence until the Township issues written approval of a SWM Site Plan, which demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance and, if required, a letter of adequacy has been issued by the Conservation District for an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.

C.	The preliminary or final approval of subdivision and/or land development plans and  the issuance of any building or occupancy permit shall not proceed until the Applicant has received written approval of a SWM Site Plan from the Township.

D.	The SWM Site Plan approved by the Township shall be on Site tluoughout the duration of the Regulated Activity.

Section 402.  SWM Site Plan Contents

The SWM Site Plan shall consist of a general description of the project including items described in Section 304, calculations, maps, and plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and Erosion and Sediment Control Plan by title and date. The cover sheet of the computations and Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall refer to the associated maps by title and date. All SWM Site Plan materials shall be submitted to the Township in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat, and well organized; othe1wise, the SWM Site Plan shall not be accepted for review and shall be retmned to the Applicant.

The following items shall be included in the SWM Site Plan:

A.	General

I.	A general description of the proposed project;

2.	A listing of all regulatory approvals required for the proposed project and the status of the review and approval process for each. Final approval or adequacy letters must be submitted to the Township prior to (or as a condition of) the Township's issuing final approval of the SWM Site Plan. Proof of application or documentation of required permit(s) or approvals for the programs listed below shall be part of the SWM Site Plan, if applicable:

a.	NPDES Pem1it for Stormwater Discharges from Construction Activities;
 
b.	PADEP permits as needed:


1.	PADEP Joint Permit Application,

11.   Chapter  105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management),


iii. Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management);

c.	PennDOT Highway Occupancy Permit;

d.	Erosion and Sediment Control Plan letter of adequacy; and


e.	Any other permit under applicable State or Federal regulations.

3.	A statement, signed by the Applicant, acknowledging that any revision to the approved SWM Site Plan shall be submitted to and approved by the Township , and that a revised Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be submitted to, and approved by, the Conservation District or Township (as applicable) for a determination of adequacy prior to construction of the revised features.

4.	The following signature block signed and sealed by the qualified Licensed Professional responsible for the preparation of the SWM Site Plan:

"I (nan1e), on this date (date of signature), hereby ce1iify to the best of my knowledge that the SWM Site Plan meets all design standards and criteria of the West Nantmeal Ordinance No. 117, Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Ordinance." Note: include signature, name, discipline of professional license, and license stamp or seal here.

B.	Maps or Plan Sheets

Map(s) or plan sheets of the Site shall be submitted on minimum twenty-four (24)-inch by thi1iy-six (36)-inch sheets and shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements for recording at the Chester County Office of the Recorder of Deeds and the requirements of the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Plan and O&M Agreement (Atiicle VII). If the SALDO has additional or more stringent criteria than this Ordinance, then the SALDO criteria shall also apply. Unless otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer, the contents of the maps or plan sheets shall include, but not be limited to:

1.	A location map, with a scale of one (1) inch equals two thousand (2,000) feet or greater, showing the Site  location  relative  to  highways,  municipal  boundaries,  or  other identifiable landmarks.

2.	The name  of the project, tax  parcel number(s), and the names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner of the property, the Applicant, and firm preparing the plan.
 
3.	Signature and seal of the qualified Licensed Professional(s) responsible for preparation of the maps and plan sheets.

4.	The date of SWM Site Plan submission and revision dates, as applicable.

5.	A graphic and v- ·itten scale of one (I) inch equals no more than fifty (50) feet.

6.	A north arrow.

7.	Legal prope11y boundaries, including:

a.	The total project property boundary and size with distances marked to the nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.

b.	Boundaries, size and description of purpose of all ex1stmg easements and deed­ restricted areas of the project prope1ty, with distances marked to the nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.

8.	Existing natural resources and natural or man-made hydrologic features that are located within the Site or receiving discharge from, or that may otherwise be impacted by, the proposed Regulated Activity, including but not limited to:

a.	All existing natural resources, hydrologic features and drainage patterns including natural waterways, water bodies, wetlands, streams (intermittent and perennial), ponds, lakes, vernal pools, etc., natural infiltration areas and patterns, areas of significant natural evapotranspiration, and other water features and aquatic resources.

b.	Any existing man-made drainage features, BMPs, Conveyances, facilities,  open channels, swales, drainage patterns, or other flood, sto1mwater or drainage control features.

c.	For the Site, discharge points and locations of concentrated flows and their drainage areas.

d.	For named waters, show names and their watershed boundaries within the Site.

e.	Special management areas (as per Subsection 301.P).

f.	For the water bodies, streams and wetlands identified in Subsection 402.B.8.a, label or otherwise show the following attributes, if applicable:

1.	The Designated Use as determined by PADEP (25 PA Code Chapter 93);

11.    Impairments listed  on the PADEP "Integrated List" (as updated)   and the listed source and cause of impairment;

iii. Drainages to water supply reservoirs.
 

g.	Areas that are part of the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory (PNDI) and a list of potential impacts and clearances received (for Regulated Activities involving one
(1)	acre or more proposed Eaiih Disturbance).

h.	Woods, vegetated riparian buffers and other areas of natural vegetation.

1.		Topography using contours (with elevations based on established bench mai·ks) at intervals of two (2) feet. In areas of slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent five (5)­ foot contour intervals may be used. The datum used and the location, elevation and datum of any bench mai·ks used shall be shown.

J.	Areas classified by the Township as steep slopes.

k.	Soil names and boundaries, general type of soils with Hydrologic Soil Group noted, and in paiiicular note areas most conducive to infiltration BMPs, such as groups A and B, etc., estimated permeabilities in inches per hour, and location and other results of all soil tests and borings.

I.	If present, areas with underlying carbonate geologic units, ex1stmg sinkholes, subsidence or other karst features, and any associated groundwater  recharge  areas with increased vulnerability to contamination.

m.	Any contaminated surface or subsurface areas of the Site.

n.	Water supply wells -

1.	Location of existing well(s) on the project property and delineation of the(ir) recharge area(s) (if known), or a fifty (50) foot diameter assumed recharge area;

ii. Location of existing well(s) within fifty (50) feet beyond the boundary of the project property boundary (if public water supply is proposed for the Regulated Activity); and

o.	Cunent FEMA one hundred (100)-year floodplain boundaries, elevations, and Floodway boundai·ies for any Special Flood Hazard Areas on or within one hundred
(100) feet of the property.

p.	Boundaries of riparian buffer(s) as required by §399-13.1.B.(2).(b)

9.	Location of  the proposed Regulated Activity, limits of Earth Disturbance (Disturbed Area), and BMPs and Conveyances relative to the location of existing natural resources and hydrologic features and special management areas resulting from the Site design process of Section 304.

10.	Description of existing and proposed  ground cover and land use including the type and total area.
 
11.	Existing and proposed man-made features including roads, paved areas, buildings, and other Impervious and Pervious Surfaces on the project prope1ty (or an appropriate portion of the prope11y as determined in consultation with the Municipal Engineer) and within the proposed Disturbed Area, and including the type and total area of the following:

a.	Existing Impervious Surfaces;

b.	Existing Impervious Surfaces proposed to be replaced;

c.	Existing Impervious Surfaces to be permanently removed and replaced with pervious ground cover;

d.	New or additional Impervious Surfaces; and

e.	Percent of the Site covered by Impervious Surfaces for both the existing and proposed Post-construction conditions.

12.	The total extent of the upstream area draining tln·ough the Site.

13.	All BMPs, Conveyances and other stormwater management facilities shall be located on the plan sheets, including design drawings, profile drawings, construction details, materials to be used, description of function, etc.

14.	Complete delineation of the flow paths used for calculating the time of concentration for the Predevelopment and Post-construction conditions shall be included.

15.	The locations  of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers, on-lot wastewater facilities (including subsurface tanks and leach fields), and water supply lines within the Site and within fifty (50) feet beyond the proposed limits ofEaith Disturbance.

16.	A grading plan, including all areas of proposed Ea11h Disturbance and the proposed Regulated Activity and delineating the boundary or limits of Earth Disturbance of the Site. The total Disturbed Area of the Site shall be noted in squai·e feet and acres.

17.	Proposed final grade elevations and contours at intervals of two (2) feet. In ai·eas of steep slopes (greater than fifteen (15) percent), five (5)-foot contour intervals may be used.

18.	For each proposed BMP and Conveyance included in the SWM Site Plan (including any to be located on any property other than the prope11y being developed by the Applicant), the following shall be included on the SWM Site Plan map or plan sheets:

a.	Identification of the person responsible for ongoing inspections, operation, repair, and maintenance of the BMP or Conveyance after completion of construction.

b.	Delineation  of  the  land  area,  strnctures,  Impervious  Surfaces,  and  Conveyances draining to and from the BMP or Conveyance.
 
c.	Easements, as per the requirements of Atiicle VII, that  shall include:

1.	Boundaries labeled with distances shown in feet and bearings to the  nearest degree;

11. Notes or other documentation, as needed, to grant the Township the right of access to all BMPs and Conveyances for the purposes of inspection and enforcement of the requirements of this Ordinance, and any  applicable  O&M Plans and O&M Agreements;

iii.	Notes  or other documentation,  as needed,  to grant  the  Township  the  right  of access to all roadways necessary to access all  BMPs and Conveyances, where roadways are not to be dedicated to the Township ;

iv.	Notes or other documentation as needed to grant the owner of any BMP or Conveyance the right of access  for  the  purpose  of  inspection,  operation, maintenance, and repair of the BMP or Conveyance that is to be owned, operated and maintained by a person other than the Township , and other than the owner of the prope1iy on which the BMP or Conveyance is located;

v.	A minimum twenty (20)-foot wide perimeter (or other width as determined in consultation with the Township Engineer) around all BMPs and Conveyances;

v1. Sufficient vehicular ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way or roadway, as determined in consultation with the Municipal Engineer; and

vii. Accompanying notes or other documentation as needed, and in accordance with A11icle VII describing the type, purpose and total area of easements, who the easement is granted to, and the rights, duties and obligations of the patiies with respect to every BMP or Conveyance.

d.	Boundaries of land areas (if any) for which deed restrictions are required for the purpose of protecting and prohibiting disturbance to a BMP  or  Conveyance, indicating the area to which the restriction applies with distances shown in feet and bearings to the nearest degree, and a written description of the type, purpose and nature of the restriction.

e.	Other items that may be needed to comply with all other requirements of Article VII.

C.	A written description of the following information shall be included in the SWM Site Plan:

1.	Existing	features,   conditions,   natural	resources,	hydrologic	features,   and	special management areas (as listed in Subsection 402.B.8);

2.	How the Site design achieves the requirements  of Section 304, and if applicable, where they could not be achieved and why;
 
3.	The overall stormwater management design concept for the project and how the  Site design achieves the requirements of Sections 301through311 of Atticle III;

4.	Proposed features and conditions, proposed erosion and sediment control features, proposed BMPs, Conveyances, and any other stormwater facilities;

5.	A description of the effect of the project (in terms of flow alteration and runoff volumes, water quality and peak flows, etc.) on existing natural resources, hydrologic features and special management areas, adjacent and downgradient propetties, and any existing municipal or other stormwater Conveyance system(s), that may be affected by or receive runoff from the Regulated Activity (whether located within or outside of the area of the Regulated Activity), and specifics of how erosion, water quality and flow impacts will be avoided or otherwise mitigated;

6.	Proposed nonpoint source pollution controls and justification and confirmation that the proposed project will not result in any increased pollutant loadings to any existing stream or stream impairment identified by PADEP, or to any receiving water body;

7.	Expected project time schedule; and

8.	Description of construction stages or project phases, if so proposed.

D.	A detailed Site evaluation conducted by a qualified Licensed Professional for projects proposed in areas of carbonate geology or  karst topography, and other environmentally sensitive  areas,  such  as  contaminated  sites  and  brownfields,  as  described  in  Subsections
301.0 and 301.R of this Ordinance.

E.	Stonnwater runoff design computations and documentation, such as hydrologic,  hydraulic, and structural computations, assumptions, BMP loading ratios, etc., consistent with the guidelines and criteria presented in the PA BMP Manual (as amended) or other guidance acceptable to the Municipal Engineer, and used in the design of the BMPs, Conveyances and other features proposed to be utilized for stotmwater management, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate that the requirements of this Ordinance have been met, specifically including the requirements in Sections 301 and 304 through 309.

F.	Inspections, Operation and Maintenance Requirements

The following documents shall be prepared and submitted to the Township for review and approval as part of the SWM Site Plan, in accordance with the requirements of Atiicle VII, for each BMP and Conveyance included in the SWM Site Plan (including any to be located on any property other than the propetiy being developed by the Applicant):

1.	An O&M Plan;

2.	An O&M Agreement;
 
3.	Any easement agreements that are needed to ensure access, inspection, maintenance, operation, repair and permanent protection of any permanent BMP(s) and Conveyances associated with the Regulated Activity;

4.	Any written deed, deed amendment or equivalent document (if needed) to be recorded against a subject property, as shown on the SWM Site Plan maps or plan sheets, or recorded plan sheets for the purpose of protecting and prohibiting disturbance to a BMP or Conveyance; and

5.	Written approval, easement agreements, or other documentation  for  discharges  to adjacent or downgradient prope1ties when required to comply with Subsection 301.G and Aiticle VII of this Ordinance.

G.	An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, where applicable, as prepared for and submitted to the Conservation District and/or Township. A letter of adequacy from the Conservation District, if applicable, must be submitted to the Township prior to (or as a condition of) the Township's final approval of the SWM Site Plan.

H.	A Highway Occupancy Permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) District Office must be submitted to the Township prior to (or as a condition of) the Township's final approval of the SWM Site Plan when utilization of a PennDOT storm drainage system is proposed.

Section 403.  SWM Site Plan Submission

A complete SWM Site Plan that complies with all applicable provisions of Section 402 shall be submitted to the Township for review and approval, as follows:

A.	The SWM Site Plan shall be coordinated with the applicable State and Federal permit process and the Municipal SALDO review process. All permit approvals or letters of adequacy not yet received by the Applicant at the time of submittal of the SWM Site Plan to the Township must be submitted to the Township prior to (or as a condition of) the Township 's final approval of the SWM Site Plan.

B.	For projects that require SALDO approval, the SWM Site Plan  shall be submitted by the Applicant as pm1 of the preliminary plan submission where applicable for the Regulated Activity.

C.	For Regulated Activities that do not require SALDO approval, the SWM Site Plan shall be submitted by the Applicant for review with the building pe1mit or zoning permit application as applicable.

D.	Two copies of the SWM Site Plan shall be submitted by the Applicant for review.

E.	The corresponding review fee shall be submitted  to the Township simultaneously  with the SWM Site Plan, per the Township's fee schedule.
 
F.	Any submissions to the Township that are found to be incomplete shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the Applicant within fifteen (15) business days with a notification in writing of the specific manner in which the submission is incomplete.

G. Financial security, per the requirements of Section 110, shall be submitted to the Township prior to approval of the SWM Site Plan or as part of the financial security which is posted for the subdivision or land development pursuant to the SALDO.

Section 404.  SWM Site Plan Review

A.	The SWM Site Plan shall be submitted to the Township for review by  the  Municipal Engineer for consistency with this Ordinance and the respective PA Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan(s). The Municipal Engineer will review the S\VM Site Plan for any subdivision or land development for compliance with this Ordinance and the Municipal SALDO provisions not otherwise superseded by this Ordinance.

B.	If applicable, the Applicant shall have received a "letter of adequacy" from the Conservation District or other PADEP approval for the proposed Regulated Activity prior to (or as a condition of) final approval by the Township .

C.	The Municipal Engineer will notify the Applicant and the Township in writing, within ninety
(90) calendar days, whether the SWM Site Plan is consistent with the requirements of this Ordinance. If the SWM Site Plan involves a subdivision and land development Plan, the notification shall occur within the time period allowed by the MPC (as amended). If a longer notification period is provided by other statute, regulation, or ordinance, the Applicant will be so notified by the Township.

1.	If the Municipal Engineer dete1mines that the SWM Site Plan is consistent with this Ordinance, the Municipal Engineer shall forward a letter of consistency to the Township, who shall then forward a copy to the Applicant.

2.	The Township may approve the SWM Site Plan with conditions reasonably defined to make the SWM Site Plan compliant with the terms of this Ordinance, and, if so, shall provide the conditions for approval in writing.

3.	If the Municipal Engineer determines that the SWM Site Plan is inconsistent or noncompliant with this Ordinance, the Municipal Engineer will fo1ward a letter to the Township, with a copy to the Applicant citing the reason(s) and specific Ordinance sections for the inconsistency or noncompliance. Inconsistency  or noncompliance may be due to inadequate information to make a reasonable judgment as to compliance with this Ordinance. Any SWM Site Plans that are inconsistent or noncompliant may be revised by the Applicant and resubmitted in accordance with Section 406 when consistent with this Ordinance. Resubmission will commence a new municipal review and notification time period.
 
D.	The Township will not grant final approval to any proposed subdivision, land development, or Regulated Activity specified in this Ordinance if the SWM Site Plan has been found to be inconsistent with this Ordinance.

E.	All required permits from PADEP shall be obtained and submitted to the Township prior to (or as a condition of) final approval of any proposed subdivision, land development, or other Regulated Activity by the Township.

F.	No building permits for any Regulated Activity will be approved by the Township if the SWM Site Plan has been found to be inconsistent with this Ordinance, as dete1mined by the Municipal Engineer. All required pe1mits from PADEP shall be obtained prior to issuance of a building pe1mit.

G.	The Township's approval of a SWM Site Plan shall be valid for a period not to exceed five
(5)  years  commencing  on  the  date  that  the  Township  approved  the  SWM  Site Plan.  If stonnwater management  facilities included in the approved  SWM Site Plan have not been constructed,  or  if constructed,  As-Built  Plans of these  facilities  have  not  been  approved within this five (5) year time period, then the Applicant may seek reinstatement of approval of the expired SWM Site Plan.  If the Township determines that the expired SWM Site Plan is consistent and compliant with current regulations and requirements, then the expired SWM Site Plan will be reinstated; otherwise, it will be rejected. The Applicant will be prohibited from conducting any Regulated Activity until a reinstated or newly approved SWM Site Plan is obtained in accordance with Section 406 of this Ordinance.

H.	All or p01tions of the final approved SWM Site Plan shall be recorded (as "record plans") per the instructions of the Township.

I. Upon completion of construction, the Applicant shall be responsible for completing final As­ Built Plans of all BMPs, Conveyances, or other stonnwater management facilities included in the approved SWM Site Plan as per the requirements of Section 502 of this Ordinance.

Section 405.  Revision of SWM Site Plans

A.	A submitted SWM Site Plan under review by the Township shall be revised and resubmitted for any of the following reasons:

1.	A change in sto1mwater management BMPs, Conveyances, facilities or techniques;

2.	Relocation or redesign of st01mwater management BMPs, Conveyances, or facilities; or

3.	Soil or other Site conditions are not as stated on the SWM Site Plan as determined by the Municipal Engineer, and the new conditions necessitate design changes.

The revised SWM Site Plan shall be resubmitted in accordance with Section 403 and subject to review as specified in Section 404 of this Ordinance.
 
B.	A revision to an approved SWM Site Plan shall be submitted to the Township, accompanied by the applicable municipal review fee.

Section 406.  Resubmission of Inconsistent or Noncompliant SWM Site Plans

Any SWM Site Plan deemed inconsistent or noncompliant may be revised and resubmitted with the revisions addressing the Municipal Engineer's concerns documented in writing. The submission shall be addressed to the Township in accordance with  Section 403 of this Ordinance, distributed accordingly, and be subject to review as specified in Section 404 of this Ordinance. The applicable municipal review fee shall accompany a resubmission of a SWM Site Plan previously determined to be inconsistent or noncompliant.
 
ARTICLE V - PERFORMANCE AND INSPECTION OF REGULATED ACTIVITIES, AND FINAL AS-BUILT PLANS

Section 501.  Performance and Inspection of Regulated Activities

A.	All Regulated Activities shall be conducted, operated and maintained in accordance with the requirements set foiih in Atiicles III, VII, and VIII of this Ordinance. When a SWM Site Plan is required by this Ordinance, all Regulated Activities shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the final approved SWM Site Plan.

B.	The Municipal Engineer or other municipal designee shall be provided access to the Site to inspect all phases of the erosion and sediment control measures and installation of the pe1manent BMPs and Conveyances at such times as deemed appropriate by the Municipal Engineer or other municipal designee.

C.	Periodic inspections may be made by the Municipal Engineer or other designee during construction. A set of design plans approved by the Township shall be on file and available for viewing at the Site throughout the duration of the construction activity.

D.	Inspections, including but not limited to a final inspection, of all constructed BMPs, Conveyances, or other stormwater facilities, and related improvements may be conducted by the Municipal Engineer or other designee to confirm compliance with this Ordinance and with the final approved SWM Site Plan prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit, use permit, or other foim of final approval of the project by the Township.

E.	Upon completion of construction, every permanent stomnvater BMP, Conveyance or other stormwater facility constructed or used as part of the Regulated Activity shall be operated, maintained and inspected by the Landowner, or other designated person, in accordance with the O&M Plan and O&M Agreement approved by the Township .

F.	The Township or its designee may periodically inspect any pennanent stormwater BMP, Conveyance or facility for compliance with this Ordinance, an approved O&M Plan, or an approved O&M Agreement, per the provisions of Article IX. The Township may inspect at any time it has reason to believe a violation exists. The Township may pursue enforcement for violations consistent with the provisions of Atiicle IX.

Section 502.  Final As-Built Plans

A.	For Regulated Activities involving one(!) acre or more of Earth Disturbance, the Applicant shall provide to the Township final As-Built Plans (signed and sealed by a qualified Licensed Professional) of all BMPs, Conveyances, other stormwater facilities, and related improvements shown in the final approved SWM Site Plan.

B.	The final As-Built Plans shall include the following for all BMPs,  Conveyances,  other stormwater facilities and related improvements:
 
1.	The location, elevations, dimensions, and as-built conditions of all BMPs, Conveyances, other stormwater facilities, and related improvements including topographic contours and all typical details for sto1m drainage and conveyance systems, stonnwater management facilities and Impervious Surfaces (existing, proposed, or constructed) included in the approved SWM Site Plan; and

2.	Explanation of any discrepancies  or variations from the final approved SWM Site Plan, other related approved construction plans, calculations and specifications (and approved revisions thereto).

C.	The final As-Built Plans shall include a certification of completion signed and sealed by a qualified Licensed Professional verifying that all permanent BMPs and Conveyances have been constructed according to the final approved SWM Site Plan and related approved construction plans, calculations and specifications for projects greater than one (I) acre of Em1h Disturbance.

D.	All areas of the Regulated Activity draining to BMPs must be stabilized prior to submittal of the As-Built Plans.

E.	After receipt of the As-Built Plans by the Township, the Township or  its  designee may review the As-Built Plans for consistency with this Ordinance, the final approved SWM Site Plan, other related approved construction plans, and subsequent approved revisions thereto, as well as actual conditions at the Site, and the Township may conduct a final inspection, as per Subsection 501.D.

F.	The As-Built Plans must be received, reviewed and determined to be acceptable by the Township  prior to:

1.	Close out of the drainage permit or other close out of the project by the Township;

2.	Release of the financial security or other performance guarantee; and

3.	Dedication of the stonnwater facilities to the Township or conveyance to a homeowners association, or other person responsible for operation, maintenance and repair.

G.	Final occupancy permit(s) or Use Pe1mit or other final approval to use or operate the constructed improvement may not be issued by the Township until the final As-Built Plans have been accepted.

H.	Upon final acceptance of the final As-Built Plans by the Township,  the Applicant  shall review and, if required by the Township, revise and re-record the O&M Plan and the O&M Agreement to reflect the final as-built conditions and information for each permanent BMP or Conveyance, in accordance with the requirements of Aiticle VII.

I.	All or portions of the final As-Built Plans shall be recorded if required by the Township.
 
ARTICLE VI - FEES AND EXPENSES



Section 601.  Township SWM Site Plan Review and Inspection Fees

Fees have been established by the Township by resolution or as otherwise allowed by law to defray plan review and construction inspection costs incurred by the Township. The Township shall periodically update the review and inspection fee schedule to ensure that review costs are adequately reimbursed.

Section 602.  Expenses Covered by Fees

A.	The fees required of the Applicant by this Ordinance shall at a minimum cover:

1.	Administrative costs;

2.	The review of the SWM Site Plan by the Township , the Municipal Engineer   and other municipal consultants;

3.	Coordination and meetings with the Applicant;

4.	The inspection of erosion and sediment control measures, BMPs, Conveyances and other related improvements during construction;

5.	Review of project communications, repo1is, and additional supporting information;

6.	Other Site inspections;

7.	The final inspection upon completion of the BMPs, Conveyances, and other stonnwater management facilities and related improvements presented in the SWM Site Plan; and

8.	Review  of final As-Built  Plan  submission and revised  calculations,  and inspections as needed.

B. The Applicant shall also reimburse all expenses incu!1'ed by the Township for any additional work or municipal consultant fees required to enforce any permit provisions regulated by this Ordinance, conect violations, and ensure proper completion of remedial actions.
 

ARTICLE VII - OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE (O&M) RESPONSIBILITIES AND EASEMENTS

Section 701.  General Requirements for Protection, Operation and Maintenance of Stormwater BMPs and Conveyances

The following shall apply to all Regulated Activities in accordance with the requirements of the subsequent sections of this Atiicle VII.

A. Continuing operations and maintenance responsibilities of all  permanent  BMPs, Conveyances, or other stormwater management facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the Township along with the SWM Site Plan. The Township may require an offer of a dedication of such facilities as part of the requirements for approval of the SWM Site Plan. Such a requirement is not an indication that the Township will accept the facilities. The Township reserves the right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance responsibility for any p011ion of or all of the BMPs, Conveyances or other stormwater controls  and facilities.

B.	An Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Plan shall be submitted to the Township for review and approval for all existing and proposed permanent BMPs and man-made Conveyances or other stormwater facilities identified in the SWM Site Plan. Multiple BMPs or Conveyances may be addressed by a combined O&M Plan where all such facilities are similar in O&M requirements and ownership.

C.	The O&M Plan(s) and O&M Agreement(s) shall name the person identified in the SWM Site Plan who shall be the owner of and be responsible for ongoing inspections, operation, repair, and maintenance of each BMP or Conveyance following completion of construction.

D.	For any BMP or man-made Conveyance (including any to be located on any prope11y other than the prope11y being developed by the Applicant) to be owned by a person other than the Township:

1.	An O&M Agreement shall be submitted to the Township  for review and approval; and

2.	The O&M Plan shall be attached to, incorporated within, and recorded as a public record along with a fully executed O&M Agreement, all of which shall be recorded as a restrictive covenant that runs with the land and shall be binding upon the Landowner and any heirs, administrators, successors in interest or assigns of the Landowner.

E.	The following shall be provided for all BMPs and Conveyances (including any to be located on any prope11y other than the property being developed by the Applicant) by an O&M or other agreement or by othe1wise establishing covenants, easements, deed restrictions, or by dedication to the Township :

1.	Permanent protection of the BMP or Conveyance from disturbance or alteration;
 
2.	Right of entiy and access for the Township for inspection and enforcement of this Ordinance (including Subsection 903.G) and any applicable O&M Plan or O&M Agreement; and

3.	Right of entry and access for the person owning the BMP or Conveyance and responsible for fulfilling the O&M requirements when that person is not the Township and  is different from the owner of the property on which the BMP  or Conveyance is located (such as may be applicable for Subsection 301.G of this Ordinance).

F.	All O&M and other agreements, covenants, easements and deed restrictions shall:

l.   Be submitted to the Township  for review and approval;

2.	Be recorded as a public record, upon approval, against each parcel(s) which is paii of the SWM Site Plan or otheiwise contains any BMP or Conveyance comprising paii of the Regulated Activity which is the subject of an O&M Agreement; and

3.	Run with the land and be binding upon the Landowner,  its  heirs,  administrators, successors in interest, and assigns.

G. The materials, documents and content required by this Atiicle VII may be prepared in conjunction with and incorporated with similar materials, documents and content required for other permit or approval applications, such as those required by PADEP for the Post Construction Stormwater Management Plan.

Section 702. Operation and Maintenance Plans

The  following  items  shall  be  included  in  the  O&M  Plan,  unless  otherwise  approved  by  the Municipal  Engineer:

A.	A plan sheet(s) or map(s) showing each BMP and man-made Conveyance and which shall include, but not be limited to:

1.	Prope1iy(ies) identification (owner name and address; and prope1iy address and/or lot and/or tax parcel number, etc.), prope1ty boundaries and tax parcel number  of the land parcel on which the BMP or Conveyance is located.

2.	Name, address, phone number, date prepared, signature and seal of  the  Licensed Professional responsible for preparation of the plan sheet or map.

3.	Clear identification  of  the  location,  dimensions,  and  function  of  each  BMP  or Conveyance covered by the O&M Plan.

4.	The location of each BMP and Conveyance relative to roadways, prope1iy boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks and existing natural drainage features such as streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within the i1runediate vicinity of, or receiving discharge from, the BMP or Conveyance.
 

5.	Delineation of the land area, structures, Impervious Surfaces and Conveyances  draining to and from the BMP.

6.	Representative elevations and/or topographic contours at intervals  of  two  (2)  feet,  or other as acceptable to the Municipal Engineer.

7.	Other features including FEMA floodplain and floodway boundaries, sinkholes, etc. located within the immediate proximity of each BMP and Conveyance.

8.	Locations of areas of vegetation to be managed or preserved that function as a BMP or Conveyance.

9.	The locations of all surface and subsurface utilities, on-lot waste water facilities, sanitary sewers, and water lines within twenty (20) feet of each BMP or Conveyance.

I 0. The following as it pertains to any easements, covenants and deed restrictions established for each applicable BMP or Conveyance:

a.	Boundaries delineated with bearings and distances shown that encompass the BMP or Conveyance and that includes a twenty (20)-foot perimeter area surrounding these features and sufficient vehicular ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way  and roadway;

b.	Labels specifying the type and purpose of the easement, covenant, or deed restriction and who it benefits; and

c.	Labels with reference to any corresponding easement agreement, covenant, deed restriction or other document to be recorded.

11. The plan sheet or map shall be prepared at sufficient scale for municipal review, and ultimately for the use by the person responsible for operation and maintenance, and shall also be prepared at a legible scale that meets the requirements for recordation along with (and as an attachment to) the O&M Agreement and O&M Plan at the Chester County Office of the Recorder of Deeds.

B.	The following info1mation shall  be included in the O&M Plan and written in a manner consistent with the knowledge and understanding of the person who will be responsible for the maintenance activities:

1.	The name and address of the following:

a.	Property(ies) on which each BMP or Conveyance is located;

b.	Owner of the prope1ty;
 
c.	Owner	of	each	stormwater	BMP	or	Conveyance	who	1s   responsible	for implementation of the O&M Plan;

d.	Person responsible for maintaining adequate liability insurance and payment of taxes; and

e.	Person preparing the O&M Plan.

2.	A description of each BMP and Conveyance and how the BMPs and  Conveyances are intended to function.

3.	A description of actions necessary to operate, inspect, and maintain each BMP or Conveyance, including but not limited to:

a.	Lawn care, vegetation maintenance, landscaping and planting;

b.	Clean out of accumulated  debris and  sediment  (including  from  grates,  trash  racks, inlets, etc.); and

c.	Other anticipated periodic maintenance and repair.

4.	The following statement shall be included:

"The  Landowner   acknowledges   that,  per   the  provisions   of  the   Township   's Stormwater  Management   Ordinance,  it   is	unla11ful  to modifo,  remove, fill, landscape,  alter  or  impair  the  effectiveness  of, or place   any  structure,  other vegetation,  yard   waste,  brush  cuttings,   or  other  waste  or  debris   into  any permanent  stormwater management BlvfP or Conveyance described in this O&M Plan or to allow the BMP or Conveyance to exist in a condition which does not conform to this O&A1Plan, without written approvalji'Dln the Township."

5.	Inspection and maintenance schedules.

6.	Explanation of the purpose and limitations of any easements, covenants, or deed restrictions associated with any BMP or Conveyance that are to be recorded against the property.

C.	A statement that no BMP or man-made Conveyance may be used by the owner or others for any purpose other than its intended stormwater control function, or, if approved by the Municipal Engineer, a statement of specific allowable uses of the BMP (i.e., recreational benefits that maybe associated with ce1iain BMPs owned by a homeowners association, or allowable uses by an individual residential Landowner).

D.	A statement that establishes a reasonable time frame for remedy of deficiencies found by the owner during their inspections.
 
E.	Language needed to fulfill the requirements of Subsections 705.B, 705.C, and 705.D of this Ordinance.



Section 703.  Operation and Maintenance Agreements

A.	An O&M Agreement shall be required for any BMP or man-made Conveyance to be owned by a person other than the Township, and the Agreement shall:

1.	Be between the owner of the BMP or Conveyance and the Township , and shall be substantially the same as the O&M Agreement in Appendix E;

2.	Incorporate the approved O&M Plan(s) for all BMPs or Conveyances to be covered by the O&M Agreement;

3.	Set forth the rights, duties and obligations of the owner of the BMP or Conveyance and the Township, and be consistent with the approved O&M Plan(s);

4.	Be recorded as a deed restriction or restrictive covenant that runs with the land and shall be binding upon the Landowner, its heirs, administrators, successors in  interest, and assigns;

5.	Be submitted to the Township  for review prior to approval of the SWM Site Plan;

6.	Upon approval by the Township , be signed by the designated owner of the BMP or Conveyance and submitted for signature by the Township ; and

7.	When fully executed, be recorded by the Landowner at the Chester County Office of the Recorder of Deeds following municipal approval of the O&M Plan and prior to the start of construction.

B.	Other items or conditions may be required by the Township to be included in the O&M Agreement where determined necessary by the Township to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of all permanent BMPs and Conveyances.

C.	After approval of the final As-Built Plans per the requirements of Article V, the Applicant shall review and, if necessary and  if required  by the Township  , revise and re-record  the O&M Plan and O&M Agreement to reflect the final as-built conditions of each BMP and Conveyance if different from the information included in the original recorded documents.



Section 704. Easements and Deed Restrictions

A. Easements shall be established in connection with any Regulated Activity for all permanent BMPs and Conveyances that will not be dedicated to or otherwise owned by the Township , (including any to be located on any property other than the prope1iy being developed by the Applicant), and shall:
 

I .  Include all land area occupied by each BMP or Conveyance;

2.	Include a twenty (20) foot wide perimeter (or other width as determined in consultation with the Municipal Engineer) surrounding the feature(s);

3.	Provide sufficient vehicular ingress and egress from a public right-of-way and roadway;

4.	Permanently protect every BMP and Conveyance from disturbance  or alteration where not otherwise  protected by a recorded O&M Agreement, covenant, deed restriction or other means;

5.	Grant the Township the right, but not the duty, to access every BMP and Conveyance from a public right-of-way or public roadway to conduct periodic inspections and to undertake other actions that may be necessary to enforce the requirements of this Ordinance, or of any applicable O&M Plan or O&M Agreement; where roadways will not be dedicated to the Township , the Township shall be granted access to the private roadways as necessary to access every BMP and Conveyance;

6.	Grant the owner of each BMP and Conveyance the right to access, inspect, operate, maintain, and repair the BMP or Conveyance when the feature is to be owned, operated and maintained by a person other than the Township and other than the owner of the parcel on which it is located;

7.	Be shown, with  bearings and distances noted, on the SWM Site Plan map/plan sheets, O&M Plan map/plan sheets, final As-Built Plans, and be signed and sealed by a qualified Licensed Professional;

8.	Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the easement shall run with the land and bind the Landowner granting the easement, its heirs, administrators, successors in interest and assigns, into perpetuity; and

9.	Be recorded at the Chester County Office of the Recorder of Deeds following municipal approval and prior to the start of construction.

B.	For any BMP or Conveyance  to be owned by a person other than the Township or  the Landowner owning the parcel upon which a BMP or Conveyance is located, an easement agreement shall be prepared and executed between the Landowner and the owner of the BMP or Conveyance which  shall:

I.	Describe the ownership interests of all parties to the easement agreement, including the ownership of the BMP or Conveyance;

2.	Include a vn:itten legal (metes and bounds) description of the easement area, with reference to a recorded plan sheet showing the legal boundaries of the easement area (or an accompanying plan sheet/map), signed and sealed by a qualified  Licensed Professional;
 

3.	Grant an easement from the Landowner to the owner of each BMP and Conveyance, establishing the right and obligation to occupy, access, inspect, operate, maintain, and repair the BMP or Conveyance;

4.	Include a description of the purpose of the easement and the responsibilities  of  the paiiies involved;

5.	Incorporate by reference or be recorded with, the corresponding O&M Plan and O&M Agreement;

6.	Restrict the Landowner's use of the easement area of the parcel on which the BMP or Conveyance is located, consistent with the rights  granted to the owner of the BMP or Conveyance;

7.	Be submitted to the Township for review and approval prior to approval of the SWM Site Plan;

8.	Upon approval by the  Township,  be  signed  by  the  owner  of  the  BMP(s)  or Conveyance(s) and the Landowner and submitted for signature by the Township;

9.	Include language legally sufficient to ensure that  the easement will  rnn with the land affected by the easement and that the easement agreement is binding upon the paiiies to the  easement agreement, their heirs, administrators, successors in interest and assigns, into perpetuity;

10.	Contain additional provisions or information as required by the Township ; and

11.	When fully executed, be recorded by the Landowner at the Chester County Office of the Recorder of Deeds against all parcels affected by the tenns of the easement agreement, within ninety (90) days of the Township's approval of the corresponding O&M Plan.

C.	For any BMP or Conveyance which is designed to receive runoff from another parcel or parcels and which is owned by the Landowner of the parcel upon which the BMP or Conveyance is located, in addition to any easement or easement agreement required pursuant to Subsection 704 A. or B., an easement agreement shall be prepai·ed and executed between the Landowner of the parcel or parcels draining to the BMP or Conveyance and the owner of the BMP or Conveyance.  This easement agreement shall:

1.	Describe the ownership interests of all parties to the easement agreement, including the ownership of all affected parcels and of the BMP or Conveyance;

2.	Provide for the grant of a drainage easement from the owner of the BMP or Conveyance to the Landowner of the parcel(s) draining to the BMP, which shall extend from the shared parcel boundary(ies) to the receiving BMP and shall include the connecting flow path(s) or Conveyance;
 
3.	Include a written legal (metes and bounds) description of the easement area, with reference to a recorded plan sheet showing the legal boundaries of the easement area (or an accompanying plan sheet/map), signed and sealed by a Licensed Professional.

4.	Inco1porate by reference or be recorded with the corresponding O&M Plan and O&M Agreement;

5.	State that the purpose of the easement agreement is to ensure the continuous right of the discharging parcel to discharge onto the parcel containing the BMP and into the BMP or Conveyance;

6.	Restrict the BMP or Conveyance owner's use of the easement area of the parcel upon which the BMP or Conveyance is located, consistent with the pmpose of the easement granted;

7.	Establish the duty and responsibility of the Landowner of the parcel or parcels draining to the BMP or Conveyance to maintain the existing drainages on the discharging parcel or parcels as designed and constructed to discharge to the receiving BMP;

8.	Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the easement will run with the land and will bind all pa11ies to the easement agreement, their heirs, administrators, successors in interest and assigns, into pe1petuity;

9.	Be submitted to the Township for review and approval prior to approval of the SWM Site Plan;

I 0. Contain all additional provisions or infonnation as the Township may require upon review; and

11. Be executed by the parties to the easement agreement and recorded at the Chester County Recorder of Deeds Office against the draining parcel(s) and the parcel upon which the BMP or Conveyance is located within ninety (90) days of the Township's approval of the corresponding O&M Plan.

D.	For any area(s) shown on the SWM Site Plan maps/plan sheets or As-Built Plan sheets as requiring, or area(s) that is otherwise determined to require, deed restriction(s) for  the pmpose of protecting and prohibiting disturbance to a BMP or Conveyance, such deed restrictions will be incorporated into a written deed, restrictive covenant, or equivalent document. The deed or other document shall:

1.	Include a clear and understandable description of the purpose, terms and conditions of the restricted use;

2. Include the written legal description (metes and bounds description) of the area to which the restrictions apply that is consistent with the boundary shown on the O&M plan sheets and SWM Site Plan maps/plan sheets;
 
3.	Make reference to any corresponding O&M Plan(s) and O&M Agreement(s);

4.	Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the terms of the restriction run with the land and shall be binding upon the Landowner, its heirs,  administrators, successors in interest, and assigns;

5.	Be submitted to the Township  or review and approval prior to approval of the SWM Site Plan;

6.	Upon approval by the Township, be signed by the Landowner and owner of the BMP or Conveyance and submitted to the Township ; and

7.	Be fully executed and recorded at the Chester County Office of the Recorder of Deeds within ninety (90) days of the Township's approval of the O&M Plan.



Section 705.  Other Post-construction Responsibilities

A.	The provisions of Section 804 of this Ordinance shall apply to any permanent BMP or Conveyance that is constructed as part of an approved SWM Site Plan or covered by an approved O&M Plan.

B.	The person  responsible for the operation and maintenance of a BMP or  Conveyance shall make records of the installation and of all  maintenance and repairs, and shall  retain  the records for at least ten (I0) years. These records shall be submitted to the Township, if requested.

C.	Upon final inspection, the Township shall inform the person responsible  for the operation and maintenance whether the submission of periodic (arurnal or other frequency) inspection and maintenance repmts will be required.

D.	The owner of each BMP and Conveyance shall keep on file with the Township the name, address, and telephone number of the person responsible for maintenance activities and implementation of the O&M Plan. In the event of a change, new information shall be submitted by the BMP or Conveyance owner to the Tovmship within thirty  (30) working days of the change.
 
ARTICLE VIII - PROHIBITIONS

Section 801.  Prohibited Discharges

A. Any drain or Conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows any non­ stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the Township 's separate storm sewer system or the Waters of the Commonwealth is prohibited.

B.	No person shall allow, or cause to allow,  discharges  into the Township  's separate stonn sewer system or the Waters of the Commonwealth that are not composed  entirely  of stormwater, except:

1.	As provided in Subsection 80l .C below; and

2.	Discharges allowed under a State or Federal permit.

C.	The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined by the Township to be significant contributors to pollution to the Township 's separate storm sewer system or to the Waters of the Commonwealth:

1.	Discharges from firefighting activities;

2.	Potable water sources including water line and fire hydrant flushings;

3.	Irrigation drainage;

4.	Air conditioning condensate;

5.	Springs;

6.	Water from crawl space pumps;

7.	Pavement  wash  waters  where  spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous  materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been removed) and where detergents are not used;

8.	Diverted stream flows;

9.	Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

10.	Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains;

11.	Lawn watering;

12.	Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;

13.	Uncontaminated groundwater;
 
14.	Water from individual residential car washing; and

15.	Routine	external   building	washdown	(which   does   not   use   detergents	or   other compounds).

D.	In the event that the Township  determines that any of the discharges identified  in Section
801.C significantly contribute pollutants to the Township's separate stmm sewer system or to the Waters of the Commonwealth, or is notified of such significant contribution of pollution by PADEP, the Township will notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.

E.	Upon notice provided by the Township under Section 801.D, the discharger shall, within a reasonable time period, as determined by the Township consistent with the degree of pollution cansed by the discharge, cease the discharge.

F.	Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under State law.



Section 802.  Prohibited Connections

The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in Section 801.C above:

A.	Any drain or Conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that  allows  any  non­ stormwater discharge, including sewage, process wastewater,  and  wash  water  to  enter  a separate stmm sewer system, and any connections to the separate storm sewer system from indoor drains and sinks.

B.	Any drain or Conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to a separate stmm sewer system, which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the Township.



Section 803.  Roof Drains and Sump Pumps

A.  Roof drains and sump pump discharges shall not be connected to sanitary sewers.

B.	Roof drain, sump pump, foundation and footing drain discharges:

1.	To the maximum extent practicable, shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative BMPs, or to vegetated or other areas with adequate capacity;

2.	May  be  connected  to  streets,  stmm  sewers,  or  roadside  ditches  only  if  determined necessary or acceptable by the Municipal Engineer; and

3.	Shall  be   considered   in   stormwater   management   calculations   to   demonstrate   that Conveyance and receiving facilities have adequate capacity.
 
Section 804.  Alteration of BMPs

A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, alter, or impair the effectiveness of any stormwater BMPs, Conveyances, facilities, areas or structures unless the activity is part of an approved maintenance program, without the written approval of the Township .

B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, additional vegetation, yard waste, brush cuttings, or other waste or debris into a BMP or Conveyance, or within a stormwater easement, that would limit or alter the functioning of the stonnwater BMP or Conveyance, without the written approval of the Township.
 
ARTICLE IX - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES



Section 901.  Public Nuisance

A.	Any Regulated Activity conducted in the violation of any provision of this Ordinance is hereby deemed a public nuisance.

B.	Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.

C.	A separate violation will be found to exist for each section of this Ordinance found to have been violated.

D.	To the extent that the Township does not enforce any provision of this Ordinance, such action or inaction shall  not constitute a waiver by the Township of its rights of future enforcement hereunder.



Section 902.  Right of Entry

A.	\Vhen it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance, the Code Official and Municipal Engineer shall be authorized to enter the prope1ty at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this Ordinance provided that if the prope11y is occupied, that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such property is unoccupied, the Code Official shall first make a reasonable eff011 to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the prope1ty and request entry. If entiy is refused, the Code Official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.

B.	Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to temporarily locate on or in any BMP, Conveyance or other stormwater facility in the Township such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges from such BMP or Conveyance, or other stormwater facilities.

C.	Failure of the Landowner or representative to grant access to the Township within forty­ eight (48) hours of notification, verbal or written, is a violation of this Ordinance.



Section 903.  Enforcement

A.	The Municipal Engineer or other designee is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this Ordinance. The Municipal Governing Body may delegate enforcement duties, including the initial determination of Ordinance violation and  service of notice, if notice is given, to such other officers or agents as the Township shall deem qualified for that purpose.
 
B.	It shall be the responsibility of the Landowner of the real property on which any Regulated Activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred to comply with the applicable terms and conditions of this Ordinance.

C.	All municipal inspections for compliance with the approved SWM Site Plan shall be the responsibility of the Township or its designee.

D.	During any stage of the work of any Regulated Activity, if the Municipal Engineer or other designee determines that the erosion and sediment control measures, permanent BMPs, Conveyances or other stormwater facilities are not being installed  or  maintained  in accordance with the approved SWM Site Plan, the Township may suspend or revoke any existing pem1its or other approvals until the deficiencies  are conected  or until  a  revised SWM Site Plan is submitted and approved, if and as determined to be necessary by the Municipal Engineer or other designee.

E.	In the event that the Municipal Engineer or other designee finds that a person has violated a provision of this Ordinance, or fails to conform to the requirements of any petmit or approval issued by the Township, or any O&M Plan or O&M Agreement approved by the Township, the Township may order compliance by written notice of the violation to the Landowner.

F.	Such notice may, without limitation, require the following remedies:

1.	Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;

2.	Elimination of prohibited  connections or discharges;

3.	Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;

4.	Abatement  or  remediation  of  sto1mwater  pollution  or  contamination  hazards  and  the restoration of any affected prope1ty;

5.	Payment  of  a  fine  to  cover  administrative  and  remediation  costs  and/or  forfeiture  of financial security;

6.	Implementation of stormwater controls, BMPs, and Conveyances; and

7.	Operation, maintenance or repair of BMPs, Conveyances or other stonnwater facilities.

G.	Such notice shall set fo11h the nature of the violation(s), citing to specific sections of this Ordinance which have not been met, and establish a time limit for commencement of correction and completion of conection of the violations(s). The notice shall provide for a right of the Landowner's appeal to the Municipal Governing Body in  accordance  with Section 906 of this Ordinance. Said notice shall further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the required action within the established deadline, possible sanctions, clearly described, may be imposed, or the work may be done by the Township or designee, and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
 
H. Failure to comply within the time specified in such notice shall also subject such person to the penalty provisions of this Ordinance. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Township from pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.



Section 904.  Suspension and Revocation of Permits and Approvals

A.	Any building, land development, or other permit or approval issued by the Township may be suspended or revoked by the Township  for:

1.	Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision  of the permit  or approved SWM Site Plan or O&M Agreement;

2.	A violation of any provision of this Ordinance or any other law or regulation applicable to the Regulated Activity;

3.	The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during the Regulated Activity that constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance, or endangers the life, health, safety, or property of others; or

4.	Failure to correct a violation within the allowed time period allowed per notice given by the Township.

B.	Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit, unless there is immediate danger or threat of such danger to life, public health or property, at the request of the Applicant, the Township's Governing Body shall schedule a hearing on the violation and proposed revocation or suspension, pursuant to public notice. The expense  of a hearing shall be the Applicant's responsibility.

C.	A suspended permit or approval may be reinstated by the Township  when:

1.	The Municipal Engineer or other designee has inspected and approved the corrections to the  BMPs,  Conveyances or other stonnwater facilities, or the elimination of the hazard or nuisance; and

2.	The Township is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.

D.	A pe1mit or approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot be reinstated. The Applicant may apply for a new permit or approval in accordance with this Ordinance.



Section 905.  Penalties

A. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania  Rules of  Criminal  Procedure,  be  guilty  of a  summary  offense  and  shall be
 
subject to the payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a te1m of not more than 30 days. Each section of this Ordinance violated shall constitute a separate offense, and each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this Ordinance is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense, each of which violations shall be punishable by a separate fine imposed by the District Justice of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution or, upon default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more than 30 days. All fines and penalties collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid to the Township Treasurer. In addition, the Municipality may, through its solicitor, institute injunctive, mandamus, or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this Ordinance. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other legal or equitable forms of remedy or relief.  Such relief may  include costs, fees, and charges, including the Municipality's attorney's fees (charged at the hourly rate approved by the Governing Body of the Municipality) and costs, as may be permitted by law.

B.	In addition, the Township may, through its solicitor, institute injunctive, mandamus, or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this Ordinance. Any court of competent jurisdiction  shall have the right  to  issue  restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other legal or equitable forms of remedy or relief. Such relief may include costs, fees, and charges, including the Township's attorney's fees (charged at the hourly rate approved by the Governing Body of the Township) and costs, as may be permitted by law.

C.	Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, the Township shall have the right at any or all times deemed necessary by the Municipal Engineer or designee to enter upon any property within the Township to inspect and, upon determination of a violation of this Ordinance, to conect the violation, with all expenses associated with conecting the violation to be charged to the property owner responsible for the violation.

Section 906.  Appeals

A.	Any person aggrieved by any action of the Municipal Engineer or other designee relative to the provisions of this Ordinance may appeal to the Township's Governing Body within thiity
(30) days of that action.

B.	Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township's Governing Body relative to the provisions of this Ordinance may appeal to the County Court of  Connnon  Pleas  in  the County where the activity has taken place within thi1ty (30) days of the Township's decision.

Section 907.  Effective Date

This Ordinance shall take effect on January 1, 2014.
 






ORDINANCE APPENDIX A


SIMPLIFIED APPROACH TO STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR SMALL PROJECTS
 
Appendix A
Simplified Approach to Stormwater Management for Small Projects

Appendix A.1 –
Applicability, Submittal and Approval Requirements

Appendix A.2 –
“Simplified Approach to Stormwater Management for Small Projects – Handbook” (Revised June 10, 2012)

Appendix A.3 –
“Simplified Approach – Stormwater Best Management Practices Operation, Maintenance and Inspection Plan and Agreement” –
Sample Agreement (Revised October 12, 2012)
 






Appendix A.1
Applicability, Submittal and Approval Requirements










West Nantmeal Chester County, Pennsylvania
 
Applicability:

•	Regulated Activities that involve both: (i) up to 2,000 square feet of Proposed Impervious Surfaces; and (ii) up to 10,000 square feet of proposed Earth Disturbance, may apply the modified requirements presented in the “Simplified Approach to Stormwater Management for Small Projects” (Simplified Approach) (Appendix A) to comply with the requirements of Sections 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, and 310, and Article IV, Article V, Article VI and Article VII of this Ordinance (as shown in Table 106.2).

•	Only projects that meet the above size thresholds as specified in the West Nantmeal Stormwater Management Ordinance may use this Simplified Approach and are then not required to submit a formal Stormwater Management Site plan to the Municipality. However, these projects are still required to address water quality and infiltration requirements as outlined in this Simplified Approach “Handbook”.

•	Any project with more than 2,000 square feet of Proposed Impervious Surface or more than 10,000 square feet of proposed Earth Disturbance can NOT apply this Simplified Approach.


•	The Applicant should first review the planned project with the Municipal Engineer prior to initiating the Simplified Approach to confirm the following:
o	That the proposed project is not otherwise exempt from the stormwater management control and the engineered Stormwater Management Site Plan requirements of the Municipality’s Ordinance;
o	That the proposed project  is eligible to use this Simplified Approach;
o	To determine which components of the proposed project must be included in
the calculation of “impervious surfaces (areas)”; and,
o	Whether any local conditions are known to the Municipal Engineer that would preclude the use of any of the techniques included in this Simplified Approach.


Submittal and Approval Requirements:

Use of the Simplified Approach requires:

•	The applicant to submit the following to the Municipality for review and approval prior to beginning construction:

o	A Simplified Stormwater Management  Site Plan (i.e. sketch plan) and accompanying Worksheet; and
o	A completed, signed and notarized “Simplified Operation, Maintenance and Inspection Plan and Agreement”.
•	The first 1-inch of rainfall runoff from Proposed Impervious Surfaces (as defined by the Municipality’s Ordinance) must be captured and removed on the applicant’s property.
•	The applicant to record the “Simplified Approach – Stormwater Best Management
Practices Operation, Maintenance and Inspection Plan and Agreement" at the Chester County Office of the Recorder of Deeds after signature by the Municipality.
•	A final inspection conducted by the Municipality after completion of construction.
 




Simplified Approach to Stormwater Management for Small Projects



Handbook


Errata Notes:
The following corrections are noted for Figure 6:
1.	Label for BMP #1 Cistern – should read “(166 Gallons)”
2.	Label for BMP #2 Infiltration Trench – should read “(20’L x 3’W x 3.5’D)”



prepared by:
Borton-Lawson Engineering, Inc.
3897 Adler Place
Bethlehem, PA 18017

Revised June 10, 2012







Further revised by:
Cedarville Engineering Group, LLC
1033 S Hanover Street, Suite 300, N. Coventry, PA 19465
for:
West Nantmeal as part of the
County-wide Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan for Chester County, PA Revised Date: 10/14/13
All revisions made by Cedarville Engineering Group, LLC were completed without
consultation with Borton-Lawson and were completed at the sole discretion of
Cedarville Engineering Group, LLC.
 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES FOR MEETING THE SIMPLIFIED APPROACH REQUIREMENTS


Introduction
This Handbook has been developed to allow homeowners or applicants for small projects to comply with stormwater management requirements of the  Stormwater Management Ordinance of the Municipality, including sizing, designing, locating and installing on-lot measures, referred to herein as “Best Management Practices” (BMPs). Only projects that meet the size thresholds specified in
 the  Mun icipality’s  Stormwater  Management  Ordinance  may  use  this  Simplif ied  Approach and are then not required to submit a formal Stormwater Management Site plan to  the Municipality. However,  these projects are  still  required to address  certain requirements,  such as stormwater quality, infiltration, rate and volume management goals as outlined in this  Simplified Approach Handbook.

Pennsylvania Act 167 (PA Stormwater Management Act) was authorized on October 4, 1978 (32 P.S.,
P.L.	864) and gave Pennsylvania Municipalities the power to regulate activities that affect flooding, streambank erosion, stormwater runoff and surface and groundwater quantity and quality. The Municipality’s Stormwater Management Ordinance was prepared to comply with the PA Act 167 requirements and includes provisions allowing this Simplified Approach to be used for small projects as specified in their Ordinance.

If the guidelines presented in this Handbook are followed, the applicant may not require professional engineering services to comply with these stormwater management goals. This Handbook is organized into five sections:
•	Section 1 describes requirements and a simplified approach for designing a suitable BMP, and a description of what needs to be included on the simplified stormwater management (SWM) site plan (i.e. sketch plan).
•	Section 2 presents definitions of key terms.
•	Section 3 presents options of BMPs that can be considered for on-lot stormwater management.
•	Section 4 illustrates an example of how to obtain the size and dimensions of a BMP(s) for a sample project.
•	Section 5 describes the requirements to be met for a “Simplified Approach Operation, Maintenance and Inspection Plan and Agreement”.

The Simplified Approach requires:
•	The applicant to submit the following to the Municipality for review and approval prior to beginning construction:
o	A Simplified Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan (i.e. sketch plan),
and accompanying Worksheet, and
o	A  completed  and  signed  “Simplified   Approach  Operation,  Maintenance  and Inspection Plan and Agreement”.
 
•	The first 1-inch of rainfall runoff from proposed impervious surfaces (as defined by the Municipality’s Ordinance) must be captured and removed from the stormwater runoff leaving the applicant’s property.
•	The applicant to record the “Simplified Approach Operation, Maintenance and Inspection Plan and Agreement" at the County’s Recorder of Deeds after signature by the Municipality.

The purpose of requiring effective stormwater management from small projects is to help reduce stormwater runoff in the community, to maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality, and to otherwise protect water resources and public safety.

What needs to be submitted to the Municipality?
?	Simplified Approach Worksheet (Table 4)
?	Simplified SWM site plan (i.e. sketch plan), containing the features described in
Section 1, Step 1
?	“Simplifed Approach Operation, Maintenance and Inspection Plan and Agreement” must be signed, notarized and (after approval and signature by the Municipality) recorded at the County Recorder of Deeds.

If the applicant is using a contractor to construct the project, the worksheet and sketch plan must be shared with the contractor to ensure the BMP(s) are properly installed.
 

1.	Determination of Simplified Approach Volume Requirements

All proposed impervious areas (as required by the Municipality’s Ordinance) must be included in the determination of the amount of new impervious areas and the size of proposed BMPs needed to manage stormwater. Proposed impervious areas on an individual residential lot generally include, but are not limited to: roof area, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, patios, porches, permanent pools, or parking areas, etc. See the definitions provided in Section 2 and check with the Municipal Engineer to confirm what features of the proposed project must be included in the calculation of new impervious areas. Sidewalks, driveways, or patios that are constructed with gravel or pervious pavers and will not be disturbed or altered in the future may not need to be included in this calculation (check with the Municipal Engineer). In these cases, the amount of proposed impervious area may be reduced for proposed driveways, patios, and sidewalks through the use of gravel, pervious pavement, and turf pavers. All proposed impervious areas must be constructed so that runoff is conveyed to a BMP(s); no runoff may be directed to storm sewers, inlets or other impervious areas (i.e. street) without effective stormwater management from a site.

In addition, the use of low impact development is recommended to further minimize the effect of the new construction on water, land, and air. Low impact development is a method of development that incorporates design techniques that include: minimizing the amount of land disturbance, reducing the amount of impervious cover, disconnecting gutters and directing stormwater runoff to vegetated areas to infiltrate, and redirecting the flow of stormwater runoff from impervious surfaces to vegetated areas instead of the street or gutter.

Below are the steps that must be undertaken to meet the Ordinance requirements. The size and description of the proposed construction as well as important aspects related to the design of the BMP(s) must be documented in the Simplified Approach Worksheet found in Table 4. All individuals planning on using the Simplified Approach are encouraged to review the planned project with the Municipal Engineer prior to initiating the Simplified Approach to confirm the following:
•	That the proposed project is not otherwise exempt from the stormwater management control and engineered Stormwater Management Site Plan requirements of the Municipality’s Stormwater Management Ordinance;
•	That the proposed project size is within the range eligible to use this Simplified Approach;
•	To determine which components of the proposed project must be included in the calculation of “impervious areas”; and
•	Whether any local conditions are known to the Municipal Engineer that would preclude the use of any of the techniques included in this Simplified Approach.

Step 1  - Prepare the Simplified SWM Site Plan (i.e. sketch plan) that includes:

•	Name and address of the owner of the property, and name and address of individual preparing the plan (if different than the property owner), along with the date of submission.
•	Location of all existing structures including buildings, driveways, and roads within fifty (50) feet of the project site.
 
•	Location of proposed structures, driveways, or other paved areas with approximate size in square feet.
•	Location, and distance, of any existing surface water features, such as streams, lakes, ponds,
wetlands or other natural waterbodies, within fifty (50) feet of the project site and/or BMPs. Depending upon the Municipality’s requirements, the following may also be required (check with the Municipal Engineer):
o	The project and/or BMPs cannot cause earth disturbance within fifty (50) feet from a perennial or intermittent stream, wetland or waterbody. Protecting this area from non-disturbance along the aforementioned features helps protect the applicant’s land from erosion, the flood carrying capacity of streams, and the water quality of the waterbody. Where the applicant cannot meet the 50-foot non-disturbance width, the applicant should work with the Municipal Engineer to determine if a reduced width is acceptable, however a minimum of at least a 10 foot non-disturbance area width should be maintained.
o	If an existing buffer is legally prescribed (i.e., deed, covenant, easement, etc.) and it exceeds this requirements, the existing buffer must be maintained.
•	Location, orientation, and dimensions of all proposed BMPs. For all rain gardens/bioretention, infiltration trenches, and dry wells the length, width, and depth must be included on the plan. For rain barrels or cisterns the volume must be included.
•	Location of any existing or proposed on-lot septic system and potable water wells showing rough proximity to infiltration facilities. See Section 3. Description of BMPs, for the appropriate setbacks for on-lot septic systems and potable water wells.

Step 2 –Determine the Impervious Area to be Managed
•	Determine the total area of all proposed impervious surfaces that will need to drain to one or more BMP(s).
•	Also determine the total area for proposed earth disturbance to complete the project and
install the BMP(s). The total earth disturbance to complete a project is often greater than the project area to allow for access from construction vehicles, stock piling of materials and excavation. The total area of earth disturbance must account for all of the construction activities necessary to construct the project.
•	Determine locations where BMP(s) need to be placed so that the appropriate amount of stormwater runoff from the proposed impervious surfaces can be captured and managed.

Step 3 – Select the BMP(s) to be Used and Determine Appropriate Sizing Criteria
•	Select the BMP(s) to be used and determine the requirements of each from Section 3, Description of BMPs.
o	For instance, the back half of a garage may drain to a rain barrel and the front half of the garage and a driveway may drain to a bioretention area. Each BMP will be sized differently, manage stormwater runoff and will need to be designed to be consistent with Section 3.
•	Then obtain the required storage volume and surface area needed for each of the proposed BMP(s) from the appropriate heading below.
•	Complete Table 4 Simplified Approach Worksheet.
 
For Rain Barrels/Cisterns:
Step 3A –Select the proposed impervious area value in Column 1 of Table 1 that is closest to, but not less than the determined value.

Step 3B – Determine the volume that needs to be provided in cubic feet and gallons to satisfy the volume requirements using Columns 2 and 3 in Table 1.



For Rain Gardens/Bioretention or Dry Well #1:
Step 3A – Select the proposed impervious area value in Column 1 of Table 2 that is closest to, but not less than the determined value.

Step 3B - Determine the volume that needs to be provided in cubic feet to satisfy the volume requirements using Column 2 in Table 2.

Step 3C – Using the value from Column 2 determined above, and the depth (D) of the proposed BMP, simply determine the surface area needed from Column 3 of Table 2.

Note: The arrows under Column 3 in Table 2 indicate which range of depths is appropriate for each BMP. To determine the depth based on the area, select an area that corresponds to the required volume, and is closest to, but not more than the area to be used. To determine the area based on the depth, select a depth that is closest to, but not less than the depth that is to be used.

For Infiltration Trench or Dry Well #2:
Step 3A – Select the proposed impervious area value in Column 1 of Table 3 that is closest to, but not less than the determined value.

Step 3B - Determine the volume that needs to be provided in cubic feet to satisfy the volume requirements using Column 2 in Table 3.

Step 3C – Using the value from Column 2 determined above, and the depth (D) of the proposed BMP, simply determine the surface area needed from Column 3 of Table 3.

Note: The arrows under Column 3 in Table 3 indicate which range of depths is appropriate for each BMP. To determine the depth based on the area, select an area that corresponds to the required volume, and is closest to, but not less than the area to be used. To determine the area based on the depth, select a depth that is closest to, but not less than the depth that is to be used.

Step 4 – Submit the final SWM Site Plan, Simplified Approach Worksheet, and signed and notarized “Simplified Approach Operation, Maintenance and Inspection Plan and Agreement” (a sample document is provided in the accompanying appendix) to the Municipality for review and approval prior to beginning construction. After the Municipality has signed the “Simplified Approach Operation, Maintenance and Inspection Plan and Agreement”, record the Agreement at the County’s Office of Recorder of Deeds. Construction can begin only after the Municipality has issued its approval of the proposed project to the applicant.
 
Table 1: Simplified Approach - Calculating Rain Barrel/Cistern Storage Volume for 1” Rainfall1


Column 1	Column 2	Column 3
 

Proposed Impervious Area (square feet)
 

Volume of Rain Barrel/Cistern2 (cubic feet)
 

Volume of Rain Barrel/Cistern (gallons)
 

I	VRBcf	VRBgal
Sum of all Proposed Impervious Areas	(1*(1/12)*I)/0.75=VRBcf	VRBcf * 7.48=VRBgal 50		6		42
100	11	83
 
150	17	125
200	22	166
250	28	208
300	33	249
350	39	291
400	44	332

450	50	374
500	56	416
550	61	457
600	67	499
650	72	540
700	78	582
750	83	623
800	89	665
850	94	706
900	100	748
950	106	790

1000	111	831

1050	117	873

1100	122	914

1150	128	956
 
Rain Barrel












Cistern
 

1200	133	997
1250	139	1039
1300	144	1080
1350	150	1122
1400	156	1164
1450	161	1205
1500	167	1247
1550	172	1288
1600	178	1330
1650	183	1371
1700	189	1413
1750	194	1454
1800	200	1496
1850	206	1538
1900	211	1579
1950	217	1621
1999	222	1661
1The typical volume of a rain barrel is between 50-200 gallons, so more than one rain barrel may be needed.  Larger volumes may require a cistern.
2It is assumed that the rain barrel/cistern is 25% full prior to receiving runoff.
 
Table 2: Simplified Approach - Calculating Rain Garden/Bioretention and Dry Well #1 Storage Volume and Surface Area for 1 Inch Rainfall

Column 1	Column 2	Column 3

Total Proposed Impervious Area (square feet)	Volume of Rain Garden/Bioretention or Dry Well #11 (cubic feet)	
Surface Area of Rain Garden/Bioretention or Dry Well #1 Acceptable Depths for Each BMP are indicated by the arrows below (square feet)
		Area
Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 0.5'	Area
Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 1.0'	Area
Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 1.5'	Area
Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 2.0'	Area
Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 2.5'	Area
Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 3.0'	Area
Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 3.5'	Area
Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 4.0'
		Rain Garden
/Bioretention (0.5’-1.0’)	
Dry Well #1  (1.5’-4.0’)
I	V	A(sf)
Sum of all Proposed
Impervious Areas	
1*(1/12)*I= V	
V/D=A
50	4	8	4	3	2	2	1	1	1
100	8	17	8	6	4	3	3	2	2
150	13	25	13	8	6	5	4	4	3
200	17	33	17	11	8	7	6	5	4
250	21	42	21	14	10	8	7	6	5
300	25	50	25	17	13	10	8	7	6
350	29	58	29	19	15	12	10	8	7
400	33	67	33	22	17	13	11	10	8
450	38	75	38	25	19	15	13	11	9
500	42	83	42	28	21	17	14	12	10
550	46	92	46	31	23	18	15	13	11
600	50	100	50	33	25	20	17	14	13
650	54	108	54	36	27	22	18	15	14
700	58	117	58	39	29	23	19	17	15
750	63	125	63	42	31	25	21	18	16
800	67	133	67	44	33	27	22	19	17
850	71	142	71	47	35	28	24	20	18
900	75	150	75	50	38	30	25	21	19
950	79	158	79	53	40	32	26	23	20
1000	83	167	56	42	33	28	24	21
 

1050	88	175	58	44	35	29	25	22
1100	92	183	61	46	37	31	26	23
1150	96	192	64	48	38	32	27	24
1200	100	200	67	50	40	33	29	25
1250	104	208	69	52	42	35	30	26
1300	108	217	72	54	43	36	31	27
1350	113	225	75	56	45	38	32	28
1400	117	233	78	58	47	39	33	29
1450	121	242	81	60	48	40	35	30
1500	125	250	83	63	50	42	36	31
1550	129	258	86	65	52	43	37	32
1600	133	267	89	67	53	44	38	33
1650	138	275	92	69	55	46	39	34
1700	142	283	94	71	57	47	40	35
1750	146	292	97	73	58	49	42	36
1800	150	300	100	75	60	50	43	38
1850	154	308	103	77	62	51	44	39
1900	158	317	106	79	63	53	45	40
1950	163	325	108	81	65	54	46	41
1999	167	333	111	83	67	56	48	42
1 It is assumed that the rain garden/bioretention or the dry well #1 are empty prior to receiving runoff (i.e. 0% full)
 
Table 3: Simplified Approach - Calculating Infiltration Trench and Dry Well #2 Storage Volume and Surface Area for 1 Inch of Rainfall

Column 1	Column 2	Column 3
Volume of Infiltration
 
Total Proposed Impervious Area (square feet)
 
Trench or Dry Well #21 (cubic feet)
 
Surface Area of Infiltration Trench or Dry Well #2 Acceptable Depths for Each BMP are indicated by the arrows below (square feet)
 

	Area
Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 1.5'	Area
Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 2.0'	Area	Area	Area	Area	Area
Required	Required	Required	Required	Required for a BMP	for a BMP	for a BMP	for a BMP	for a BMP with a	with a	with a	with a	with a Depth(D)	Depth(D)	Depth(D)	Depth(D)	Depth(D) of 2.5'	of 3.0'	of 3.5'	of 4.0'	of 4.5'	Area
Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 5.0'
			Infiltration Trench (2.0’-5.0’)	
			Dry Well #2  (1.5’-4.0’)	
I	V			A(sf)	
Sum of all Proposed
(1*(1/12)*I)/ (0.4)1 =V
Impervious Areas					
V/D=A				
50	10	7	5	4	3		3	3	2	2
100	21	14	10	8	7		6	5	5	4
150	31	21	16	13	10		9	8	7	6
200	42	28	21	17	14		12	10	9	8
250	52	35	26	21	17		15	13	12	10
300	63	42	31	25	21		18	16	14	13
350	73	49	36	29	24		21	18	16	15
400	83	56	42	33	28		24	21	19	17
450	94	63	47	38	31		27	23	21	19
500	104	69	52	42	35		30	26	23	21
550	115	76	57	46	38		33	29	25	23
600	125	83	63	50	42		36	31	28	25
650	135	90	68	54	45		39	34	30	27
700	146	97	73	58	49		42	36	32	29
750	156	104	78	63	52		45	39	35	31
800	167	111	83	67	56		48	42	37	33
850	177	118	89	71	59		51	44	39	35
900	188	125	94	75	63		54	47	42	38
950	198	132	99	79	66		57	49	44	40
1000	208	139	104	83	69		59	52	46	42
1050	219	146	109	88	73		63	55	49	44
1100	229	153	115	92	76		65	57	51	46
 

1150	240	160	120	96	80	68	60	53	48
1200	250	167	125	100	83	71	63	56	50
1250	260	174	130	104	87	74	65	58	52
1300	271	181	135	108	90	77	68	60	54
1350	281	188	141	113	84	80	70	63	56
1400	292	194	146	117	97	83	73	65	58
1450	302	201	151	121	101	86	76	67	60
1500	313	208	156	125	104	89	78	69	63
1550	323	215	161	129	108	92	81	72	65
1600	333	222	167	133	111	95	83	74	67
1650	344	229	172	138	115	98	86	76	69
1700	354	236	177	142	118	101	89	79	71
1750	365	243	182	146	122	104	91	81	73
1800	375	250	188	150	125	107	94	83	75
1850	385	257	193	154	128	110	96	86	77
1900	396	264	198	158	132	113	99	88	79
1950	406	271	203	163	135	116	102	90	81
1999	416	278	208	167	139	119	104	93	83
1 Assumes a percent void volume of 40%
 
Table-4: Simplified Approach Worksheet
Name of Property Owner(s):	Date:
Name of Applicant(s) [if different than Owner(s)]:
Contact Phone #:	Email Address:
Address of Project:
Description of Project:
?	Met with Municipal Engineer to discuss proposed project. [insert date of meeting]
Distance from earth disturbance to nearest surface water feature (stream, pond, wetland, etc.)

(if required by the Municipality, circle one):	50 feet or less	More than 50 feet

Step 1: Attach Simplified SWM Site Plan (i.e. sketch plan), per Section 1, Step 1

Step 2: Determine the Impervious Area to be Managed
	Total Proposed Impervious Area (square feet):
	Total Earth Disturbance (square feet):

Step 3: Select the BMP(s) to be Used and Appropriate Sizing Criteria
	Rain Barrel or Cistern
	Proposed Impervious
Surface from Column 1 in Table 1	Volume from Column 3
in Table 1			
					
					
					
	Rain Garden/Bioretention or Dry Well #1
	Proposed
Impervious Surface from Column 1 in Table 2	Volume of BMP
from Column 2 in Table 2	Area
Dimensions of BMP - Column 3 in Table 2	Depth of BMP
from Column 3
in Table 2	Types of
Materials to be Used
					
					
					
	Infiltration Trench or Dry Well #2
	Proposed Impervious Surface from Column 1 in Table 3	Volume of BMP from Column 2 in Table 3	Area Dimensions of BMP - Column 3 in Table 3	Depth of BMP from Column 3
in Table 3	Types of Materials to be Used
					
					
					
Step 4: Complete, Sign & have Operation, Maintenance and Inspection Plan and Agreement Notarized and Recorded at the County Recorder of Deeds (when signed by Municipality)
Note: For additional BMPs, use additional sheet(s).
 
2.	Definitions

These definitions apply only to this Simplified Approach to Stormwater Management for Small Projects Handbook. The definitions included in the Municipality’s Stormwater Management Ordinance also apply.

Best Management Practice (BMP) – As defined in the Municipality’s Stormwater Management Ordinance, but generally including activities, facilities, designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from land development and earth disturbance activities to meet stormwater quality, runoff control and groundwater recharge protection requirements. BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices such as: infiltration facilities (dry wells and infiltration trenches), filter strips, low impact design, bioretention (rain gardens), permeable paving, grassed swales, and manufactured devices (cisterns and rain barrels). Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent appurtenances to the project site.

Geotextile - A fabric manufactured from synthetic fibers which provides a separation between different types of media (i.e., soil and stone), and is used to achieve specific objectives, including infiltration or filtration.

Hotspot - Areas where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants that are higher than those that are typically found in stormwater (e.g. vehicle salvage yards, recycling facilities, vehicle fueling stations, fleet storage areas, vehicle equipment and cleaning facilities, and vehicle service and maintenance facilities).

Impervious Surface - As defined in the Municipality’s Stormwater Management Ordinance, but generally including any surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces generally include, but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, pavements, driveway areas, or roofs. The applicant should review the Municipality’s Stormwater Management Ordinance or consult with the Municipal Engineer to confirm what components of the proposed project are considered “impervious surfaces”. Decks, swimming pools, compacted soils or stone surfaces (such as for vehicle movement or parking), among other features, may be included in the Municipality’s definition of “impervious surfaces”.

Infiltration - Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is absorbed by plant roots, transpired or evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated downward to recharge groundwater.

Low Impact Development - A land development and construction approach that uses various land planning, design practices, and technologies to simultaneously conserve and protect natural resource systems, and reduce infrastructure costs.

Percent Void Volume – The volume of void space, expressed as a percentage, of the total volume of the storage facility (void volume + volume of solid materials providing structural support for the storage facility).

Pervious Surface - Any area not defined as impervious surface.
 

Potable – A water supply that is either absent of contaminants or contains contaminant levels that are below a given threshold level that makes the water as suitable for drinking.



Runoff - Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.

Stormwater - Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation, or snow or ice melt.
 
3.	Description of BMPs

The following is a description of several types of BMPs that could be implemented. The requirements of each BMP as described below are taken directly from the PA Stormwater BMP Manual (December, 2006). Refer to the PA BMP Manual (latest version) which can be found on the PA Department of Environmental Protection’s website.

Rain Barrels/Cisterns
Rain Barrels are large containers that collect drainage from roof leaders and temporarily store water to be released to lawns, gardens, and other landscaped areas after the rainfall has ended. Rain Barrels are typically between 50 to 200 gallons in size. The stored water can also be used as a non- potable water supply. Cisterns are larger than rain barrels having volumes of 200 gallons or more, and can be placed either on the surface or underground. Figures 1 and 2 show examples of rain barrels and cisterns, respectively, that could be used to manage stormwater from a project. Rain barrels and cisterns are manufactured in a variety of shapes and sizes. All of these facilities must make provisions for the following items:
•	There must be a means to release the water stored in the container between storm events in
order for the necessary storage volume to be available for the next storm.
•	Stormwater must be kept from entering other potable systems, and pipes and storage units must be clearly marked “Do Not Drink”.
•	An overflow outlet should be placed a few inches below the top of the storage container with an overflow pipe to divert flow away from structures once the storage containers are filled.
•	Use screens to filter debris, and covers (lids) placed over the containers to prevent insects and debris from entering the storage chamber.
•	Make sure cisterns are watertight and do not leak.
•	Rain barrels are typically assumed to be 25% full to calculate volume since they are not always emptied before each storm. The tables contained in this Handbook were developed to account for the 25% increase in the required storage of a rain barrel or a cistern.
 










 

Source (picture on left):  http://www.rfcity.org/Eng/Stormwater/YourProperty/YourProperty.htm
Source (picture on right): :http://www.floridata.com/tracks/transplantedgardener/Rainbarrels.cfm

Figure 1: Rain Barrels










 
Source (for both pictures): Pennsylvania Stormwater BMP Manual (PADEP, 2006)

Figure 2: Cisterns
 
Infiltration Trench
An infiltration trench is a long, narrow, rock-filled trench, with or without a perforated pipe placed within the rock to distribute water evenly along the trench, that receives stormwater runoff, and has no outlet. Runoff is stored in the void space between the stones and in the pipe, and infiltrates through the bottom of the trench into the underlying soil matrix. Figure 3 shows a typical cross- section of an infiltration trench configuration. Infiltration trenches shall incorporate or make provisions for the following elements:

•	These facilities should be located a minimum of ten (10) feet (or as otherwise required by the Municipality) from the building foundation to avoid foundation seepage problems, and are not recommended if their installation would create a risk of flooding other structures constructed at or below grade.
•	Perforated pipe placed within the rock is to be set level.
•	The width is limited to between 3 to 8 feet, and the depth ranges from 2 to 5 feet.
•	Trench should be wrapped in nonwoven geotextile (top, sides, and bottom).
•	There should be a positive overflow that allows stormwater that cannot be stored or infiltrated to be discharged into a nearby vegetated area.
•	Roof downspouts may be connected to infiltration trenches, but should contain a cleanout to collect sediment and debris before entering the infiltration area.
•	Infiltration testing is recommended to ensure soil is capable of infiltrating stormwater.
•	It is recommended that there be a 2 foot clearance above the regularly occurring seasonal high water table, and have a minimum depth to bedrock of 2 feet.
•	The infiltration trench should be at least 50 feet from individual water supply wells, 100 feet from community or municipal water supply wells, and 50 feet from any septic system component.  It should not be located near stormwater Hotspots (refer to B.2 Definitions).
•	The  infiltration  trench  should  be  located  so  that  it  presents  no  threat  to  sub-surface
structures such as building foundations and basements.
•	Protect infiltration areas from compaction by heavy equipment during and after construction.
•	Infiltration trenches should be constructed after all earth disturbance associated with a given project or site is stabilized to avoid clogging.
•	The ratio of the drainage area which stormwater runoff is collected from to the area of the footprint (bottom area) of the infiltration portion of the facility should be as small as possible with a ratio of less than 5:1 preferred.
 

 

Source: Pennsylvania Stormwater BMP Manual (PADEP, 2006)

Figure 3: Cross-Section of Typical Infiltration Trench
 
Rain Garden/Bioretention Area
A Rain Garden (Bioretention Area) is an excavated depression area on the surface of the land in which native vegetation is planted to filter and use stormwater runoff. Runoff ponds on top of the surface of the rain garden and then infiltrates into an enhanced soil/planting mix below the surface where plants can use the water to grow. Bioretention improves water quality, with the vegetation planted in the facility filtering the water, and the root systems encouraging or promoting infiltration.  Figure 4 shows a cross-section of a typical rain garden.  Key elements of a rain garden include:

•	Recommended ponding depths not exceeding 1 foot.
•	Native vegetation that can tolerate dry and wet weather.
•	An overflow area where, if the bioretention area were to overflow, the overflow would flow over pervious surfaces (i.e. grass, meadow), and would not cause harm to property, or;
•	An overflow, such as a domed riser, to allow excess flow from large storms to travel to other infiltration areas, pervious areas, or connected storm systems designed to receive the excess runoff.
•	For most areas, slopes should be limited to 3:1, maximum; however, where space is limited, 2:1 side slopes may be acceptable with approval from the municipal engineer.
•	The soil/planting mix depth should not be less than 1.5 feet deep and typically consist of
a mixture of topsoil, sand and compost (i.e. mulch).   The topsoil, sand and compost should be uniformly mixed by volume in a 50%, 30%, 20% mixture, respectively.




 
Source: Pennsylvania Stormwater BMP Manual (PADEP, 2006)

Figure 4:  Cross-Section of Typical Rain Garden/Bioretention Area
 
Dry Wells
A dry well, also referred to as a seepage pit, is a subsurface storage facility that temporarily stores and infiltrates runoff from the roofs of buildings or other impervious surfaces. A dry well can be either a structural prefabricated chamber (Dry Well #1) or an excavated pit filled with stone fill (Dry Well #2). Dry Wells discharge the stored runoff via infiltration into the surrounding or underlying soils. Figure 5 shows a typical prefabricated dry well and a typical dry well configuration with stone fill. The following elements shall be incorporated into all dry well designs:

•	These facilities should be located a minimum of ten (10) feet (or as otherwise required by the Municipality) from the building foundation to avoid foundation seepage problems, and are not recommended if their installation would create a risk of flooding other structures constructed at or below grade.
•	Dry well should be constructed after all earth disturbance associated with a given project or site is stabilized to avoid clogging.
•	During construction, compaction of the subgrade soil in the bottom of the dry well should be
avoided, and construction should be performed only with light machinery.
•	For Dry Well #2 designs, the depth of dry well should be between 1.5 feet to 4 feet. Gravel fill should consist of uniformly graded stone with an average diameter of between one and one half and two (1.5 –2.0) inches with the gravel fill wrapped in a nonwoven geotextile to separate the stone fill from the surrounding soil.
•	At least 1 foot of soil must be placed over the top of the dry well.
•	Dry wells should be inspected at least four (4) times annually as well as after large storm events.
•	Dry wells should have overflow pipes to allow high volumes of runoff to overflow the facility and flow into a connected infiltration area, pervious area, or other connected storm sewer designed to receive the excess runoff.
•	Every dry well must have at least one monitoring well to assist in  the inspection of the dry
well to determine how much water is retained within the well during dry weather periods.
•	Infiltration testing is recommended to ensure the underlying soil is capable of infiltrating the needed volume of stormwater.
 




Monitoring Well

















Source (for picture on left): http://www.seagrant.sunysb.edu/pages/BMPsForMarinas.htm
Source (for picture on right): http://www.copelandconcreteinc.net/1800652.html

Figure 5: Typical Dry Well Configuration filled with Stone Fill (DRY WELL #2) (Left) and Structural Prefabricated Chamber (DRY WELL #1)  (Right)
 
4.	Example

Simplified Approach to Stormwater Management for a Residential Garage and Driveway addition

Joe Homeowner wants to build a 400 square foot two car garage, and a 540 square foot (30’ long x 18’ wide) impervious driveway that is graded so that the stormwater runoff drains to the grassy area along one edge of the driveway. (An annotated copy of Table 1 is provided below as Table 5 and an annotated copy of Table 3 is provided below as Table 6, and outlines the steps of this example) and a completed Table 4 is provided as Table 7.

STEP 1 – Make a sketch of the site plan as shown in Figure 6.

STEP 2 - Determine the total area of all proposed impervious surfaces to drain to each BMP:

Garage Roof (Front)	10 ft.  x 20 ft.	=	200 sq. ft
Garage Roof (Rear)	10 ft.  x 20 ft.	=	200 sq. ft.
Driveway	30 ft.  x 18 ft.	=	540 sq. ft.
			-------------
Total Proposed Impervious
Surface			940 sq. ft.
Total Proposed Earth
Disturbance Area			2,500 sq. ft. (estimated)

Note: If the driveway used pervious pavement (i.e. paving blocks), then the total impervious area would only be 400 square feet, and no stormwater management practices would need to control runoff from the project.

STEP 3 – Select the BMP(s) to be Used and Appropriate Sizing Criteria

Select a BMP or combination of BMPs from Section 3 to be used to satisfy the volume requirement. Determine the length, width, depth and other requirements for the BMPs in Section 3. A BMP needs to be placed to catch runoff from the back of the garage, and a BMP needs to be placed to capture runoff from the front of the garage and the driveway. Figure 6 shows the direction the runoff flows and the locations where the BMPs are to be placed.

Joe Homeowner would like to use a rain barrel (BMP #1) to capture the runoff from the rear of the garage and an infiltration trench (BMP #2) to capture runoff from the front of the garage and the driveway.






BMP #1 (Rain Barrel/Cistern) – Steps 3A and 3B
 
STEP 3A - Select the proposed impervious area value for BMP #1, the rain barrel or cistern, in Column 1 that is closest to, but not less than 200 in Table 1:

The value in Column 1 that is closest to but is not less than 200 is 200.

STEP 3B - Determine the volume that BMP #1 must be to satisfy the volume requirements using Columns 2 and 3 in Table 1:

The volume in gallons of the rain barrel/cistern to be used as BMP #1, assuming the rain barrel/cistern is 25% full, is determined by finding the value in Column 3 for the same row that corresponds to the impervious area value determined in Step 1. Therefore, the volume of BMP #1, the rain barrel/cistern must be = 166 gallons. Depending on the size of the rain barrel(s), a combination of rain barrels could be used in succession as shown in Figure 1, or a cistern could be used.

BMP #2 (Infiltration Trench) - Steps 3A through 3C

STEP 3A - Select the proposed impervious area value for BMP #2, the infiltration trench, using Column 1 in Table 6:

Find the row in Column 1 that is closest to but not less than 740 (200 from the front of the garage + 540 from the driveway).  Therefore, the value selected is 750.

STEP 3B - Determine the volume that BMP #2, the infiltration trench must be to satisfy the volume requirements using Column 2 in Table 6:

The volume of the infiltration trench to be used as BMP #2, assuming a percent void volume of 40%, is determined by finding the value Column 2 that is in the same row as 750 square feet from Column 1 as described in Step 2. Therefore, the volume of BMP #2 must be 156 cubic feet.

STEP 3C - Utilizing the value from Column 2 determined above, and the surface area that the proposed BMP will occupy, determine the depth needed using Column 3 in Table 6:

Joe Homeowner would like to place the infiltration trench along the edge of the driveway so it would have a length of 20 feet. The smallest width that can be used, as stated in the infiltration trench requirements in Section 3, is 3 feet. Therefore, the area of the infiltration trench is:

20 feet * 3 feet = 60 square feet

To find the minimum depth of the trench move toward the right side of the table from 156 cubic feet in Column 2 to Column 3, and find the column with a value of as close to but not more than 60 square feet, which is 52 square feet.  Then obtain the minimum depth of the
 
facility by reading the depth from the column heading at the top of the table.  Therefore, the depth of the trench would need to be 3 feet.



Selected BMPs:
BMP #1: Rain barrel(s) that provides for at least 166 gallons, and BMP #2: A 20’ long x 3’ wide x 3’ deep infiltration trench
 

Table 5: Example – Calculating Storage Volume for Rain Barrel/Cistern

Column 1	Column 2	Column 3
 

Proposed Impervious Area (square feet)
 

Volume of Rain Barrel/Cistern1 (cubic feet)
 

Volume of Rain Barrel/Cistern (gallons)
 

I	VRBcf	VRBgal
Sum of all Proposed Impervious Areas	(1*(1/12)*I)/0.75=VRBcf	VRBcf * 7.48=VRBgal 50		6		42
 
100	11	83
150	17	125
 
Rain Barrel
 
2	200	22
 
3	166
 
250	28	208
300	33	249
350	39	291
400	44	332

450	50	374

500	56	416
550	61	457
600	67	499
650	72	540
700	78	582
750	83	623
800	89	665
850	94	706
900	100	748
950	106	790

999	111	830

1Assume that the rain barrel/cistern is 25% full
 











Cistern
 






 
Proposed Two Car Garage
 


BMP#1 Cistern (332 Gallons)
 


Rain Gutter

 
Existing House
 


200 sf (rear)
 


 

200 sf (front)
 


3 feet
 
Potable Water Well
 

BMP#2 Infiltration Trench (30’ L x 3’ W x 3.5’ D)

 


Rain Gutter
 
Pervious Area
 

 

Pervious Area
 
Direction of Runoff
 



 


Pine Street
 
Name: Joe Homeowner
Address: 123 Pine Street
Anytown, PA 19087
Date: August 31, 2008
 


Figure 6: Example of Simplified Stormwater Management Site Plan for Joe Homeowner
 
Table 6: Example – Calculating Storage Volume Surface Area and Depth for Infiltration Trench
Column 1	Column 2	Column 3
Volume of Infiltration
 
Total Proposed Impervious Area (square feet)
 
Trench or Dry Well #21 (cubic feet)
 
Surface Area of Infiltration Trench or Dry Well #2 Acceptable Depths for Each BMP are indicated by the arrows below (square feet)
 
Area Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 1.5'
 
Area Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 2.0'
 
Area Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 2.5'
 
Area Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 3.0'
 
Area Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 3.5'
 
Area Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 4.0'
 
Area Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 4.5'
 
Area Required for a BMP with a Depth(D) of 5.0'
 


Dry Well #2  (1.5’-4.0’)
I	V	A(sf)
Sum of all Proposed
 
Infiltration Trench (2.0’-5.0’)
 
Impervious Areas
 
(1*(1/12)*I)/ (0.4)1 =V	V/D=A
 
50	10	7	5	4	3	3	3	2	2
100	21	14	10	8	7	6	5	5	4
150	31	21	16	13	10	9	8	7	6
200	42	28	21	17	14	12	10	9	8
250	52	35	26	21	17	15	13	12	10
300	63	42	31	25	21	18	16	14	13
350	73	49	36	29	24	21	18	16	15
400	83	56	42	33	28	24	21	19	17
450	94	63	47	38	31	27	23	21	19
500	104	69	52	42	35	30	26	23	21
550	115	76	57	46	38	33	29	25	23
600	125	83	63	50	42	36	31	28	25
650	135	90	68	54	45	39	34	30	27
700	146	97	73	58	49	42	36	32	29
 
Step 3A
 
750
 
Step 3B
 
156	104	78
 
Step 3C
 
52	45	39	35	31
 
800	167	111	83	67	56	48	42	37	33
850	177	118	89	71	59	51	44	39	35
900	188	125	94	75	63	54	47	42	38
950	198	132	99	79	66	57	49	44	40
999	208	139	104	83	69	59	52	46	42
1 Assumes a percent void volume of 40%
 
Table 7: Simplified Approach Worksheet – Example for Joe Homeowner
Name of Property Owner(s):   Joe Homeowner	Date: 8/26/12
Name of Applicant(s) [if different than Owner(s)]: N/A
Contact Phone #: 610-555-1234	Email Address:  joe@homeowner.com

Address of Project:  123 Pine St., Anytown, PA 19355
Description of Project: Add a 2-car garage and driveway
?	Met with Municipal Engineer to discuss proposed project.  [date of meeting 6/1/12]
Distance from earth disturbance to nearest surface water feature (stream, pond, wetland, etc.)

(if required by the Municipality, circle one):	50 feet or less	More than 50 feet

x	Step 1: Attach Simplified SWM Site Plan (i.e. sketch plan), per Section .1, Step 1

Step 2: Determine the Impervious Area to be Managed
	Total Proposed Impervious Area (square feet): 940 sq. feet
	Total Earth Disturbance (square feet): ~ 2,500 sq. feet

Step 3: Select the BMP(s) to be Used and Appropriate Sizing Criteria
	Rain Barrel or Cistern
	Proposed Impervious
Surface from Column 1 in Table 1	Volume from Column 3
in Table 1			
	200 sq. feet	166 gallons			
					
					
	Rain Garden/Bioretention or Dry Well #1
	Proposed Impervious Surface from Column 1 in Table 2	Volume of BMP from Column 2 in Table 2	Area Dimensions of BMP - Column 3 in Table 2	Depth of BMP from Column 3
in Table 2	Types of Materials to be Used
	N/A				
					
					
	Infiltration Trench or Dry Well #2
	Proposed
Impervious Surface from Column 1 in Table 3	Volume of BMP
from Column 2 in Table 3	Area
Dimensions of BMP - Column 3 in Table 3	Depth of BMP
from Column 3
in Table 3	Types of
Materials to be Used
	740 sq. feet	156 cubic feet	20 ft by 3 ft	3 ft	Infiltration
trench, uniformly graded aggregate, 8” HDPE pipe, geotextile, grass planted on top.
					
x	Step 4: Complete, Sign & have Operation, Maintenance and Inspection Agreement Notarized
and Recorded at the County Recorder of Deeds (when signed by the Municipality)
Note: For additional BMPs, use additional sheet(s).
 
5.	Simplified Approach Operation, Maintenance and Inspection Plan and
Agreement

It is the property owner’s responsibility to properly maintain BMPs. It is also the property owner’s responsibility to inform any future buyers of the function, operation, and maintenance needed for any BMPs on the property prior to the purchase of the property. The accompanying sample “Simplified Approach Operation, Maintenance and Inspection Plan and Agreement” (see accompanying appendix) outlines the maintenance required for each type of BMP, the responsibilities of the property owner, and the rights of the Municipality in regards to inspection and enforcement of the maintenance requirements.

The “Simplified Approach Operation, Maintenance and Inspection Plan and Agreement” must be signed, notarized and submitted to the Municipality. Following the signature by the Municipality, the property owner must have the Agreement recorded at the County Recorder of Deeds, so that the Agreement will be applicable to future property owners.
 
Appendix A.3
Simplified Approach – Stormwater Best Management Practices Operation, Maintenance, and Inspection Plan and Agreement











SAMPLE AGREEMENT
 
A.3	Simplified Approach - Stormwater Best Management Practices Operation, Maintenance, and Inspection Plan and Agreement



SAMPLE AGREEMENT










It is the Landowner’s responsibility to properly maintain BMPs. It is also the Landowner’s responsibility to inform any future buyers of the function, operation, and maintenance needed for any BMPs on the property prior to the purchase of the property. The following maintenance agreement outlines the inspection and maintenance required for each type of BMP, the responsibilities of the Landowner, and the rights of the Municipality in regards to inspection and enforcement of the maintenance requirements.

The Operation, Maintenance and Inspection Plan and Agreement must be signed, notarized and submitted to the Municipality. Following approval and signature by the Municipality, the Landowner must have the Agreement recorded at the Chester County Office of the Recorder of Deeds, so that the Agreement will be applicable to future landowners.






















REVISED
Chester County Water Resources Authority February 12, 2013
 
SIMPLIFIED APPROACH STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
OPERATION, MAINTENANCE, AND INSPECTION PLAN AND AGREEMENT




THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this	day of	, 20	, by and between

 	, (hereinafter the “Landowner”), and

 	(City, Borough, Township), Chester County, Pennsylvania, (hereinafter “Municipality”).

WITNESSETH

WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property by virtue of a deed of conveyance recorded in the land records of Chester County, Pennsylvania,  at Deed Book	and Page	, (hereinafter “Property”); and
WHEREAS, the Landowner recognizes that the stormwater management best management practices or BMPs (hereinafter referred to as “BMP” or “BMP(s)”) located on the Property at


(address of Property where BMP is located) must be inspected and

maintained; and

WHEREAS, the Municipality and the Landowner, for itself and for its administrators, executors, successors, heirs, and assigns, agree that the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Municipality and the protection and maintenance of water quality require that on-site BMP(s) be constructed and maintained on the Property; and
WHEREAS, for the purposes of this Agreement, the following definitions shall apply:

BMP – “Best Management Practice;” activities, facilities, designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from land development, to protect and maintain water quality and ground water recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of the Municipality’s Stormwater Management Ordinance, including, but not limited to infiltration trenches, dry wells, bioretention, rain gardens, permeable paving, rain barrels and cisterns, etc. The BMP(s) are permanent appurtenances to the Property; and
 


Conveyance – As specifically identified in the Simplified Stormwater Management Site Plan (herein after “Plan”), a man-made, existing or proposed facility, structure or channel used for the transportation or transmission of stormwater from one place to another, including pipes, drainage ditches, channels and swales (vegetated and other), gutters,  and like facilities or features. The conveyances identified in the Plan are permanent appurtenances to the Property; and
WHEREAS, the Municipality requires that the BMP(s) and conveyances as shown on Plan and in accordance with the sizing calculations found on the Simplified Method Worksheet (herein after
“Worksheet”) be constructed by the Landowner; the BMP(s) shall further be maintained by the Landowner, its administrators, executors, successors, heirs, and assigns in accordance with the associated operation and maintenance requirements included herein. The Plan and Worksheet are attached hereto and incorporated herein together as Exhibit “A” hereto; and
WHEREAS, the Municipality requires that stormwater management BMP(s) be constructed and adequately inspected, operated and maintained by the Landowner, its administrators, executors, successors, heirs, and assigns, in accordance with the following maintenance requirements:


1.	Infiltration Trenches

a.	At  least  twice  a  year  and  after  significant  rainfall  events  the  Landowner  is  to  inspect  the infiltration trench and remove any accumulated debris, sediment and invasive vegetation.
b.	Vegetation along the surface of an infiltration trench is to be maintained in good condition, and any bare spots are to be revegetated as soon as possible.
c.	Vehicles are not to be parked or driven on an infiltration trench, and care is to be taken to avoid excessive compaction by mowers.
d.	Any debris, such as leaves blocking flow from reaching an infiltration trench, is to be routinely removed.





2.	Bioretention/Rain Garden
 
a.	Any debris, such as leaves blocking flow from reaching a bioretention/rain garden, is to be routinely removed.
b.	Pruning and weeding are required as needed including removal of invasive species, especially while vegetation is being established for a bioretention/rain garden.
c.	Mulch cover is to be maintained in a bioretention/rain garden, re-spread and replaced as needed to prevent erosion, reduce weed growth and assist with plant survival, without restricting the infiltration of stormwater.
d.	At least twice a year the Landowner is to inspect the bioretention/rain garden for sediment buildup, ground cover and vegetative conditions and make any repairs as needed.
e.	Watering is required as needed, including during periods of extended dry weather and drought.

f.	Trees and shrubs in a bioretention/rain garden are to be inspected at least twice per year by the Landowner to evaluate their health.  If they are in poor health they are to be replaced.


3.	Dry Wells

a.	Dry wells are to be inspected by the landowner at least four (4) times a year and after significant rainfalls, and debris, trash, sediment, and any other waste material need to be removed and disposed of at suitable disposal or recycling sites and in compliance with local, state, and federal waste regulations.
b.	For dry wells, gutters are to be regularly cleaned out and ensure that proper connections are maintained to facilitate the effectiveness of the dry well.
c.	The filter screen for downspouts or roof gutters which intercepts roof runoff and conveys it to the dry well must be cleaned and replaced as necessary.
d.	Dry wells that are damaged are to be fixed or replaced within two (2) weeks of being damaged.

e.	If an intermediate sump box exists in conjunction with a dry well, it must be cleaned out at least once per year.

4.	Rain Barrels and Cisterns

a.	Rain Barrels and Cisterns are to be cleared of debris routinely at least every three (3) months and after significant storms to allow stormwater from gutters to enter them.
b.	Gutters that directly convey rain water to dry wells, rain barrels, and cisterns are to be routinely cleared of trash and debris at least every three (3) months and after significant rainfall events.
c.	Rain Barrels and cisterns should be routinely emptied to allow for storage of additional rain water.

d.	Overflow outlets from rain barrels and cisterns must be kept free and clear of debris.

e.	Rain Barrels and cisterns that are damaged are to be fixed or replaced within two (2) weeks of being damaged.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing promises, the mutual covenants contained herein, and the following terms and conditions, the parties hereto, intending to be legally bound hereby, agree as follows:
1.	The foregoing recitals to this Agreement are incorporated as terms of this Agreement and obligations of the Landowner as if fully set forth in the body of this Agreement.

2.	The Landowner shall construct the BMP(s) in accordance with the specifications identified in the Plan and Worksheet.

3.	The Landowner shall inspect, operate and maintain the BMP(s) as shown on the Plan in good working order acceptable to the Municipality and in accordance with the specific inspection and maintenance requirements outlined in this Agreement.

4.	The Landowner hereby grants permission to the Municipality, its  authorized agents and employees, to enter upon the Property from the public right-of-way or roadway, at reasonable times and upon presentation of proper identification, to inspect the BMP(s) whenever it deems necessary for compliance with this Agreement and the Municipality’s Stormwater Ordinance. Whenever possible, the Municipality shall notify the Landowner prior to entering the Property.

5.

wit	

hout a.	The Landowner acknowledges that, per the Municipality’s Stormwater Ordinance, it is unlawful, written approval of the Municipality, to:
Modify, remove, fill, landscape, alter or impair the effectiveness of any BMP or conveyance that is
	

b.




c.	constructed as part of the Plan;

Place any structure, fill, landscaping, additional vegetation, yard waste, brush cuttings, or other waste or debris into a BMP or conveyance that would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP or conveyance;
Allow the BMP or conveyance to exist in a condition which does not conform to the Plan or this Agreement; and
	
d.	
Dispose of, discharge, place or otherwise allow pollutants including, but not limited to, deicers, pool additives, household chemicals and automotive fluids to directly or indirectly enter any BMP or conveyance.

6.		
In the event the Landowner fails to operate and maintain the BMP(s) as shown on the Plan in good
working order acceptable to the Municipality the Landowner shall be in violation of this Agreement and the Landowner agrees that the Municipality or its representatives may, in addition to and not in derogation or
 
diminution of any remedies available to it under the Stormwater Ordinance or other statutes, codes, rules or regulations, or this Agreement,  enter upon the Property and take whatever action is deemed necessary to maintain said BMP(s).  It is expressly understood and agreed that the Municipality is under no obligation to maintain or repair said facilities, and in no event shall this Agreement be construed to impose any such obligation on the Municipality.

7.	In the event the Municipality, pursuant to this Agreement, performs work of any nature, or expends any funds in performance of said work for labor, use of equipment, supplies, materials, and the like, the Landowner shall reimburse the Municipality for all expenses (direct and indirect) incurred within 30days of delivery of an invoice from the Municipality. Failure of the Landowner to make prompt payment to the Municipality may result in enforcement proceedings, which may include the filing of a lien against the Property, which filing is expressly authorized by the Landowner.

8.	The intent and purpose of this Agreement is to ensure the proper maintenance of the onsite BMP(s) by the Landowner; provided, however, that this Agreement shall not be deemed to create or effect any additional liability of any party for damage alleged to result from or be caused by stormwater runoff.

9.	The Landowner, its executors, administrators, assigns, heirs, and other successors in interests, hereby release and shall release the Municipality, its employees, agents and designated representatives from all damages, accidents, casualties, occurrences or claims which might arise or be asserted against the Municipality and/or its said employees, agents or representatives, arising out of the construction, presence, existence, or maintenance of the BMP(s) either by the Landowner or Municipality.  In the event that a claim is asserted or threatened against the Municipality, its employees, agents or designated representatives, the Municipality shall notify the Landowner and the Landowner shall defend, at his own expense, any claim, suit, action or proceeding, or threatened claim, suit, action or proceeding against the Municipality or, at the request of the Municipality, pay the cost, including attorneys’ fees, of defense of the same undertaken on behalf of the Municipality.  If any judgment or claims against the Municipality, its employees, agents or designated representatives shall be allowed, the Landowner shall pay all damages, judgments or claims and any costs and expenses incurred by the Municipality, including attorneys fees, regarding said damages, judgment or claims.

10.	The Municipality may enforce this Agreement in accordance with its Stormwater Ordinance, at law or in equity, against the Landowner for breach of this Agreement. Remedies may include fines, penalties, damages or such equitable relief as the parties may agree upon or as may be determined by a Court of competent jurisdiction.  Recovery by the Municipality shall include its reasonable attorney’s fees and costs incurred in seeking relief under this Agreement.
 
11.	Failure or delay in enforcing any provision of this Agreement shall not constitute a waiver by the Municipality of its rights of enforcement hereunder.

12.	The Landowner shall inform future buyers of the Property about the function of, operation, inspection and maintenance requirements of the BMP(s) prior to the purchase of the Property by said future buyer, and upon purchase of the Property the future buyer assumes all responsibilities as Landowner and must comply with all components of this Agreement.

13.	This Agreement shall inure to the benefit of and be binding upon, the Municipality and the Landowner, as well as their heirs, administrators, executors, assigns and successors in interest.


This Agreement shall be recorded at the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of the County of Chester, Pennsylvania, and shall constitute a covenant running with the Property and/or equitable servitude, in perpetuity.

ATTEST:

WITNESS the following signatures and seals:

(SEAL)	For the Municipality:




(SEAL)	For the Landowner:




ATTEST:


 	(City, Borough, Township) County of Chester, Pennsylvania

I,		, a Notary Public in and for the County and State aforesaid, whose commission expires on the	day of	, 20    , do hereby certify that
 		whose name(s) is/are signed to the foregoing Agreement bearing date of the	day of		, 20__, has acknowledged the same before me in my said County and State.

GIVEN UNDER MY HAND THIS	day of	, 20__.



NOTARY PUBLIC	(SEAL)
 





ORDINANCE APPENDIX B SITE DESIGN PROCESS
 




NATURAL HYDROLOGY SITE DESIGN PROCESS

INTRODUCTION

Section 304 identifies a natural hydrology site design process that strives to minimize disturbances to land, site hydrology, and natural resources, and maintain the natural hydrologic regime, drainage patterns and flow conditions of a site to the maximum extent practicable. This appendix is intended to build on that process by providing additional information for achieving site designs that best maintain pre-construction stormwater runoff conditions, protect site amenities, and preserve natural resources. This appendix describes the following components of the natural hydrology site design process:

•	Design Principles and Techniques;
•	Design Process;
•	Design Practices; and
•	References.

Some common drainage design approaches for land development radically alter natural hydrologic conditions by constructing collection and conveyance systems that are designed to remove runoff from a site as quickly as possible and capture it in a detention basin. This approach has often led to the degradation of water quality, reduced groundwater recharge, and increased volumes of runoff, as well as the expenditure of additional resources for detaining and managing increased volumes of concentrated runoff at some downstream location.

The natural hydrology site design process encourages land development site designs that minimize post-development runoff rates and volumes, and that minimize needs for artificial conveyance and storage facilities. This process strives to incorporate the desired land development into the natural hydrologic landscape in a manner that maintains and utilizes existing site hydrology features and functions to minimize generation of new stormwater. This avoids cumulative environmental impacts often associated with land development, and reducing the need for and size of constructed stormwater facilities. This approach minimizes the disturbance of land area, natural features and site hydrology; preserves significant concentrations of open space, woodlands, and corridors of environmentally sensitive features; and incorporates landscape-based BMPs and low impact development techniques to minimize the utilization of more intrusive structural stormwater facilities.

With this design process, the primary goals of a land development project can be achieved while minimizing the negative environmental impacts and avoiding management costs associated with unnecessary stormwater runoff. The fundamental principle of this design process is that site hydrology features are considered “up front” in the land development design process and are prioritized as integral aspects to be maintained and utilized within the site design, rather than being first sacrificed for space needed for traditional site layout or for construction of more intrusive stormwater facilities.
 

Natural hydrology site design is not a new approach but rather a holistic process that combines certain principles of Low Impact Development, Conservation Design, and Sustainable Design, and focuses on reducing unnecessary alterations to the natural patterns and functions of existing on-site hydrologic features. These natural hydrologic features tend to perform their “hydrologic function” (i.e., infiltration, evapotranspiration, flow attenuation, pollutant removal, etc.) very efficiently and sometimes have the hydrologic capacity to perform that function on increased runoff loadings from the built environment. However, care must be taken to adequately characterize the capacity of their hydrologic function and avoid overwhelming the feature with excessive runoff loadings, thus causing unintended impairments that are completely counter- productive to the purpose of natural hydrology site design.

Preserving natural hydrologic conditions requires careful site design considerations. Natural hydrology site design should serve as the foundation of the overall site design approach, and when applied in conjunction with the design professional’s overall land development goals and desired outcomes, can help shape the overall vision and conceptual layout of the land development project.

Site design practices include preserving natural drainage features, minimizing impervious surface area, reducing the hydraulic connectivity of impervious surfaces, and protecting natural depression storage. Applying this site design process helps maintain site hydrology and manage stormwater by: minimizing the generation of stormwater runoff (achieved by designing to the land, considering site drainage patterns and infiltration characteristics, reducing grading and compaction, and considering scale and placement of buildings); managing stormwater as close to the point of generation as possible (by disconnecting impervious surfaces and distributing storm flows to landscaped-based BMPs); providing open and vegetated channel conveyance (as needed to treat water quality, reduce velocity and infiltrate); and managing remaining conveyed stormwater in common open space (as needed to disperse low velocity storm flows, treat water quality, infiltrate, and release). A well-designed site will contain a mix of all those features.



DESIGN PRINCIPLES AND TECHNIQUES

Natural hydrology site design involves identifying and prioritizing natural resources and natural and man-made hydrologic features, and incorporating such features into the overall site design to take advantage of their efficiencies of hydrologic performance, their cost efficiencies of reducing the need for or size of constructed stormwater facilities, and their aesthetic amenities. The five Design Principles to be achieved by this approach are as follows:

•	Minimize land disturbance – both surface and subsurface.
•	Minimize the cumulative area to be covered by impervious and compacted surfaces.
•	Designing to the land, so that the layout of constructed and landscape features utilizes the natural topography and minimizes grading.
•	Design the constructed stormwater management system to take advantage of the natural hydrologic landscape to achieve the required stormwater runoff control standards.
•	Refine the site design and layout to optimize the cumulative benefits of the natural
 
hydrologic features, the constructed stormwater management system, and the land development components to achieve the minimum post-construction runoff volume, peak discharge rates and pollutant loads from the proposed land development site.

Techniques to be applied to achieve the design principles are presented in Table B.1.



DESIGN PROCESS

The first step in applying natural hydrology site design is to identify, delineate and assess the functions of all existing natural resources and natural and man-made hydrologic features that: are located within the project site; will receive discharge from the project site; or, may be impacted by runoff or disturbance from the proposed land development project. This includes:

•	Streams, waterways, springs, wetlands, vernal pools, and water bodies;
•	Drainage patterns, conveyances and discharge points;
•	Natural infiltration areas and patterns;
•	Areas of natural vegetation that provide significant evapotranspiration, pollutant removal, bank stabilization, flow attenuation, or riparian buffer functions;
•	Floodplains; and
•	Other features that contribute to the overall hydrologic function and value of the site and its receiving streams.

Once this inventory and assessment are completed, these identified resources and features are then prioritized for their ability to provide hydrologic function and performance for managing runoff from the proposed site improvements. Specifically, they should be prioritized as follows:

•	Those to be incorporated into the site design in a manner that provides for their protection from any disturbance or impact from the proposed land development;
•	Those to be protected from further disturbance or impact and for which the proposed land development will provide improvement to existing conditions;
•	Those that can be incorporated into and utilized as components of the overall site design in a manner that protects or improves their existing conditions while utilizing their hydrologic function (e.g., for infiltration, evapotranspiration, or reducing pollutant loads, runoff volume or peak discharge rates, etc.) to reduce the need for or size of constructed BMPs; and
•	Those that may be considered for alteration, disturbance or removal.

These prioritizations are then applied as the basis on which to begin the site design lay-out, grading, construction, and permanent ground cover designs to achieve the five (5) Design Principles outlined above. The following section describes just a few of the many design practices, methods and techniques that are available to achieve the landowner’s desired land development goals and the desired environmental efficiencies intended by natural hydrology site design.
 
Table B.1 – Site Design Process Principles and Techniques


Design Principles	
Design Techniques






Minimize land disturbance – both surface and subsurface.	•	Maintain the natural soil structure and vegetative cover that are often critical components of maintaining the hydrologic functions of natural infiltration, bioretention, flow attenuation, evapotranspiration, and pollutant removal.
•	Protect, or improve, natural resources to reduce the needs for environmental   mitigation,   future   environmental   restoration,   and
cumulative flow and water quality impacts of unnecessary disturbances within the watershed system.
•	Minimize the disturbance of natural surface and groundwater drainage features and patterns, discharge points and flow characteristics, natural
infiltration and evapotranspiration patterns and characteristics, natural
stream channel stability, and floodplain conveyance, etc.

Minimize the cumulative area to be covered by impervious and compacted surfaces.	•	Minimize the size of individual impervious surfaces.
•	Separate large impervious surfaces into smaller components.
•	Disconnect runoff from one impervious surface to another.
•	Avoid unnecessary impervious surfaces.
•	Utilize porous materials where suited in lieu of impervious materials.







Designing to the land, so that the layout of constructed and landscape features utilizes the natural topography and minimizes grading.	•	Prioritize on-site hydrologic features (i.e., for protection, improvement, utilization, or alteration) and natural  site drainage patterns and infiltration characteristics and consider them for the cornerstones of the conceptual site design.
•	Reduce grading and compaction by applying selective grading design methods  to  provide  final  grading  patterns  tthat  preserve  existing
topography where it most benefits natural hydrologic functions and where needed; this results in graded areas that evenly distribute runoff and minimize concentrated runoff flows.
•	Consider the scale and placement of buildings and other infrastructure to minimize impact to natural hydrologic features.
•	Incorporate unique natural, scenic, and historic site features into the configuration of the development, and ensure flexibility in development design to meet community needs for complimentary and aesthetically pleasing development, such as can be achieved through Conservation
Design and Sustainable Design approaches.
 


Design Principles	
Design Techniques












Design the constructed stormwater management system to take advantage of the natural hydrologic landscape to achieve the required stormwater runoff control standards.	•	Incorporate natural hydrologic features that have been selected for their available capacity and function into the overall system of site runoff controls.
•	Incorporate Low Impact Development (or similar) BMPs and distribute storm flows to:
o	Reduce runoff;
o	Manage stormwater at or as close to the point of generation as
possible;
o	Disconnect discharges from streets and municipal storm sewer systems; and
o	Select and design BMPs to give first priority to nonstructural and vegetation (landscape-based) BMPs, second priority to surface structural BMPs, third priority to subsurface structural BMPs, and design subsurface BMPs as shallow as possible.
•	Provide open channel conveyance, as needed, to:
o	Treat water quality;
o	Reduce runoff velocity; and
o	Promote infiltratation and evapotranspiration of runoff.
•	Manage remaining conveyed stormwater from small storms in common open space areas to achieve multiple objectives:
o	Disperse storm flows and reduce velocity;
o	Treat water quality; and
o	Promote infiltrate and evapotranspiration of runoff.
•	Provide for appropriate conveyance to retention or detention storage facilities as needed for flows from large storm events.
•	Maintain open space functions consistent with common area uses (passive recreation, on-site sewage management, scenic vistas, etc).
Refine the site design and layout to optimize the cumulative benefits of the natural hydrologic features, the constructed stormwater management system, and the land development components to achieve the minimum post-construction runoff volume, peak discharge rates and pollutant loads from the proposed land development site.	
Apply site design techniques and practices as appropriate based on:

•	Conservation Design principles and practices.
•	Sustainable Design principles and practices.
•	Low Impact Development Design principles and practices.
 
DESIGN PRACTICES

Numerous practices and strategies can be considered where their aim is to sustain and utilize the benefits of existing site hydrology and minimize the generation of new stormwater runoff. Following are brief descriptions of various practices that can be used to achieve the principles of the natural hydrology site design process.

Site Layout Practices
The following site layout practices are but a few of the methods by which the natural hydrology
site design process described above can be implemented. Such practices are less functions of regimented codes and procedures than about understanding and recognizing the benefits and values that existing resources can contribute to the desired outcomes of the land development project. In some circumstances, communication among design engineers, land planning and environmental professionals, knowledgeable developers, community representatives, and regulatory authorities is also beneficial to combine their collective understanding and perspectives to create effective planning efforts.



Preserving Natural Drainage Features. Protecting natural drainage features, particularly vegetated drainage swales and channels, is desirable because of their ability to infiltrate and attenuate flows and to filter pollutants. Unfortunately, some common land development practices encourage just the opposite pattern -- streets and adjacent storm sewers typically are located in the natural headwater valleys and swales, thereby replacing natural drainage functions with an impervious system. As a result, runoff and pollutants generated from impervious surfaces flow directly into storm sewers with no opportunity for attenuation, infiltration, or filtration. Designing developments to fit site topography retains much of the natural drainage function. In addition, designing with the land minimizes the amount of site grading, reduces the amount of compaction that can alter site infiltration characteristics, and can result in cost savings to the developer.

Protecting Natural Depression Storage Areas. Depressional storage areas have no  surface outlet, or drain very slowly following a storm event. They can be commonly seen as ponded areas in fields during the wet season or after large runoff events. Some development practices eliminate these depressions by filling or draining, thereby eliminating their ability to reduce surface runoff volumes and trap pollutants. The volume and release-rate characteristics of depressions should be protected in the design of the development site to assist in reducing runoff volumes and reducing runoff rates. Designing around the depression, or incorporating its storage as additional capacity in required detention facilities, treats this area as a site amenity rather than a detriment.

Avoiding Introduction of Impervious Areas. Careful site planning should consider reducing impervious coverage to the maximum extent possible. Building footprints, sidewalks, driveways, and other features producing impervious surfaces should be evaluated to minimize impacts on runoff. In many instances, municipalities have the ability to reduce impervious cover by providing incentives or opportunities in their zoning and subdivision/ land development ordinances to reduce road width, reduce or modify cul-de-sac dimensions, reduce or modify curbing requirements, and reduce or modify sidewalk requirements.
 
Disconnecting Impervious Surfaces. Impervious surfaces are significantly less of a problem if they are not directly connected to an impervious conveyance system (such as storm sewer). Two basic ways to reduce hydraulic connectivity are routing roof runoff over lawns and reducing the use of storm sewers. Site grading should promote increasing travel time of stormwater runoff from these sources, and should help reduce concentration of runoff to a single point within the project site.

Routing Roof Runoff Over Lawns. Roof runoff can be easily routed over lawns in most site designs. The practice discourages direct connections of downspouts to “driveway-to-street-to- storm sewers” or parking lots. The practice also discourages sloping driveways and parking lots to the street.  Crowning the driveway, to run off to the lawn, uses the lawn as a filter strip.

Reducing Street Widths. Street widths can be reduced by either eliminating on-street parking and/or by reducing roadway widths. Designers should select the narrowest practical street width for the design conditions (speed, curvature, etc.). Narrower neighborhood streets should be considered and encouraged under select conditions. Reduced street widths also can lower maintenance needs and costs.

Limiting Sidewalks to One Side of the Street. A sidewalk on one side of the street may suffice in low-traffic neighborhoods. The lost sidewalk could be replaced with bicycle/recreational trails that follow back-of-lot lines as an alternative to reduced sidewalks, where appropriate.

Reducing Building Setbacks. Reducing building setbacks (from streets) reduces the size of impervious areas of driveways and entry walks and is most readily accomplished along low- traffic streets where traffic noise is not a problem.

Constructing Compact Developments or Conservation Design: Low impact cluster or compact development can reduce the amount of impervious area for a given number of lots. Savings result from reduced street length, which also contributes to a reduction in development and long- term maintenance costs. Reduced site disturbance and preservation of open space help buffer sensitive natural areas and retain more of a site’s natural hydrology. Development can be designed so that areas of high infiltration soils are reserved as stormwater infiltration areas. Construction activity can be focused onto les -sensitive areas without affecting the gross density of development.



Stormwater Best Management Practices
Stormwater best management practices (BMPs) are intended to supplement natural hydrology
site design techniques where needed. Structural in nature, such practices include bioretention facilities, rain gardens, swales and other engineered stormwater BMPs. Listed here are techniques intended to help manage stormwater predominantly at or near the source, rather than traditional techniques that largely release runoff over an extended period of time to adjacent properties and streams. This list, in no way exhaustive, gives examples of a few of the most common  practices.
 
Bioretention. This type of BMP combines open space with stormwater treatment. Soil and plants, rather than sand filters, treat and store runoff. Infiltration and evapotranspiration are achieved, often coupled with an underdrain to collect water not infiltrated or used in the root zone.

Rain Gardens. Typically rain gardens are shallow depression areas containing a mix of water tolerant native plant species. The intent is to capture runoff for storage and use in the root zone of plants. Intended largely as a way of managing stormwater through evapotranspiration (ET), rain gardens often function as infiltration facilities as well.

Reducing the Need for Storm Sewers. Increasing the use of natural or vegetated drainage swales can reduce the need for extending storm sewers for draining streets, parking lots, and back yards, the potential for accelerating runoff from the development can be greatly reduced. The practice requires greater use of swales and may not be practical for some development sites, especially if there are concerns for areas that do not drain in a “reasonable” time. The practice requires educating local citizens, who may expect runoff to disappear shortly after a rainfall event.

Using Permeable Paving Materials. These materials include permeable interlocking concrete paving blocks or porous bituminous concrete, among others. Such materials should be considered as alternatives to conventional pavement surfaces, especially for low use surfaces such as driveways, overflow parking lots, and emergency access roads. Surfaces for which seal coats may be applied should refrain from using permeable paving materials.



SOURCES
Conservation Design for Stormwater Management, Delaware Department of Natural Resources
and Environmental Control and the Brandywine Conservancy, September 1997.

Conservation Design: Techniques for Preserving Natural Hydrologic Functions, White Paper prepared for New Castle County, Delaware Drainage Code, John M. Gaadt, AICP, September 2007.


Growing Greener, Conservation by Design, a program of the Natural Lands Trust,
www.natlands.org/.

Guidance on MS4 Ordinance Provisions, Document Number 392-0300-003, by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.

Low Impact Development Center, http://www.lowimpactdevelopment.org/.

PA Department of Environmental Protection, Best Management Practices Manual, 2006.
 

ORDINANCE APPENDIX C


RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS AND CURVE NUMBERS







TABLE C-1. RUNOFF CURVE NUMBERS
Source: Table 2-2a, Table 2-2b, and Table 2-2c from U. S. Department of
Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, June 1986, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55 (TR-55), Second Edition.



TABLE C-2. RATIONAL RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
Source: Table F.2 from Delaware County Planning Department, December 2011,
Crum Creek Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan.


TABLE C-3.  MANNING’S ‘n’ VALUES
Source: Table 3-1 from United States Army Corps of Engineers, January 2010,
HEC-RAS River Analysis System, Hydraulic Reference Manual, Version 4.1.
 
TABLE C-1. RUNOFF CURVE NUMBERS
(3 pages)

Source: Table 2-2a, Table 2-2b, and Table 2-2c from U. S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, June 1986, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55 (TR-55), Second Edition.
 
Chapter 2
 
Estimating Runo ff
 
Technical Release 55
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds
 




Table 2-2a	Runoff curve numbers for urban areas 1/


Curve numbers for
------------------------------------------- Cover description -----------------------------------------	-----------hydrologic soil group -------------
Average percent
Cover type and hydrologic condition	impervious area 2/	A	B	C	D

Fully developed urban areas ( vegetation established)

Open space (lawns, parks, golf courses, cemeteries, etc.) 3/:



Impervious areas:
Paved parking lots, roofs, driveways, etc.
(excluding right-of-way) .............................................................	98	98	98	98
Streets and roads:
Western desert urban areas:
Urban districts:
Residential districts by average lot size:
1/8 acre or less (town houses) ..........................................................	65	77	85	90	92
1/4 acre ................................................................................................	38	61	75	83	87
1/3 acre ................................................................................................	30	57	72	81	86
1/2 acre ................................................................................................	25	54	70	80	85
1 acre ...................................................................................................	20	51	68	79	84
2 acres ..................................................................................................	12	46	65	77	82
Developing urban areas

Newly graded areas
(pervious areas only, no vegetation) 5/ ................................................................	77	86	91	94

Idle lands (CN’s are determined using cover types similar to those in table 2-2c).

1	Average runoff condition, and Ia = 0.2S.
2	The average percent impervious area shown was used to develop the composite CN’s. Other assumptions are as follows: impervious areas are
directly connected to the drainage system, impervious areas have a CN of 98, and pervious areas are considered equivalent to open space in good hydrologic condition. CN’s for other combinations of conditions may be computed using figure 2-3 or 2-4.
3	CN’s shown are equivalent to those of pasture. Composite CN’s may be computed for other combinations of open space cover type.
4	Composite CN’s for natural desert landscaping should be computed using figures 2-3 or 2-4 based on the impervious area percentage
(CN = 98) and the pervious area CN. The pervious area CN’s are assumed equivalent to desert shrub in poor hydrologic condition.
5	Composite CN’s to use for the design of temporary measures during grading and construction should be computed using figure 2-3 or 2-4 based on the degree of development (impervious area percentage) and the CN’s for the newly graded  pervious areas.





 
(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986)
 
2–5
 
Chapter 2
 
Estimating Runo ff
 
Technical Release 55
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds
 




Table 2-2b	Runoff curve numbers for cultivated agricultural lands 1/


Curve numbers for
------------------------------------------ Cover description ---------------------------------------------	-------------  hydrologic soil group  ----------------
Hydrologic
Cover type	Treatment 2/	condition 3/	A	B	C	D

Fallow	
Bare soil	
—	
77	
86	
91	
94
	Crop residue cover (CR)	Poor	76	85	90	93
		Good	74	83	88	90
Row crops	Straight row (SR)	Poor	72	81	88	91
		Good	67	78	85	89
	SR + CR	Poor	71	80	87	90
		Good	64	75	82	85
	Contoured (C)	Poor	70	79	84	88
		Good	65	75	82	86
	C + CR	Poor	69	78	83	87
		Good	64	74	81	85
	Contoured & terraced (C&T)	Poor	66	74	80	82
		Good	62	71	78	81
	C&T+ CR	Poor	65	73	79	81
		Good	61	70	77	80
Small grain	SR	Poor	65	76	84	88
		Good	63	75	83	87
	SR + CR	Poor	64	75	83	86
		Good	60	72	80	84
	C	Poor	63	74	82	85
		Good	61	73	81	84
	C + CR	Poor	62	73	81	84
		Good	60	72	80	83
	C&T	Poor	61	72	79	82
		Good	59	70	78	81
	C&T+ CR	Poor	60	71	78	81
		Good	58	69	77	80
Close-seeded	SR	Poor	66	77	85	89
or broadcast		Good	58	72	81	85
legumes or	C	Poor	64	75	83	85
rotation		Good	55	69	78	83
meadow	C&T	Poor	63	73	80	83
		Good	51	67	76	80
1	Average runoff condition, and Ia=0.2S
2	Crop residue cover applies only if residue is on at least 5% of the surface throughout the year.
3	Hydraulic condition is based on combination factors that affect infiltration and runoff, including (a) density and canopy of vegetative areas,
(b) amount of year-round cover, (c) amount of grass or close-seeded legumes, (d) percent of residue cover on the land surface (good = 20%), and (e) degree of surface roughness.

Poor: Factors impair infiltration and tend to increase runoff.

Good: Factors encourage average and better than average infiltration and tend to decrease runoff.









2–6	(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986)
 
Chapter 2
 
Estimating Runo ff
 
Technical Release 55
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds
 




Table 2-2c	Runoff curve numbers for other agricultural lands 1/


Curve numbers for
--------------------------------------- Cover description --------------------------------------	------------  hydrologic soil group ---------------
Hydrologic
Cover type	condition	A	B	C	D

Pasture, grassland, or range—continuous	
Poor	
68	
79	
86	
89
forage for grazing. 2/	Fair	49	69	79	84
	Good	39	61	74	80
Meadow—continuous grass, protected from grazing and generally mowed for hay.	—	30	58	71	78
Brush—brush-weed-grass mixture with brush	Poor	48	67	77	83
the major element. 3/	Fair	35	56	70	77
	Good	30 4/	48	65	73
Woods—grass combination (orchard	Poor	57	73	82	86
or tree farm). 5/	Fair	43	65	76	82
	Good	32	58	72	79
Woods. 6/	Poor	45	66	77	83
	Fair	36	60	73	79
	Good	30 4/	55	70	77
Farmsteads—buildings, lanes, driveways,	—	59	74	82	86
and surrounding lots.					
1	Average runoff condition, and Ia = 0.2S.
2	Poor:    <50%) ground cover or heavily grazed with no mulch.
Fair:    50 to 75% ground cover and not heavily grazed.
Good:   > 75% ground cover and lightly or only occasionally grazed.
3	Poor:    <50% ground cover.
Fair:    50 to 75% ground cover.
Good:  >75% ground cover.
4	Actual curve number is less than 30; use CN = 30 for runoff computations.
5	CN’s shown were computed for areas with 50% woods and 50% grass (pasture) cover. Other combinations of conditions may be computed from the CN’s for woods and pasture.
6	Poor:  Forest litter, small trees, and brush are destroyed by heavy grazing or regular burning.
Fair:   Woods are grazed but not burned, and some forest litter covers the soil.
Good:  Woods are protected from grazing, and litter and brush adequately cover the soil.




















 
(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986)
 
2–7
 












TABLE C-2. RATIONAL RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
(1 page)

Source: Table F.2 from Delaware County Planning Department, December 2011,
Crum Creek Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan.














































APPENDIX C 	3
 
TABLE F-2
RATIONAL RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS

	
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP

LAND USE DESCRIPTION	
A	
B	
C	
D

Cultivated land : without conservation treatment	
.49	
.67	
.81	
.88

: with conservation treatment	
.27	
.43	
.61	
.67

Pasture or range land: poor condition	
.38	
.63	
.78	
.84

: good condition	
---*	
.25	
.51	
.65

Meadow: good condition	
---*	
---*	
.44	
.61

Woods: thin stand, poor cover, no mulch	
---*	
.34	
.59	
.70

: good cover	
---*	
---*	
.45	
.59

Open spaces, lawns, parks, golf courses, cemeteries				
Good condition: grass cover on 75% or more of the area	
---*	
.25	
.51	
.65
Fair condition: grass cover on 50% to 75% of the area	
---*	
.45	
.63	
.74

Commercial and business areas (85% impervious)	
.84	
.90	
.93	
.96

Industrial districts (72% impervious)	
.67	
.81	
.88	
.92

Residential:				

Average lot size	Average % impervious				
1/8 acre or less	65	
.59	
.76	
.86	
.90
1/4 acre	38	
.25	
.49	
.67	
.78
1/3 acre	30	
---*	
.49	
.67	
.78
1/2 acre	25	
---*	
.45	
.65	
.76
1 acre	20	
---*	
.41	
.63	
.74

Paved parking lots, roofs, driveways, etc.	
.99	
.99	
.99	
.99

Streets and roads:				

Paved with curbs and storm sewers	
.99	
.99	
.99	
.99

Gravel	
.57	
.76	
.84	
.88

Dirt	
.49	
.69	
.80	
.84
Notes: Values are based on SCS definitions and are average values.
Values indicated by ---* should be determined by the design engineer based on site characteristics.

Source :  New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Technical Manual for Stream Encroachment, August 1984


F-3
 












TABLE C-3. MANNING’S ‘n’ VALUES
(3 pages)

Source: Table 3-1 from United States Army Corps of Engineers, January 2010,
HEC-RAS River Analysis System, Hydraulic Reference Manual, Version 4.1.














































APPENDIX C 	4
 
Chapter 3- Basic Data Requirements
Table 3-1 Manning's 'n' Values




Type of Channel and Description	Minimum	Normal	Maximum

A.	Natural Streams

1.	Main Channels
a.	Clean, straight, full, no rifts or deep pools
b.	Same as above, but more stones and weeds
c.	Clean, winding, some pools and shoals
d.	Same as above, but some weeds and stones
e.	Same as above, lower stages, more ineffective slopes and sections
f.	Same as "d" but more stones
g.	Sluggish reaches, weedy. deep pools
h.	Very weedy reaches, deep pools, or floodways with heavy stands of timber and brush

2.	Flood Plains
a.	Pasture no brush
1.	Short grass
2.	High grass
b.	Cultivated areas

















3.	Mountain Streams, no vegetation in channel, banks usually steep, with trees and brush on banks submerged
a.	Bottom: gravels, cobbles, and few boulders
b.	Bottom: cobbles with large boulders













3-14
 
Chapter 3- Basic Data Requirements


Table 3-1 (Continued) Manning's 'n' Values




Type of Channel and Description	Minimum	Normal	Maximum

B.	Lined or Built-Up Channels

1.	Concrete
a. Trowel finish	0.011	0.013	0.015
b.  Float Finish	0.013	O.Q15	0.016
c. Finished, with gravel bottom	O.Q15	0.017	0.020
d. Unfinished	0.014	0.017	0.020
e.  Gunite, good section	0.016	0.019	0.023
f. Gunite, wavy section	O.Q18	0.022	0.025
g.  On good excavated rock	0.017	0.020	
h.  On irregular excavated rock	0.022	0.027	
2.	Concrete bottom float finished with sides of:
a. Dressed stone in mortar	O.Q15	0.017	0.020
b. Random stone in mortar	O.Q17	0.020	0.024
c. Cement rubble masonry, plastered	0.016	0.020	0.024
d. Cement rubble masonry	0.020	0.025	0.030
e. Dry rubble on riprap	0.020	0.030	0.035

3.	Gravel bottom with sides of:	
	a. Formed concrete	0.017	0.020	0.025
	b. Random stone in mortar	0.020	0.023	0.026
	c. Dry rubble or riprap	0.023	0.033	0.036

4.	Brick
a. Glazed	0.011	0.013	0.015
b.  In cement mortar	0.012	0.015	0.018
5.	Metal



6.



7.  Ve&etal linin&	0.030	0.500

















3-15
 
Chapter 3- Basic Data Requirements



Table 3-1 (Continued) Manning's 'n' Values



Type of Channel and Description	Minimum	Normal	Maximum

C. Excavated or Dredged Channels

L  Earth, straight and uniform
a. Clean, recently completed	0.016	0.018	0.020
b.  Clean, after weathering	O.Q18	0.022	0.025
c. Gravel, uniform section, clean	0.022	0.025	0.030
d.  With short grass, few weeds	0.022	0.027	0.033
2.	Earth, winding and sluggish
a.	No vegetation	0.023	O.Q25	0.030
b.	Grass, some weeds	0.025	0.030	0.033
c.	Dense weeds or aquatic plants in deep channels	0.030	O.Q35	0.040
d.	Earth bottom and rubble side	0.028	0.030	O.D35
e.	Stony bottom and weedy banks	0.025	0.035	0.040
f.	Cobble bottom and clean sides	0.030	0.040	0.050

3.	Dragline-excavated or dredged
a.	No vegetation	0.025	0.028	0.033
b.	Light brush on banks	0.035	0.050	0.060

4.	Rock cuts
a.	Smooth and uniform	0.025	0.035	0.040
b.	Jagged and irregular	0.035	0.040	0.050 	
5.	Channels not maintained, weeds and brush
a.	Clean bottom, brush on sides	0.040	0.050	0.080
b.	Same as above, highest stage of flow	0.045	0.070	0.110
c.	Dense weeds, high as flow depth	0.050	0.080	0.120
d.	Dense brush, high stage	0.080	0.100	0.140



Other sources that include pictures of selected streams as a guide to n value determination are available (Fasken, 1963; Barnes, 1967; and Hicks and Mason, 1991). In general, these references provide color photos with tables of calibrated n values for a range of flows.

Although there are many factors that affect the selection of the n value for the channel, some of the most important factors are the type and size of materials that compose the bed and banks of a channel, and
the shape of the channel.  Cowan (1956) developed a procedure for estimating the effects of these factors to determine the value of Manning's n of a channel.  In Cowan's procedure, the value of n is computed by the following equation:








3-16
 



ORDINANCE APPENDIX D WEST NILE VIRUS DESIGN GUIDANCE
 
WEST NILE VIRUS GUIDANCE

(This source is from the Monroe County, PA Conservation District that researched the potential of West Nile Virus problems from BMPs due to a number of calls they were receiving)

Monroe County Conservation District Guidance: Stormwater Management and West Nile Virus

Source:  Brodhead McMichaels Creeks Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Ordinance Final Draft 2/23/04

The Monroe County Conservation District recognizes the need to address the problem of nonpoint source pollution impacts caused by runoff from impervious surfaces. The new stormwater policy being integrated into Act 167 stormwater management regulations by the PA Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) will make nonpoint pollution controls an important component of all future plans and updates to existing plans. In addition, to meet post- construction anti-degradation standards under the state National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permitting program, applicants will be required to employ Best Management Practices (BMPs) to address nonpoint pollution concerns.

Studies conducted throughout the United States have shown that wet basins and in particular constructed wetlands are effective in traditional stormwater management areas such as channel stability and flood control and are one of the most effective ways to remove stormwater pollutants (United States Environmental Protection Agency 1991, Center for Watershed Protection 2000). From Maryland to Oregon, studies have shown that as urbanization and impervious surfaces increase in a watershed, the streams in those watersheds become degraded (CWP 2000). Although there is debate over the threshold of impervious cover when degradation becomes apparent (some studies show as little as 6% while others show closer to 20%), there is agreement that impervious surfaces cause nonpoint pollution in urban and urbanizing watersheds and that degradation is ensured if stormwater BMPs are not implemented.

Although constructed wetlands and ponds are desirable from a water quality perspective, there may be concerns about the possibility of these stormwater management structures becoming breeding grounds for mosquitoes. The Conservation District feels that although it may be a valid concern, municipalities should not adopt ordinance provisions prohibiting wet basins for stormwater management.

Mosquitoes

The questions surrounding mosquito production in wetlands and ponds have intensified in recent years by the outbreak of the mosquito-borne West Nile Virus. As is the case with all vector-borne maladies, the life cycle of West Nile Virus is complicated, traveling from mosquito to bird, back to mosquito, and then to other animals including humans. Culex pipiens was identified as the vector species in the first documented cases from New York in 1999. This species is still considered the primary transmitter of the disease across its range. Today there are some 60 species of mosquitoes that inhabit Pennsylvania. Along with C. pipiens, three other
 
species have been identified as vectors of West Nile Virus while four more have been identified as potential vectors.

The four known vectors in NE Pennsylvania are Culex pipiens, C. restuans, C. salinarius, and Ochlerotatus japonicus. All four of these species prefer, and almost exclusively use, artificial containers (old tires, rain gutters, birdbaths, etc.) as larval habitats. In the case of C. pipiens, the most notorious of the vector mosquitoes, the dirtier the water, the better they like it. The important factor is that these species do not thrive in functioning wetlands where competition for resources and predation by larger aquatic and terrestrial organisms is high.

The remaining four species, Aedes vexans, Ochlerotatus Canadensis, O. triseriatus, and
O. trivittatus, are currently considered potential vectors due to laboratory tests (except the O. trivittatus, which did have one confirmed vector pool for West Nile Virus in PA during 2002). All four of these species prefer vernal habitats and ponded woodland areas following heavy summer rains. These species may be the greatest threat of disease transmission around stormwater basins that pond water for more than four days. This can be mitigated, however, by establishing ecologically functioning wetlands.

Stormwater Facilities

If a stormwater wetland or pond is constructed properly and a diverse ecological community develops, mosquitoes should not become a problem. Wet basins and wetlands constructed as stormwater management facilities should be designed to attract a diverse wildlife community. If a wetland is planned, proper hydrologic soil conditions and the establishment of hydrophytic vegetation will promote the population of the wetland by amphibians and other mosquito predators. In natural wetlands, predatory insects and amphibians are effective at keeping mosquito populations in check during the larval stage of development while birds and bats prey on adult mosquitoes.

The design of a stormwater wetland must include the selection of hydrophytic plant species for their pollutant uptake capabilities and for not contributing to the potential for vector mosquito breeding. In particular, species of emergent vegetation with little submerged growth are preferable. By limiting the vegetation growing below the water surface, larvae lose protective cover, and there is less chance of anaerobic conditions occurring in the water.

Stormwater ponds can be designed for multiple purposes. When incorporated into an open space design, a pond can serve as a stormwater management facility and a community amenity. Aeration fountains and stocked fish should be added to keep larval mosquito populations in check.

Publications from the PA Department of Health and the Penn State Cooperative Extension concerning West Nile Virus identify aggressive public education about the risks posed by standing water in artificial containers (tires, trash cans, rain gutters, bird baths) as the most effective method to control vector mosquitoes.
 

Conclusion

The Conservation District understands the pressure faced by municipalities when dealing with multifaceted issues such as stormwater management and encourages the incorporation of water quality management techniques into stormwater designs. As Monroe County continues to grow, conservation design, infiltration, and constructed wetlands and ponds should be among the preferred design options to reduce the impacts of increases in impervious surfaces. When designed and constructed appropriately, the runoff mitigation benefits to the community from these design options will far outweigh their potential to become breeding grounds for mosquitoes.
 
ORDINANCE APPENDIX E




STORMWATER
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES AND CONVEYANCES
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT











SAMPLE AGREEMENT
















REVISED
Chester County Water Resources Authority February 19, 2013
 
STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) AND CONVEYANCES
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT


THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this		day of	, 20_    , by and between	, (hereinafter the “Landowner”), and West Nantmeal Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania, (hereinafter “Municipality”);

WITNESSETH


WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property by virtue of a deed of conveyance  recorded  in  the  land  records  of  Chester  County,  Pennsylvania,  at  Deed  Book
 	and Page _	, (hereinafter “Property”); and

WHEREAS, the Landowner is proceeding to build and develop the Property; and

WHEREAS, the stormwater Best Management Practices (herein after BMP(s)) And Conveyances Operations and Maintenance Plan approved by the Municipality (hereinafter referred to as the “O&M Plan”) for the Property, which is attached hereto as Appendix A and made part hereof, provides for management of stormwater within the confines of the Property through the use of BMP(s) and conveyances; and

WHEREAS, the Municipality and the Landowner, for itself and its administrators, executors, successors, heirs, and assigns, agree that the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Municipality and the protection and maintenance of water quality require that stormwater BMP(s) and conveyances be constructed and maintained on the Property; and

WHEREAS, for the purposes of this agreement, the following definitions shall apply: BMP – “Best Management Practice” –Those activities, facilities, designs, measures, or procedures as specifically identified in the O&M Plan, used to manage stormwater impacts from land development, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of the Municipality’s Stormwater Management Ordinance. BMPs may include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from large- scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, manufactured devices, and operational and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff. The BMPs indentified in the O&M Plan are permanent appurtenances to the Property; and

Conveyance – As specifically identified in the O&M Plan, a man-made, existing or proposed facility, structure or channel used for the transportation or transmission of stormwater from one place to another, including pipes, drainage ditches, channels and swales (vegetated and other), gutters, stream channels, and like facilities or features. The conveyances identified in the O&M Plan are permanent appurtenances to the Property; and
 

WHEREAS, the Municipality requires, through the implementation of the O&M Plan, that stormwater management BMPs and conveyances, as required by said O&M Plan and the Municipality’s Stormwater Management Ordinance, be constructed and adequately inspected, operated and maintained by the Landowner, its administrators, executors, successors in interest, heirs, and assigns.

NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing promises, the mutual covenants contained herein, and the following terms and conditions, the parties hereto, intending to be legally bound hereby, agree as follows:

1.	The foregoing recitals to this Agreement are incorporated as terms of this Agreement as if fully set forth in the body of this Agreement.

2.	The Landowner shall construct the BMP(s) and conveyance(s) in accordance with the final      design      plans      and      specifications      as      approved      by      the      Municipality
 	(title of approved plans)	(date).

3.	The Landowner shall inspect, operate and maintain the BMP(s) and conveyance(s) as shown on the O&M Plan in good working order acceptable to the Municipality and in accordance with the specific inspection and maintenance requirements in the approved O&M Plan.

4.	The Landowner hereby grants permission to the Municipality, its authorized agents and employees, to enter upon the Property from a public right-of-way or roadway, at reasonable times and upon presentation of proper identification, to inspect the BMP(s) and conveyance(s) whenever it deems necessary for compliance with this Agreement, the O&M Plan and the Municipality’s Stormwater Management Ordinance. Whenever possible, the Municipality shall notify the Landowner prior to entering the Property.

5.	The Municipality intends to inspect the BMP(s) and conveyance(s) at a minimum of once every 5 years to determine if they continue to function as required.

6.	The Landowner acknowledges that, per the Municipality’s Stormwater Ordinance, it is unlawful, without written approval of the Municipality, to:
a.	Modify, remove, fill, landscape, alter or impair the effectiveness of any BMP or conveyance that is constructed as part of the approved O&M Plan;
b.	Place any structure, fill, landscaping, additional vegetation, yard waste, brush cuttings, or other waste or debris into a BMP or conveyance that would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP or conveyance;
c.	Allow the BMP or conveyance to exist in a condition which does not conform to the approved O&M Plan or this Agreement; and
d.	Dispose of, discharge, place or otherwise allow pollutants including, but not limited to, deicers, pool additives, household chemicals, and automotive fluids to directly or indirectly enter any BMP or conveyance.

7.	In the event that the Landowner fails to operate and maintain the BMP(s) and conveyance(s)  as shown on the O&M Plan in good working order acceptable to the Municipality,
 
the Landowner shall be in violation of this Agreement, and the Landowner agrees that the Municipality or its representatives may, in addition to and not in derogation or diminution of any remedies available to it under the Stormwater Ordinance or other statutes, codes, rules or regulations, or this Agreement, enter upon the Property and take whatever action is deemed necessary to maintain said BMP(s) and conveyance(s). It is expressly understood and agreed that the Municipality is under no obligation to maintain or repair said facilities, and in no event shall this Agreement be construed to impose any such obligation on the Municipality.

8.	In the event that the Municipality, pursuant to this Agreement, performs work of any nature or expends any funds in performance of said work for labor, use of equipment, supplies, materials, and the like, the Landowner shall reimburse the Municipality for all expenses (direct and indirect) incurred within 30 days of delivery of an invoice from the Municipality. Failure of the Landowner to make prompt payment to the Municipality may result in enforcement proceedings, which may include the filing of a lien against the Property, which filing is expressly authorized by the Landowner.

9.	The intent and purpose of this Agreement is to ensure the proper maintenance of the on- site BMP(s) and conveyance(s) by the Landowner; provided, however, that this Agreement shall not be deemed to create or affect any additional liability on any party for damage alleged to result from or be caused by stormwater runoff.

10.	The Landowner, for itself and its executors, administrators, assigns, heirs, and other successors in interest, hereby releases and shall release the Municipality’s employees, its agents and designated representatives from all damages, accidents, casualties, occurrences, or claims which might arise or be asserted against said employees, agents or representatives arising out of the construction, presence, existence, or maintenance of the BMP(s) and conveyance(s) either by the Landowner or Municipality. In the event that a claim is asserted or threatened against the Municipality, its employees, agents or designated representatives, the Municipality shall notify the Landowner, and the Landowner shall defend, at his own expense, any claim, suit, action or proceeding, or any threatened claim, suit, action or proceeding against the Municipality, or, at the request of the Municipality, pay the cost, including attorneys’ fees, of defense of the same undertaken on behalf of the Municipality. If any judgment or claims against the Municipality’s employees, agents or designated representatives shall be allowed, the Landowner shall pay all damages, judgments or claims and any costs and expenses incurred by the Municipality, including attorneys, regarding said damages, judgments or claims.

11.	The Municipality may enforce this Agreement in accordance with its Stormwater Ordinance, at law or in equity, against the Landowner for breach of this Agreement. Remedies may include fines, penalties, damages or such equitable relief as the parties may agree upon or as may be determined by a Court of competent jurisdiction. Recovery by the Municipality shall include its reasonable attorney’s fees and costs incurred in seeking relief under this Agreement.

12.	Failure or delay in enforcing any provision of this Agreement shall not constitute a waiver by the Municipality of its rights of enforcement hereunder.

13.	The Landowner shall inform future buyers of the Property about the function of, operation, inspection and maintenance requirements of the BMP(s) prior to the purchase of the
 
Property by said future buyer, and upon purchase of the Property the future buyer assumes all responsibilities as Landowner and must comply with all components of this Agreement.

14.	This Agreement shall inure to the benefit of and be binding upon, the Municipality and the Landowner, as well as their heirs, administrators, executors, assigns and successors in interest.



This Agreement shall be recorded at the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Chester County, Pennsylvania, and shall constitute a covenant running with the Property, in perpetuity.




ATTEST:

WITNESS the following signatures and seals:

(SEAL)	For the Municipality:



(SEAL)	For the Landowner:



ATTEST:

 	 (City, Borough, Township)






County of Chester, Pennsylvania
I,	, a Notary Public in and for the County and State aforesaid, whose commission expires on the	day of	,
 
20    , do hereby certify that   	
 
whose name(s)
 
is/are   signed   to   the   foregoing   Agreement   bearing   date   of   the    	
 
day   of
 
 	, 20    , has acknowledged the same before me in my said County and State.

GIVEN UNDER MY HAND THIS	day of	, 20__.



NOTARY PUBLIC	(SEAL)



