ZONING
ORDINANCE
FOR LUZERNE COUNTY
PENNSYLVANIA
ORIGINALLY ADOPTED: DECEMBER 16, 1964
LATEST TEXT AMENDMENT: SEPTEMBER 25, 2012
2
MUNICIPALITIES UNDER COUNTY JURISDICTION *
ZONING SUBDIVISION
1. AVOCA BOROUGH 1. AVOCA BOROUGH
2. CONYNGHAM TOWNSHIP 2. CONYNGHAM TOWNSHIP
3. COURTDALE BOROUGH 3. COURTDALE BOROUGH
4. DUPONT BOROUGH 4. DALLAS BOROUGH
5. DURYEA BOROUGH 5. DUPONT BOROUGH
6. FAIRMOUNT TOWNSHIP 6. DURYEA BOROUGH
7. HUGHESTOWN BOROUGH 7. FAIRMOUNT TOWNSHIP
8. HUNLOCK TOWNSHIP 8. HUGHESTOWN BOROUGH
9. HUNTINGTON TOWNSHIP 9. HUNLOCK TOWNSHIP
10. JEDDO BOROUGH 10. HUNTINGTON TOWNSHIP
11. LAFLIN BOROUGH 11. JEDDO BOROUGH
12. LAKE TOWNSHIP 12. LAFLIN BOROUGH
13. LARKSVILLE BOROUGH 13. LAKE TOWNSHIP
14. LUZERNE BOROUGH 14. LARKSVILLE BOROUGH
15. NEW COLUMBUS BOROUGH 15. LUZERNE BOROUGH
16. NEWPORT TOWNSHIP 16. NEW COLUMBUS BOROUGH
17. PRINGLE BOROUGH 17. NEWPORT TOWNSHIP
18. ROSS TOWNSHIP 18. PLYMOUTH BOROUGH
19. UNION TOWNSHIP 19. PLYMOUTH TOWNSHIP
20. WARRIOR RUN BOROUGH 20. PRINGLE BOROUGH
21. WEST WYOMING BOROUGH 21. ROSS TOWNSHIP
22. WYOMING BOROUGH 22. SHICKSHINNY BOROUGH
23. YATESVILLE BOROUGH 23. UNION TOWNSHIP
24. WARRIOR RUN BOROUGH
25. WEST PITTSTON BOROUGH
26. WEST WYOMING BOROUGH
27. WYOMING BOROUGH
28. YATESVILLE BOROUGH
* As of August 10, 2012
3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
MUNICIPALITIES UNDER COUNTY JURISDICTION 2
PREAMBLE 4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTIVES 6
ARTICLE 1 – TITLE 7
ARTICLE 2 – GENERAL PROVISIONS 7
ARTICLE 3 – ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 13
ARTICLE 4 – DISTRICT USES 14
ARTICLE 5 – YARD AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS 28
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS 32
ARTICLE 7 – EXCEPTION AND MODIFICATIONS 64
ARTICLE 8 – ZONING HEARING BOARD 67
ARTICLE 9 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 75
ARTICLE 10 – AMENDMENTS TO MAP OR TEXT 79
ARTICLE – 11 DEFINATIONS 81
ARTICLE – 12 INTREPRETATION AND VALIDITY 90
ARTICLE – 13 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT(S) 91
SECTION 9.02 – SCHEDULE OF FEES 97
4
ZONING ORDINANCE FOR LUZERNE COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
Whereas the Luzerne County Zoning Ordinance is based on the Master or Comprehensive
Plan of Luzerne County as a means of working towards it, particularly the section known as the
Land Use Plan; and
Whereas Section 603 of Act 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of
July 31, 1968, Article VI states as follows:
Ordinance Provisions
Zoning Ordinance may prohibit, regulate, restrict and determine:
Uses of land, watercourses and other bodies of water;
Size, height, bulk, location, erection, construction, repair, maintenance, alteration, razing,
removal and use of structures;
Areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water to be occupied by uses and structures,
as well as areas, courts, yards and other open spaces and distances to be left unoccupied by
uses and structures;
Density of population and intensity of use.
In addition, zoning ordinances may contain:
Provisions for special exceptions and variances administered by the Zoning Hearing
Board, which provisions shall be in accordance with this act;
Provision for conditional uses to be allowed or denied by the governing body after
recommendations by the planning agency, pursuant to express standards and criteria set
forth in the ordinances;
Provision for the administration and enforcement of such ordinances;
Such other provisions as may be necessary to implement the purposes of this act, and
Whereas Section 604 of Act 247 states as follows:
5
Zoning Purposes
The provisions of zoning ordinances shall be designed:
To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following:
the public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical
community development, proper density of population, civil defense, disaster
evacuation, airports, and national defense facilities, the provision of adequate light
and air, police protection, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, public grounds and other public requirements, as well as
To prevent one or more of the following:
overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss
of health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers. Zoning ordinances
shall be made in accordance with an overall program, and with consideration for the
character of the municipality, its various parts and the suitability of the various parts
for particular uses and structures.
Now, therefore, this Ordinance is in accordance with these heretofore stated purposes,
which are interpreted by the Governing Body of Luzerne County to include control of strip mining
and other excavations to reduce mine acid water pollution, and thereby to improve the future quality
of the water and also to minimize siltation and fish and aquatic plant kill and improve recreation
potentialities; to eliminate the scarring and erosion of the land by requiring backfill and thereby to
improve or maintain its future usefulness and property values, and its attractiveness to industrialists
considering locating in Luzerne County; to improve the safety of human beings (particularly
children) and structures from improperly maintained strip mines, or flying rocks; to protect the
County from liability by requiring insurance of excavators; to protect structures and roads and other
land uses by requiring excavations to maintain distance provisions from them and any, or any other,
public or semi-public uses; and to reducing dust, dirt and noise from highways and residence
districts by distance provisions.
6
STATEMENT OF OBJECTIVES
The Luzerne County Objectives include those listed in the 1968 Comprehensive Plan Report
of the Luzerne County Planning Commission, plus the following:
Income - To raise the level of incomes in Luzerne County to State and National standards,
and particularly to assist the low income groups.
Housing - To provide an adequate supply of decent, sanitary and safe housing in Luzerne
County for all income groups regardless of race or color background, including the
rehabilitation of existing structures.
Crime Prevention - To reduce the incidence of crime to the extent possible, within
Luzerne County.
Economics - To increase the tax base by acquiring, leveling and developing sites,
especially mining sites, and attracting non-seasonal industries which pay good
wages, principally those with a good growth potential.
Utilities - To insure that necessary public and private utilities are provided in Luzerne
County, particularly sewage systems.
Land Use and Comprehensive Plans - To use the Zoning Ordinance as a tool to help
implement the Land Use and Comprehensive Plans of Luzerne County.
Health - To improve the health of the residents of Luzerne County by controlling
pollution, separating residences for adequate light, sun and air, and the provision of
adequate facilities at the lowest possible cost.
To reduce pollution to the lowest level which is economically feasible.
To limit densities of population to reasonable standards, depending on location, to provide
attractive surroundings, have sufficient parking and avoid congestion.
7
ARTICLE I - TITLE
1.01 This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Zoning Ordinance of Luzerne
County, Pennsylvania.
ARTICLE 2 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
2.01 Definitions Reference
Definitions for words or terms used in this Ordinance are given in Article 11.
2.02 Compliance With Ordinance Required
Except as hereinafter provided, no land, building, structure or premises shall hereafter be
used, and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be located, erected,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, altered or moved except in conformity with
the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located and in conformity with
all duly ordained ordinances, resolutions, or the Subdivision Regulations of Luzerne County
or its municipalities, except for provisions stated in Section 6.15 Planned Residential
Developments. No yard space or minimum area required for a building or use shall be
considered as any part of the yard space or minimum area for another building or use.
2.03 Accessory Buildings in Residence Districts
No accessory building shall be erected in any required court or any yard other than a rear
yard, except as provided hereafter. An accessory building may be erected as part of a
principal building, or, if at least six (6) feet there from, may be connected thereto by a
breezeway or similar structure, provided all yard requirements of this Ordinance for a
principal building are complied with.
In any Conservation, Agricultural or Residence District, where a corner lot adjoins in the
rear of a lot fronting on the side street, no part of any accessory building on such corner lot
within twenty-five (25) feet of the common lot line shall be nearer a side road lot line than
the least depth of the front yard required along such side street for a dwelling on such
adjoining lot, and in no case shall any part of such accessory building be nearer to the side
road lot line than the least width of the side yard required for the principal building to which
it is accessory.
8
2.04 Conversion of Dwellings
The conversion of any building into a dwelling, or the conversion of any dwelling so as to
accommodate an increased number of dwelling units, or families shall be permitted only
within a district in which a new building for similar occupancy would be permitted under
this Ordinance, and only when the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements
governing new construction in such district with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per
dwelling unit, percentage of lot coverage, dimensions of yards and other open spaces, and
off street parking. Each conversion shall be subject also to such further requirements as may
be specified hereinafter within the article applying to such district.
2.05 Excavation of Sand, Gravel, Coal or Other Minerals and Rock and Peat Moss, for Sale
Excavations of sand, gravel, coal stripping or other minerals, and rock and peat moss shall
be considered a temporary use, and new excavations shall be permitted only in Mining,
Agricultural, Conservation or Heavy Industrial Districts. Deep coal mining shall be
permitted in any district. All new excavations of materials listed above shall require the
approval of the Board.
A. In the case of coal mining, new excavations shall be defined as those specific limited areas
not now operating under a State permit at the time this Ordinance becomes effective. For
strip mining, applications shall not exceed ten (10) acres in area, and the Board shall require
such measures as will protect the public interest including conformance with the following:
Map. Submission of a map which will outline the entire proposed area to be strip
mined, said map to contain the surface features showing buildings,
dwellings, churches, schools, railroads, highways, and lot lines of public
and semi-public uses within a distance of 500 feet from the perimeter of the
proposed strip mining operation. In addition, said map will indicate the
approximate or proposed depth of said strip mining operation.
Bond and Backfilling. That a bond in the sum of $2,500.00 per acre of land to be
excavated, be filed with the Board, to guarantee the complete backfilling of any
overburden removed, and to guarantee 50 percent of survival of all trees planted for
a year’s period in connection with the State Law in Anthracite Strip Mining.
Backfilling is to restore the land to a useable condition. If, after complete backfilling
of all overburden, the land is not approximately level with the unexcavated area, the
slopes of the edge of the excavated area shall not be steeper than one foot of vertical
distance for each one and one-half feet of horizontal distance. On sloping hillsides,
the final grade of this stripped area shall range from seven to fifteen percent.
Insurance. That a certificate of insurance with limits of $100,000 per person and
$300,000.00 per accident for personal injuries, and $300,000.00 for property
damage, be filed with the Board both for the benefit of all persons who might be
injured or suffer property damage as a result of said mining operations, and to save
9
the County of Luzerne and its officials harmless from any and all claims, suits or
demands caused by the mining operations.
Supervision of Blasting. The use of explosives for the purpose of blasting in
connection with strip mining shall be done in accordance with regulations
promulgated by and under the supervision of a representative of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
Distance Provisions. The perimeter of any excavation under this section shall not be nearer
than 200 feet from any building or road, except that owned by the excavator, or 100 feet
from any, or any other, public or semi-public use.
Timing. Primary blasting in any excavation shall occur only between the hours of
8:30 A.M. and 4:00 P.M., on either Eastern Standard or Eastern Daylight time, as
the case may be.
Location of Processing Equipment. To reduce airborne dust, dirt and noise, all structures
for sorting, crushing, grinding, loading, weighing, washing, and other operations shall not be
built closer than 300 feet from the right of way of any public highway, or 300 feet from the
boundary of residential, commercial or light industrial districts.
Drainage. All excavations both during operations and after completion shall be
adequately drained to prevent the formation of pools of water and reduce the
seepage of water into underground mines, both for safety, and to reduce formation
of mine acid water polluting the streams and rivers. Prior to any excavation for
stripping operations a ditch shall be excavated on the outside of the proposed pit for
the purpose of conveying the drainage from the watershed above the stripping pit to
the regular creek channels to reduce seepage of surface water into underground
mines
Compliance with State Requirements. Permits under the provisions of this
Ordinance will not be issued until the required license or permit has been secured
from the Department of Environmental Protection, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. In the case of quarries, sand and gravel pits, and peat moss bogs, the Board shall require
conformance with the following:
Map. Submission of a map which will outline the entire area proposed to be
excavated, said map to contain the surface features showing dwellings, churches,
schools, railroads and highways, and lot lines of public and semi-public uses,
within a distance of 500 feet from the perimeter of any quarrying operation, and a
distance of 300 feet from any sand and gravel pit or peat bog. In addition, said map
will indicate the approximate or proposed depth of said excavating operation.
10
Slopes and Drainage. After excavations are completed, the slopes of the edge of the
excavated area of sand and gravel pits and peat bogs shall not be steeper than one foot of
vertical distance for each one and one-half feet of horizontal distance. The surface of the
area excavated shall be leveled, and drained to the extent feasible.
Blasting. The use of explosives for the purpose of quarrying shall be done in
accordance with regulations promulgated by and under the supervision of a
representative of the applicable state agency.
Distance Provisions. The perimeter of any excavation under this section shall not be nearer
than 200 feet in the case of quarrying, 150 feet for sand and gravel pits, or 100 feet in the
case of peat bogs, from any building or road, except that owned by the excavator, or 100
feet from any, or any other, public or semi-public use.
Location of Processing Equipment. To reduce airborne dust, dirt and noise, all structures
for sorting, crushing, grinding, loading, weighing, washing, and other operations shall not be
built closer than 300 feet from the right of way of any public highway, or 300 feet from the
boundary of residential, commercial or light industrial district.
2.06 Non-Conforming Buildings and Land
Except for non-conforming junkyards, any lawful use of any dwelling, building, structure, or
land existing at the effective date of this Ordinance may be continued, even though such use
does not conform to the provisions hereof. If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming
use of a building may be changed to another non-conforming use of the same or
of a more restricted classification Whenever a non-conforming use has been changed to a
more restrictive use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less
restricted use. The non-conforming use of a building may be extended throughout those
parts thereof which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of
adoption of this Ordinance. No non-conforming building or structure shall be extended or
enlarged except when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board which may permit one
enlargement or extension up to 25 percent of the floor area of the structure as it existed at
the time of passage of this Ordinance.
Whenever the use of a building shall become non-conforming through a change in the
Zoning Ordinance or in the district boundaries, such use may be continued, and if no
structural alterations are made, may be changed to another non-conforming use of the same
or of a more restricted classification.
A non-conforming use of a building or a portion thereof which is hereafter discontinued for
a continuous period of one (1) year, shall not again be used except in conformity with the
regulations of the district in which such building is located.
11
Except for residential structures as hereinafter provided, a non-conforming building which
has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or the public enemy to the extent of more
than a sixty (60) percent of its reproduction value at the time of damage, shall not be
restored except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
When damaged by less than a sixty (60) percent of its reproduction value, a non-conforming
building may be repaired or reconstructed, and used as before the time of damage, provided
such repairs or reconstruction are completed within one (1) year of the date of such damage.
For residential structures non-conforming only as to yard spaces, in residential zones where
most of the residential structures nearby are similarly non-conforming, the structures may be
rebuilt similar to the yard spaces of the adjoining lots, or a majority of the lots in the
particular block front.
2.07 Pending Applications for Building Permits or Structures Already Begun
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the over-all layout, plans, construction,
size or designated use of any development, building, structure, or part thereof, for which
official approval and required permits have been granted, or where no approvals or permits
are necessary, where construction has been legally started, before the enactment of this
Ordinance, and completed within a one year period.
2.08 Rear Dwellings and Easements Required Therewith
In all districts except the industrial districts, no building in the rear of a principal building on
the same lot, other than a non-conforming building, shall be used for residence purposes
unless it conforms to the open space requirements of this Ordinance. For the purpose of
determining the front yard in such case, the rear line of the required rear yard for the
principal building in front shall be considered the front lot line for the building in the rear.
In addition, there must be provided for any such rear dwelling an unoccupied and
unobstructed access way not less than fifteen (15) feet wide to a road, and there shall not be
more than one dwelling housing not more than two (2) families for each such easement,
except that a common easement of access at least forty (40) feet wide may be provided for
two or more dwellings housing any number of families.
Zoning permit applications submitted for final approval shall be in accordance with the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of Luzerne County and all construction shall
be in accordance with the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and all other codes
and ordinances of Luzerne County except those excluded under this section. The
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of Luzerne County, as amended, shall
govern the construction and acceptance of public improvements.
2.09 Road Frontage Required
No lot shall contain any dwelling unless it abuts at least twenty (20) feet on a street, or
unless it conforms to the easement of access required in Section 2.08 of this Article.
12
2.10 Traffic Visibility Across Corner Lots
On any corner lot in any district, no fence, structure, planting or any other obstruction shall
be erected and thereafter maintained within fifteen (15) feet in “B-1” and “B-2” Districts,
and twenty (20) feet of the “Corner” in all other districts, so as to interfere with traffic
visibility across the corner, except for single poles for signs or utilities, which do not have to
set back.
2.11 Certain Buildings and Land Uses Excepted
A. Agricultural Uses
Except for compliance with minimum yard requirements, visibility across corner lots, and
for commercial raising of fur bearing animals or hog farms, nothing in this Ordinance shall
prohibit the use of any land for agricultural purposes as defined herein, or the construction
or use of buildings or structures incident to the use for agricultural purposes of the land on
which such buildings or structures are located, in any Conservation, Agricultural or Mining
District
B. Public or Semi-Public Uses
Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance
of essential services, by public utilities, or County, city, borough, township or other
governmental agencies, and no zoning certificate shall be required for any such structures;
provided, however, that the provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to buildings, towers,
or storage yards of such public utilities or governmental agencies except when conforming
to the procedure specified by Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act No. 247,
Article VI, Section 619.
2.12 Time Limitation
No Zoning Permit for construction, erection, or alteration of any building or structure or part
thereof, or for signs or outdoor advertisements, or part thereof, shall be valid for more than
one (1) year unless work at the site has commenced within such period.
2.13 Notice of Starting Work
The Zoning Officer shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours notice by owner or
applicant prior to commencement of work at site under zoning permits.
2.14 Refiling of Disapproved or Withdrawn Cases
If a case is disapproved by the Governing Body of Luzerne County, thereafter the Governing
Body of Luzerne County shall take no further action on another case for substantially the
13
same proposal on the same property, until one (1) year after the date of such disapproval. If
a case before the Governing Body of Luzerne County is advertised, and thereafter
withdrawn by the applicant before or at the meeting of the Governing Body of Luzerne
County, he shall be precluded from filing another application for substantially the same
proposal on the same premises for six (6) months, and the case shall be readvertised.
ARTICLE 3 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
3.01 Types of Districts
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the area of Luzerne County, Pennsylvania, exclusive of
the territory within any city, borough, or township having a zoning ordinance in effect, is
hereby divided into the following districts:
“C-1” Conservation District
“A-1” Agricultural District
“S-1” Suburban Residence District
“R-1” One-Family Residence District
“R-2” Two-Family Residence District
“R-3” Apartment Residence District
“B-1” Neighborhood Business District
“B-2” Community Business District
“B-3” Highway Business District
“B-4” General Business District
“M-1” Mining District
“M-2” Light Industrial District
“M-3” Heavy Industrial District
3.02 Zoning Maps
The boundaries of these zoning districts are hereby established on a series of maps,
designated “Zoning Maps for Luzerne County, Pennsylvania”, which are hereby made a part
of this Ordinance, together with all existing and future notations, references and
amendments. The said “Zoning Maps” shall be and remain on file in the Office of the
Luzerne County Planning Commission.
14
The district boundary lines on the Zoning Maps are intended to follow property lines or the
centers of streets, alleys, railroads or watercourses. In the case of unsubdivided property, the
district boundary lines shall be determined by scaling.
In order to determine a property’s zoning district, the Luzerne County Assessment Property
Identification Number must be given to the Planning Commission office, in person or by
telephone (570) 825-1560.
ARTICLE 4 - DISTRICT USES
4.01 “C-1” - Conservation District 4.02 “A-1” - Agricultural District
Permitted Uses: Permitted Uses:
Agriculture Agriculture
Nurseries and Greenhouses Greenhouses and Nurseries
Parks Home Occupations
Private Recreational Facilities Public Uses Except
Recreational
Public Uses Except Recreational Recreational Facilities, Private
Semi-Public Uses (not contagious) Semi-Public Uses (not contagious)
Single-Family Home Single or Two-Family Home
State Game Lands Trailers and Mobile Homes
Trailers and Mobile Homes Utilities (except yards & buildings)
Utilities (except yards & buildings) Ventilating Shafts
Ventilating Shafts Accessory Uses to the Above
Accessory Uses to the Above Communications Antennas mounted on
an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or
other structure, and communications
equipment building.
Special Exception Uses: Special Exception Uses:
Cemeteries Airports
Commercial Recreational Facilities Animal Hospital, Clinic or Kennels
Extraction and Underground Storage Cemeteries
of Gas and Oil Extraction and Underground Storage
Extraction of Peat Moss & Minerals of Gas and Oil
Home Occupations Extraction of Peat Moss & Minerals
Planned Residential Developments Nursing Homes
Public Recreational Facilities Planned Residential Developments
Radio or TV Sending or Boosting Stations Public Recreational Facilities
15
Raising Fur-Bearing Animals (except pets) Radio or TV Sending or Boosting
Roadside Stands Stations
Solid Waste Disposal Areas Raising Fur-Bearing Animals (except
Semi-Public Uses (contagious) pets) and Commercial Hog Farms
Storage of Explosives Recreational Facilities (commercial)
Strip Mines, Quarries, or Gravel Pits Solid Waste Disposal Areas
Trailer Parks and Mobile Home Parks Sawmills
Utility Buildings and Yards Semi-Public Uses (contagious)
Accessory Uses to the Above Sewerage Disposal Plants
Communications Towers (Section 8.04B) Storage of Explosives
Strip Mines, Quarries or Gravel Pits
Tourist Homes
Trailer Parks and Mobile Home Parks
Utility Building and Yards
Communications Towers(Section 8.04)
Convalescent Homes
Accessory Uses to the Above
4.03 “S-1” Suburban 4.04 “R-1” Single-Family
Residence District Residence District
Permitted Uses: Permitted Uses:
Agriculture (except kennels, hatcheries, One-Family Detached Dwellings
commercial chicken farms) Public Uses Except Recreational
One-Family Detached Dwellings Semi-Public Uses (except hospitals,
Public Uses, Except Recreational sanitaria and nursing homes)
Semi-Public Uses (hospitals, sanitaria Utilities (except buildings and
yards)
and nursing homes) Accessory Uses to the Above
Utilities (except buildings and yards) No-Impact Home Occupations
Accessory Uses to the Above
Communications Antennas mounted
on an existing public utility
transmission tower.
No-Impact Home Occupations
16
Special Exception Uses: Special Exception Uses:
Cemeteries Branch Telephone Exchanges
Home Occupations Cemetery Extensions
Hospitals or Sanitaria (not contagious) Home Occupations
Mobile Homes Hospitals or Sanitaria (not contagious)
Planned Residential Developments Mobile Homes
Professional Offices Planned Residential Developments
Public Recreational Facilities Private Recreational Facilities
Wireless Transmitting or Booster Stations Professional Offices
Private Recreational Facilities Public Recreational Facilities
Accessory Uses to the Above Accessory Uses to the Above
4.05 “R-2” Two-Family 4.06 “R-3” Apartment
Residence District Residence District
Permitted Uses: Permitted Uses:
One-Family Detached Dwellings Dormitories, Fraternities, or
Public Uses Except Recreation Sororities
Semi-Public Uses Home Occupations
Two-Family Dwellings Multiple Dwellings
Utilities (except buildings and yards) One-Family Detached Dwellings
Accessory Uses to the Above Professional Offices
No-Impact Home Occupations Public Uses
Rooming or Boarding Houses
Semi-Public Uses (except
contagious diseases
Two-Family Dwellings
Utilities (except yards and
buildings
Accessory Uses to the Above
Special Exception Uses: Special Exception Uses:
Cemetery Extensions Cemeteries
Home Occupations Grouped Professional Offices
Mobile Homes Mobile Homes
Planned Residential Developments Mortuaries
Private Recreational Facilities Nursery Schools
Professional Offices Nursing or Convalescent Homes
Public Recreational Facilities Planned Residential Developments
Roomers or Boarders (maximum of six) Private Clubs or Lodges
Accessory Uses to the Above Private Recreational Facilities
Tourist Homes
Accessory Uses to the Above
17
4.07 “B-1” Neighborhood 4.08 “B-2” Community
Business District Business District
Permitted Uses: Permitted Uses:
Banks Banks
Cafes or Restaurants (without entertainment) Cafes or Restaurants (without
Mortuaries entertainment_
Neighborhood Retail Stores Clubs and Lodges
Personal Services Commercial Offices
Professional Offices including clinics Mortuaries
Public Uses Parking Areas
Semi-Public Uses Personal Services
Service Station (minor repairs) Professional Offices including clinics
Soda Fountains Public Uses
Taverns Retail Stores
Utilities (except yards) Semi-Public Uses
Accessory Uses to the Above
Service Stations
Soda Fountains
Taverns
Utilities (except yards)
Accessory Uses to the Above
Special Exception Uses: Special Exception Uses:
Clubs or Lodges Drive-In Commercial Uses
Multiple Dwellings (not including theaters)
Theaters (indoors) Entertainment Facilities
Accessory Uses to the Above Multiple Dwellings
Accessory Uses to the Above
18
4.09 “B-3” Highway 4.10 “B-4” General
Business District Business District
Permitted Uses: Permitted Uses:
Amusement Parks Animal Hospitals, Clinics or Kennels
Animal Hospitals, Clinics, or Kennels Billiard and Pool Rooms
Cemeteries Bulk Fuel Storage
Commercial Greenhouses and Plant Business Services
nurseries Cleaning, Laundry, and
Commercial Horse Race Track & Riding Dyeing Plants
Stables Commercial Recreation
Drive-In Commercial Uses (not including Equipment Sales and Repair
theaters) Food Processing
Entertainment Facilities Service Garages and/or
Feed and Grain Sales & Storage Vehicular Sales (excluding
Service Garages and/or Vehicular Sales storing junked vehicles
(excluding body work) outdoors)
Golf Driving Ranges & Miniature Golf Hotels
Mortuaries Lumber Yards
Motels and Tourist Courts Machine Shops
Offices and Banks Mortuaries
Outdoor Advertisements Outdoor Advertisements
Personal Services Personal Services
Professional Activities Printing, Lithographing or
Public and Semi-Public Uses Publishing Plants
Restaurants Public and Semi-Public Uses
Retail Businesses Research and Testing Facilities
Service Stations Restaurants
Tourist Homes Retail Businesses
Utilities Second-Hand Stores and Pawn
Accessory Uses to the Above Shops
Stone or Monument Works
Taverns
Tire Retreading and Recapping
Used Car or Trailer Lots
Utilities
Welding Shops
Wholesale Business
Accessory Uses to the Above
19
Special Exception Uses: Special Exception Uses:
Apartments Adult Entertainment/Bookstore
Drive-In Theaters (Theater)
Equipment Sales and Repair Contractors Yards
Race Tracks, Automobiles Communications Towers(Sec.8.04B)
Trailer Parks Crematory
Truck Terminals
Wholesale Business
Accessory Uses to the Above
Communications Towers(Section 8.04B)
Crematory
4.11 “M-1” Mining District
Permitted Uses:
Bulk Fuel Storage
Contractors Yards
Railroad Yards
Storage of Materials Excavated
Tipples
Trucking Contractors Yards
Utilities
Accessory Uses to the Above
Special Exception Uses:
Areas of Deep Coal Mining
Correctional Institution
Extraction and Underground Storage of Gas and Oil
Extraction of Peat Moss
Excavation of Sand and Gravel
Junk Yards
Manufacturing Uses
Processing of Materials Excavated
Quarrying of Rock
Storage of Explosives
Solid Waste Disposal Areas
Strip Mining
Accessory Uses to the Above
Communications Towers(Section 8.04B)
Crematory
20
4.12 “M-2” Light Industrial District
Permitted Uses:
Communications Antennas mounted on an existing public utility transmission tower,
Building or other structure, and communications equipment building.
Performance Standards:
A. Smoke
The emission of gray smoke at a density greater than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart
published by the Bureau of Mines (Power’s Micro-Ringelmann Chart, McGraw Hill
Publishing Company, 1954, may be used) shall not be permitted except gray smoke of a
shade not darker than No. 2 may be emitted for not more than 4 minutes in any 30 minutes.
These provisions, applicable to gray smoke, shall also apply to visible smoke of a different
color but with equivalent apparent opacity.
B. Fly Ash, Soot and Dust
The emission of any particles from any flue or smokestack shall not exceed 0.2 grains per
cubic foot of the flue gas at a stack temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit and 50 percent
excess air, and shall not cause any damage to the health of people, to animals, vegetation, or
other forms, of property, or cause any excessive soiling. All walks, driveways, and parking
or outdoor storage areas shall be paved or dust proofed.
C. Noise
At no point on the boundary of a Residence District, or property line other than a Residence
District Boundary, shall the sound pressure level of any individual operation or plat (other
than background noises produced by sources not under the control of this Ordinance, such as
the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) exceed the decibel levels in
the designated octave bands shown below for the districts indicated:
21
TABLE A
Maximum Permissible Sound Pressure Levels
Maximum Sound Pressure Level in Decibels
(1.0002 dynes per square centimeter)
Octave Band in Decibels Along Residence Decibels Along Property
Cycles Per Second District Boundaries Lines Other Than Residence
District Boundaries
0-75 72 79
76-150 67 74
151-300 59 66
301-600 52 59
601-1200 46 53
1201-2400 40 47
2401-4800 34 41
Above 4800 32 39
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Objectionable noises due to intermittence, beat, frequency or shrillness shall be muffled so
as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
At the specified points of measurement, the sound pressure level of noise radiated
continuously from a facility shall not exceed the values given in Table A in any octave band
of frequency. The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and an
octave band analyzer that conform to specifications published by the American Standards
Association. ( American Standard Sound Level Meters For Measurement of Noise and
Other Sound, 224.3-1944, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, N.Y., and
American Standard Specification for an octave -band filter, set for the analysis of noise and
other sounds, 224. 10-1953, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, N.Y., shall
be used.)
22
D. Odor
No emission of unpleasant gases or other odorous matter shall be permitted in such
quantities as to be offensive outside the lot lines of the tract. Any process which may
involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard
system, so that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard system should fail. There
is hereby established as a guide in determining such quantities of offensive odors Table 3
(Odor Thresholds) in Chapter 5 “Air Pollution Abatement Manual”, copyright 1951 by
Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington, D.C. Where said publication gives
a range of figures, a simple average of these shall be used.
E. Toxic Gases
The emission of gases or fumes injurious to persons or property beyond the lot lines
occupied by the use is prohibited. (Table 1, Industrial Hygiene Standards, Maximum
Allowable Concentration, Chapter 5 of the Air Pollution Abatement Manual furnishes a list
of toxic pollutants.)
F. Glare and Heat
Glare and heat from arc welding, acetylene torch cutting or similar processes shall be
performed so as not to produce glare which is visible, or objectionable heat, beyond the
property line of the lot on which the operation is located. Direct glare from incandescent
exposed lights shall not be visible from adjoining streets or properties.
G. Sewage
No discharge is permitted at any point in any private sewage disposal system or stream or
into the ground, of any materials in such a way or of such nature or temperature as could
contaminate any water supply, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous objectionable
elements except in accordance with the standards as approved by water pollution control
boards or appropriate agencies of the Department of Health. Furthermore, no accumulation
of solid wastes conducive to the breeding of rodents or insects shall be permitted.
H. Vibration
Any use creating intense earth-shaking vibration shall be set back at least five-hundred (500)
feet from the lot lines on all sides, except for lot lines along or inside the Heavy Industrial
District where such setback shall not be required, but in no case shall any vibration be
perceptible along the boundary line of any zoning district other than the Heavy Industrial
District.
23
I. Fire and Safety
All buildings containing uses involving burning materials of any kind shall be of fireproof
construction. Incombustible to moderate burning materials - permitted freely. Free or active
burning to intense burning materials must be: enclosed within incombustible walls, 40-foot
setback or automatic sprinkler, flammable vapors at ordinary temperatures, prohibited. This
subsection shall not apply to the use of fuels. If such use is limited to storage, and movement
of fuel is within appropriate containers or pipes.
Prohibited Uses:
Residential subdivisions and developments and the construction of dwellings on existing
lots zoned as industrial, except for dwellings for watchman, caretaker or farm.
Schools, hospitals, clinics, or other institutions for human care, except where incidental to a
permitted principal use.
Any building for retail business or service, except where incidental to a principal permitted
use.
Junk yards. Farm animals, including horses.
Special Exception Uses:
Communications Towers(Section 8.04B)
Correctional Institution
Crematory
Solid Waste Disposal Areas, subject to the requirements of Section 6.19.
24
4.13 “M-3” Heavy Industrial District
Permitted Uses:
Communications Antennas mounted on an existing public utility transmission tower,
building or other structure, and communications equipment building.
Performance Standards
A. Smoke
The emission of gray smoke at a density greater than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart
published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines (Power’s Micro-Ringelmann Chart, McGraw Hill
Publishing Company, 1954, may be used) shall not be permitted, except gray smoke of a
shade not darker than No. 3 may be emitted for not more than 4 minutes in any 30 minutes.
These provisions, applicable to gray smoke shall also apply to visible smoke of a different
color but with equivalent apparent opacity.
B. Fly Ash, Soot and Dust
The emission of particles from any flue or smokestack shall not exceed 0.3 grains per cubic
foot of flue gas at a stack temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit and 50 percent excess air,
and shall not cause any damage to the health of people, to animals, vegetation, or other
forms of property, or cause any excessive soiling. All walks, driveways, and parking or
outdoor storage area shall be paved or dust-proofed.
C. Noise
At no point on the boundary of a Residence District, or property line other than a Residence
District Boundary, shall the sound pressure level of any individual operation or plant (other
than background noises produced by sources not under the control of this Ordinance, such as
the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) exceed the decibel levels in
the designated octave bands shown for the district indicated:
25
TABLE A
Maximum Permissible Sound Pressure Levels
Maximum Sound Pressure Level in Decibels
( 1.0002 dynes per square centimeter)
Octave Band Cycles Decibels Along Residence Decibels Along Property
Per Second District Boundaries Lines Other Than Residence
District Boundaries
0-75 75 80
76-150 70 75
151-300 65 70
301-600 59 64
601-1200 53 58
1201-2400 48 53
2401-4800 44 49
Above 4800 41 46
Objectionable noises due to, intermittence, beat, frequency or shrillness shall be muffled so
as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
At the specified points of measurement, the sound pressure level of noise radiated
continuously from a facility shall not exceed the values given in Table A in any octave band
of frequency. The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and an
octave band analyzer that conform to specifications published by the American Standards
Association. (American Standard Sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other
Sound, 224.3-1944, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, N.Y. and American
Standards Specification for an octave-band filter set for the analysis of noise and other
sounds and Other Sounds, 224.3-1953, American Standards Association, Inc., New York,
N.Y., shall be used.)
D. Odor
No emission of unpleasant gases or other odorous matter shall be permitted in such
quantities as to be offensive outside the lot lines of the tract. Any process which may
involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard
system, so that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard system should fail. There
is hereby established as a guide in determining such quantities of offensive odors Table 3
(Odor Thresholds) in Chapter 5 “Air Pollution Abatement Manual”, copyright 1951 by
Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington, D.C. Where said publication gives
a range of figures, the highest figure shall be used.
26
Tanneries, stock yards, glue factories, oil refineries, soap factories, rubber manufacturers,
fertilizer manufacture, and similar industries must present detailed plans for elimination of
obnoxious odors before a permit will be granted
E. Toxic Gases
The emission of gases or fumes injurious to persons or property beyond the lot occupied by
the use is prohibited (Table 1 Industrial Hygiene Standards, Maximum Allowable
Concentration, Chapter 5 of the Air Pollution Abatement Manual furnishes a list of toxic
pollutants.)
F. Glare and Heat
Glare and heat from arc welding, acetylene torch cutting or similar processes shall be
performed so as not to produce glare which is visible, or objectionable heat, beyond the
property line of the lot on which the operation is located. Direct glare from incandescent
exposed lights shall not be visible from adjoining streets or properties.
G. Sewage
No discharge is permitted at any point in any private sewage disposal system or stream or
into the ground, or any materials in such a way or of such a nature or temperature as could
contaminate any water supply, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous objectionable
elements, except in accordance with the standards as approved by water pollution control
boards or appropriate agencies of the Department of Health. Furthermore, no accumulation
of solid wastes conducive to the breeding of rodents or insects shall be permitted
H. Vibration
Any use creating intense earth-shaking vibrations shall be set back at least five-hundred
(500) feet from the boundary of a Residence, Commercial or Light-Industrial District, but in
no case shall any vibration be perceptible along the boundary of any District other than
along or in a Heavy Industrial District.
I. Fire and Safety
All buildings containing uses involving burning materials of any kind shall be of fire-proof
construction. Incombustible to moderate burning materials - permitted freely.
Free or active burning to intense burning materials - enclosed within incombustible walls or
protected by automatic sprinkler.
27
Flammable vapors at ordinary temperatures - permitted except within 600 feet of any other
zoning district.
This subsection shall not apply to use of fuels if such use is limited to storage, and
movement of fuel is within appropriate containers or pipes.
J. Special Exception Uses:
Communications Towers(Section 8.04B)
Correctional Institution
Crematory
Junk Yards
Solid Waste Disposal Areas subject to the requirements of Section 6.19.
Uses which cannot conform to the performance standards of Heavy Industrial Districts. The
Board shall require the applicant to make all reasonable efforts to minimize the
objectionable or harmful effects involved, and may require distance provisions, locations
downwind of developed areas, larger lot sizes or any other provisions deemed necessary in
keeping with the public interest.
K. Prohibited Uses:
Residential subdivisions and developments and the construction of dwellings on existing
lots zoned as industrial, except for dwellings for watchman, caretaker, or farm.
Schools, hospitals, clinics, or other institutions for human care, except where incidental to a
permitted principal use.
Any building for retail business or service except where incidental to a principal permitted
use.
Farm animals, including horses.
28
ARTICLE 5 - YARD AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS
DISTRICTS
Type of Regulation Conservation Agricultural
District District
C-1 A-1
Minimum Yards in Feet
Front Yard 50 50
Rear Yard 50 50
Side Yards:
One Side Yard 30 25
Combined Side Yards 60 50
Minimum Lot Dimensions
(Area in Square Feet except 2 acres 1 acre
where acreages are indicated)
Width in Feet 200 150
Minimum Interior Housing
Area Sq. Ft. 525 525
Maximum Building Height (5)
Stories 2.5 2.5
Feet 35 35
Maximum Percentage of
Lot Coverage 20 None
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
1. Except when abutting a Residence District (See Article 7.02C)
2. Neither public water or sewer
3. Either public water but individual sewage disposal system on each lot, or on-lot water systems but a public sewer
system on each lot. (In S-1 District 11,250 is minimum lot size even if they have both public water and sewers.)
4. Served by both public sewer and water systems, 6,000 sq. ft. for a single family, as minimum in R-2 districts.
5. These height requirements shall not apply to any Communications Antennas or Communications Towers.
29
ARTICLE 5 - YARD AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS (CON’T.)
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
Type of Regulation S-1 R-1 R-2 R-3
Minimum Yards in Feet
Front Yard 40 30 25 25
Rear Yard 40 35 30 30
Side Yards:
One Side Yard 15 12 8 5
Combined Side Yard 30 25 16 13
Minimum Lot Dimensions
Area in Sq. Ft.(Except where
acreages are indicated) 20,000(2) 20,000(2) 20,000(2) 6,000(4)
11,250(3) 11,250(3) 11,250(3) 2,000 per D.U.
7,200(4) 6,000(4)
3,500 per D.U.
Width in Feet 100(2) 100(2) 100(2)
75(3) 75(3) 75(3)
60(4) 60(4) 60(4)
Minimum Interior Housing
Area Sq. Ft. 800 700 600 525
Maximum Building Height
Stories 2.5 2.5 2.5
Feet 35 35 35 Distance from
center line of
street
Maximum percentage of Lot
Coverage 30 40 45 50
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
1. Except when abutting a Residence District (See Article 7.02C)
2. Neither public water or sewer
3. Either public water but individual sewage disposal system on each lot, or on-lot water systems but a public sewer
system on each lot. (In S-1 District 11,250 is minimum lot size even if they have both public water and sewers.)
4. Served by both public sewer and water systems, 6,000 sq. ft. for a single family, as minimum in R-2 districts.
30
ARTICLE 5 - YARD AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS(CON’T.)
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Type of Regulation B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4
Minimum yards in Feet
Front Yard 20 15 30 15
Rear Yard 25 30 40 30
Side Yards:
One Side Yard None(1) None(1) 15 None(1)
Combined Side Yards None(1) None(1) 40 None(1)
Minimum Lot Dimensions
Area on Sq. Ft. (except None None None None
where acreages are
indicated)
Width in Feet None None None None
Minimum Interior Housing
Area Sq. Ft. None None None None
Maximum Building Height
Stories 2 3 3 3
Feet 30 40 40 40
Maximum Percentage of
Lot Coverage 25 35 30 40
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
1. Except when abutting a Residence District (See Article 7.02C)
2. Neither public water or sewer
3. Either public water but individual sewage disposal system on each lot, or on-lot water systems but a public sewer
system on each lot. (In S-1 District 11,250 is minimum lot size even if they have both public water and sewers.)
4. Served by both public sewer and water systems, 6,000 sq. ft. for a single family, as minimum in R-2 districts.
5. For B-3 and B-4 districts, these height requirements shall not apply to any Communications Antennas on
Communications Towers.
31
ARTICLE 5 - YARD AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS (CON’T.)
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Type of Regulation M-1 M-2 M-3
Minimum Yards in Feet
Front Yard 40 25 20
Rear Yard 50 30 25
Side Yards:
One Side Yard 25 15 20
Combined Side Yards 50 30 40
Minimum Lot Dimensions
Area in Sq. Ft. (except where None None None
acreages are indicated)
Width in Feet None None None
Minimum Interior Housing
Area Sq. Ft. N.A. N.A. N.A.
Maximum Building Height
Stories None 3 None
Feet None 40 None
Maximum Percentage of
Lot Coverage 10 30 40
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
1. Except when abutting a Residence District (See Article 7.02C)
2. Neither public water or sewer
3. Either public water but individual sewage disposal system on each lot, or on-lot water systems but a public sewer
system on each lot. (In S-1 District 11,250 is minimum lot size even if they have both public water and sewers.)
4. Served by both public sewer and water systems, 6,000 sq. ft. for a single family, as minimum in R-2 districts.
5. These height requirements shall not apply to any Communications Antennas or Communications Towers.
32
ARTICLE 6 - SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS
6.01 Amusement Centers
Amusement centers including bowling alleys, dance halls and similar uses shall provide
proper parking areas with vehicular circulation designed so as to minimize traffic
congestion, shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to any property line, shall provide adequate
screening from any Residence District, and shall prevent offensive noise, vibration and
lighting.
6.02 Animal Hospital and Similar Uses
No animal hospital, veterinary clinic and kennel shall be located closer than 100 feet to any
Residence District, or existing restaurant, hotel, motel, tourist court or trailer camp.
Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent offensive noise and odor.
6.03 Animals in Residence, Business and Mining Districts
Farm animals, including horses, shall not be kept in Residence, Neighborhood Business,
Community Business and Mining Districts. Household pets shall be limited to four (4)
combined per family in Residence Districts.
6.04 Outdoor Advertisements and Signs (Defined in Article 11)
A. General Provisions
The following outdoor advertisements and signs are permitted in any zone, as limited in
Section 6.04D; if illuminated, they shall be of an enclosed lamp design, non-flashing,
containing no colored illumination, and may also be of the reflector type.
A sign indicating the name or number of the owner and/or premises or the accessory use of a
dwelling for a home occupation or for professional purposes, provided that such sign shall
not exceed one square foot in area.
One bulletin board on church, school, or college property, not over 20 square feet in area.
A sign on a farm, noting the sale of articles grown or produced on premises, provided that
such sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area, shall be at least 10 feet from any public
right-of-way and at least 50 feet from the nearest corner of a road intersection.
Directional or informational signs of a public or quasi public nature, not exceeding six (6)
square feet in area. Such signs shall contain no advertising matter, and shall not be
illuminated, but may be of the beaded reflector type.
33
No signs for Adult Entertainment/Adult Bookstore (Theater) operations shall contain
photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner, and may
contain only the name of the regulated establishment.
B. Real Estate Signs
A temporary real estate sign, not exceeding six (6) square feet in area, indicating the sale or
lease only of the property on which such sign is displayed; provided that where parcels of
land are offered for sale or lease, having a road frontage of 200 feet or more, a sign or signs
totaling not more than 20 square feet in area for each 200 feet of frontage may be posted.
The sign shall be removed from the premises within 30 days after the sale or rental thereof.
One temporary sign not exceeding 60 square feet in area in subdivisions containing less than
25 lots and located therein, and set back from every street line the distance required for a
principal building in the district in which it is located.
One temporary sign not exceeding 150 square feet in area in subdivisions containing 25 or
more lots and located therein and set back from every street line a minimum distance in feet
equal to the number of square feet of the sign, but such setback shall not be less than the
distance required for a principal building in the district in which the sign is located, and
need not be more than 100 feet in any case.
C. Construction Advertisements
Building contractors’ and professional persons’ temporary advertisement on or adjacent to
buildings under construction, limited to a total area for all such signs of 150 square feet.
D. Business or Industrial Signs
Business or industrial signs are permitted in business or industrial zones, under the
following conditions, as limited in Section 6.04D.
Number of Signs:
The number of signs shall be limited to three for each street on which the establishment
fronts, as for instance, one parallel, one projecting, and one free-standing sign. In addition,
one identification sign for a shopping center or other integrated group of stores, commercial
buildings, or industrial buildings, may be added for each street on which the properties
front; provided that no such signs shall be located within 100 feet of any existing principal
building on adjoining residential premises on the same side of the street, or opposite land
zoned for residential purposes on the other side of the street. Temporary professionally made
signs are also permitted limited to 48 square feet in size.
34
Size of Signs:
The maximum size of a sign for one business or industrial establishment shall be as follows:
B-1 District - 50 square feet
B-2 District - 60 square feet
Other commercial or industrial districts: In square feet, four times the frontage of the lot on
which the sign is located
The maximum size of a sign for a shopping center, or integrated group of stores or industrial
establishments shall be 180 square feet.
E. Outdoor Advertisements
Outdoor advertisements are limited to the B-3, B-4, M-1, and M-3 districts.
Location: No outdoor advertisement shall be permitted within 200 feet of any Residence
District, nor facing any public or parochial school, library, church, hospital or similar
institutional use if closer than 200 feet.
Spacing: No two outdoor advertisements shall be located closer to one another than the
distance equal to one-fifth of their combined gross square foot area, except that no two such
advertisements shall be closer to one another than 120 feet.
Setbacks: Outdoor advertisements shall conform with all yard spaces required for the
district in which they are located.
Size: The total surface area of any outdoor advertisements, exclusive of structural supports
and trim, shall not exceed in square feet, four times the frontage of the lot or tract on which
it or they stand, nor shall any individual advertisement of a poster panel exceed 300 square
feet, or painted advertisement - 600 square feet. However, where a lot or tract is already
occupied by a use or structure exhibiting signs, the total surface area of signs and outdoor
advertisements shall not exceed in square feet, four times the lot frontage.
F. Limitations for All Signs and Outdoor Advertisements
Their surface shall include only one face, and if composed of individual letters, figures or
designs, the space between and around such letters, figures or designs.
Any free-standing or projecting sign or outdoor advertisement within 25 feet of a street
right-of-way line shall be so placed as to allow clear and ample visual sight lines for
driveways leading into a street, for the intersection of two streets, or a street with an alley.
35
G. Height
Maximum Height: No sign or outdoor advertisement shall project above the height limit of
structures in the district in which it is located, nor shall it extend more than 20 feet above the
highest part of the roof.
Clearance: No hanging, suspended or projected sign (except in service station driveways)
or outdoor advertisement, shall have a vertical clearance of less than 14 feet over any
vehicular public way, nor less than nine feet over any pedestrian public way. In service
station driveways, the minimum clearance shall be 12 feet. Public ways used in this subsection
include privately-owned sidewalks or drives, customarily used by the public
H. Maintenance
All signs and outdoor advertisements shall be maintained in good condition, as determined
by the Zoning Officer, otherwise they shall be ordered removed, after due notice.
I. Projections
No sign or outdoor advertisement shall project from the wall of a building more than six (6)
feet.
J. Lighting or Moving
If illuminated, the light shall be confined to the surface of the sign or outdoor advertisement,
which shall be located and arranged as to avoid glare or reflection onto any portion of any
designated highway or into the path of incoming vehicles, or into any adjacent residential
premises.
Flashing or moving outdoor advertisements shall not be permitted in any district, and
flashing or moving signs are not permitted in any district except B-2, B-3, B-4 districts,
where signs are located on business premises, and where these signs are located and
arranged as to avoid glare or reflection onto any portion of any adjacent highway or into the
path of oncoming vehicles. or into any adjacent residential premises.
6.05 Cemeteries, Crematories, Columbaria, and Mausoleums
Due consideration shall be given to compatibility with adjacent land uses, existing or
proposed highways, and any elements or factors deemed to affect the public health, safety,
and welfare of the surrounding area, and a minimum setback may be required from any
property line for any structure, grave or place of temporary or permanent burial, and such
walls, fences, and/or planting of shrubbery, trees or vines may be required as may be
reasonable and proper to afford adequate screening.
36
6.06 Community Buildings, Social Halls, Lodges, Fraternal Organizations, Clubs, And
Similar Social Or Recreational Establishments
Buildings housing any of these uses shall be distant not less than 20 feet from any other lot
in any Residence District, and there shall be no external evidence of any gainful activity,
however incidental, nor any access to any spaces used for gainful activity, other than within
the building.
6.07 Day Nursery, Nursery School, Private Kindergarten, Or Child Welfare Center
. These uses may be permitted provided there is established and maintained in connection
therewith, a suitably fenced and screened play lot meeting with requirements of Section
7.02CL and provided that there is no nuisance created by reason of noise, health or other
condition.
6.08 Drive-In Theaters
Where possible, access shall be to minor roads, rather than highways, to reduce congestion
and accidents.
Theater screens shall be placed so that they are not visible from a highway, or shall be
screened with adequate fencing or planting.
No central loud speakers shall be permitted.
All parts of the theater shall be at least 200 feet from any Residence District.
6.09 Golf Driving Ranges and Miniature Golf
All lighting installations shall be such and be so arranged as not to increase traffic hazards
or to cause direct or glaring reflection into adjoining premises.
6.10 Home Occupations
A home occupation shall be an incidental use of a dwelling unit conducted only by residents
of the building, who may not employ more than one additional non-resident person. The
following additional conditions shall be fulfilled:
A. Where Permitted:
Within a single dwelling unit, provided that only one home occupation per dwelling unit is
permitted.
37
B. Evidence of Use:
No exterior evidence of the home occupation shall be visible, other than a permitted sign.
C. Extent of Use:
Not more than 20 percent of the gross floor area of any dwelling unit may be used for a
home occupation, except for medical and dental offices and foster family care, which may
use up to 40 percent.
D. Permitted Uses:
Fine arts studios, professional and medical offices, dressmaking, and similar occupations,
but excluding commercial stables or kennels, and any occupation that may customarily
require the use of a panel or delivery truck more than one ton, or similar vehicle. Outdoor
storage of materials or products is also prohibited. Any use which produces offensive and
disturbing noise, smoke, odor, or other objectionable effect is prohibited.
E. No Impact Home Occupations: The business activity shall be compatible with the
residential use of the property and surrounding properties, have no non-resident employee,
no display or sale of retail goods, no inventory of a substantial amount, no parking, lights, or
signs. The business shall not create noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical or
electronic interference, including with radio or television reception. The business may
not generate solid waste, or sewage, which is above the normal residential amount, must be
conducted entirely within the dwelling unit not using more than 25% of the floor area, and
may not involve an illegal activity.
6.11 Hospitals and Related Uses
Hospitals, sanitaria, and convalescent or nursing homes shall locate future structures or
extensions thereto, at least 100 feet distant from any lot in any Residence District, or any lot
occupied by a dwelling, school, church or institution for human care.
Hospitals or sanitaria which do not primarily treat communicable diseases, insane or feebleminded
patients, epileptics, drug addicts or alcoholic patients, and which are not penal or
correctional institutions, shall have a minimum size of three acres. Other hospitals and
sanitaria shall have a minimum size of 15 acres.
38
6.12 Junk Yards and Similar Storage Areas - Including Automobile Wrecking
All junk yards shall be completely screened from roads or developed areas with a solid fence
or wall six (6) feet or more in height, maintained in good condition, and painted except for
masonry construction, or with suitable plantings.
No operations shall be conducted which shall cause a general nuisance or endanger the
public health.
All existing junk yards shall comply with these requirements within one year of the date of
this Ordinance, or shall then terminate their operation.
6.13 Motels
No motel shall have a lot area of less than one acre, nor a lot area per sleeping unit of less
than 2,000 square feet.
Motels shall utilize collective sewers connected with a sewage disposal system approved by
the State Department of Health.
6.14 Off-Street Loading and Parking
A. Off-Street Loading
Every building which requires the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material
or merchandise, shall provide off-street loading berths in accordance with the Table below:
39
OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
Uses Floor Area(Sq. Ft.) Required Berths
Schools 15,000 or more 1
Hospitals(including
ambulance space) 10,000 - 300,000 1
For each additional 1 additional
300,000 or major
fraction thereof
Undertakers & 5,000 1
Funeral Parlors
For each additional 1 additional
5,000 or major
fraction thereof
Hotels and Offices 10,000 or more 1
Commercial, Wholesale 10,000 - 25,000 1
Manufacturing and 25,000 - 40,000 2
Storage 40,000 - 60,000 3
60,000 - 100,000 4
For each additional 1 additional
50,000 or major
fraction thereof
Each loading space shall not be less than ten (10) feet in width, 35 feet in length, and 14 feet in
height and may occupy all or part of a required yard.
40
B. Off-Street Parking
In all districts, off-street parking facilities shall be provided and properly maintained, as set
forth in this section, for any building which is hereafter erected, enlarged or increased in
capacity. Such facilities shall be made available for public use.
Size and Access:
Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than 180 square feet exclusive of
access drives or aisles and be in usable shape and condition. Except in the case of dwellings,
no parking area shall contain less than three spaces.
There shall be adequate ingress and egress to all parking spaces. Where a lot does not abut
on a public or private alley or easement of access, there shall be provided an access drive
leading to the parking or storage areas or loading spaces. Such access drive shall not be less
than 10 feet in width in the case of a dwelling, and not less than 20 feet in all other cases.
Access to off-street parking areas shall be limited to several well-defined locations, and in
no case shall there be unrestricted access along the length of a street or alley
Number of Parking Spaces Required:
The number of off-street parking spaces required is set forth in the following Table. Where
the use of the premises is not specifically mentioned, requirements for similar uses shall
apply.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
USES REQUIRED SPACES
1. Automobile Laundry 5 for each laundry machine
2. Automobile Sales & Service Garages 1 for each 400 sq. ft. of floor area
3. Banks or Professional Offices 1 for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area
4. Bowling Alleys 5 for each alley
5. Churches and Schools 1 for each 3.5 seats in an auditorium, or 1 for
each 17 classroom seats, whichever is greater
6. Community Bldgs. & Social Halls 1 for each 100 sq. ft. of floor area
41
7. Driving Ranges & Miniature Golf 1 for each tee
8. Food Supermarkets 1 for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area
9. Funeral Homes, Mortuaries 5 for each parlor
10. Furniture or Appliance Stores 1 for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area
11. Hospitals, Nursing and 1 for each 3 beds, plus 1 for each employee
Convalescent Homes
12. Hotels 1 space unit for each 2 living or sleeping units
13. Manufacturing Plants, Research or 1 for each 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area, plus 1 for
Testing Labs, Bottling Plants each 4 employees in the maximum working
shift. The total parking area shall not be less
than 25% of the building floor area.
14. Medical or Dental Offices 5 spaces for each doctor or dentist
15. Multiple Dwellings 1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit
16. Restaurants, Beer Parlors, & 1 for each 2.5 seats
Night Clubs
17. Retail Stores and Shops 1 for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area, where the
floor area exceeds 1,000 sq. ft.
18. Rooming Houses & Dormitories 1 for each 2 bedrooms
19. Service Stations 2 for each service bay
20. Single & 2-Family Dwellings 1 for each family or dwelling unit
21. Sports Arenas, Auditoriums, 1 for each 3.5 seats
Theaters, Assembly Halls
22. Trailer or Monument Sales or 1 for each 2500 sq. ft. of lot area
Auctions
23. Wholesale Establishments or 1 for each 2 employees on maximum shift.
Warehouses The total parking area shall not be less than
25% of the building floor area.
42
Location of Facilities:
Required facilities shall be located on the same zone lot as the use to which they are
accessory, or else within a radius of 400 feet; provided that required spaces conform with
the provisions set forth herein, and that such spaces shall be in the same ownership as the
use to which they are accessory and shall be subject to deed restrictions filed in an office of
record, binding the owner and his heirs or assigns to maintain the required number of spaces
throughout the life of such use.
C. Facilities or Requirements for Parking and/or Loading
Off-street parking and loading facilities may be provided jointly for separate uses if
approved by the Zoning Hearing Board. The total number of spaces shall not be less than the
sum of the separate requirements for each use, and shall comply with all regulations
governing location of accessory spaces.
D. Development of Parking Lots and Loading Areas (including Commercial Parking
Lots, Automobile or Trailer Sales Lots)
Screening and Landscaping:
Off-street parking areas for more than five vehicles, and off-street loading areas, shall be
effectively screened on each side which adjoins or faces residential or institutional premises
situated in any Residence District.
Minimum Distances and Setbacks:
No off-street loading area or parking area for more than five (5) vehicles shall be closer than
ten (10) feet to any adjoining dwelling, school, hospital, or similar institution. If it adjoins a
Residence District, no parking area shall be located less than ten (10) feet from the
established street right-of-way line within 50 feet of any Residence District.
Surfacing:
Surfacing shall consist of an asphaltic or Portland cement binder pavement (or similar
durable and dustless surface), graded and drained to dispose of all surface water, and
designed to provide for orderly and safe loading and parking.
Lighting:
Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking or loading areas shall be arranged so as to
reflect the light away from adjoining premises in any Residence District.
43
6.15 Planned Building Groups
Integrated Neighborhood and Community Shopping Centers
A. Preliminary Plan and Minimum Size
The owner of a tract of land located in any district at or near where a proposed shopping
center is shown on the Land Use Plan of Luzerne County, containing not less than two (2)
acres in the case of a neighborhood shopping center (B-1 District type), and not less than
fifteen (15) acres in case of a community shopping center (B-2 District type), shall submit to
the Commission for its review a preliminary plan for the use and development of such tract
of land for an integrated shopping center.
B. Applicant’s Financial Ability
In accepting such plan for review, the Commission must be satisfied that the proponents of
the integrated neighborhood or community shopping center are financially able to carry out
the proposed project; that they intend to start construction within one (1) year of the
approval of the project and necessary change in zoning, and intend to complete it within a
reasonable time as determined by the Commission.
C. Commission Findings
It then shall be the duty of the Planning Commission to investigate and ascertain whether the
location, size and other characteristics of the site, and the proposed plan, comply with the
following conditions:
Need Must Be Demonstrated: The need for the proposed center at the proposed location,
to provide adequate shopping facilities or service to the surrounding neighborhood or
community, as the case may be, has been demonstrated by the applicant by means of market
studies or such other evidence as the Planning Commission may require.
Adequacy of Site: The proposed shopping center is of sufficient but not excessive size to
provide adequate neighborhood or community shopping facilities, as the case may be, for
the population which may reasonably be expected to be served by such shopping facilities.
Traffic Congestion Not To Be Created: The proposed shopping center is located so that
reasonably direct traffic access is supplied from principal thoroughfares, and where
congestion will not likely be created by the proposed center; or where such congestion will
be obviated by presently projected improvement of access thoroughfares, by demonstrable
provisions in the plan for proper entrances and exits, and by internal provisions for traffic
and parking.
44
Integrated Design: The plan shall provide for a shopping center consisting of one or more
groups of establishments in buildings of integrated and harmonious design, together with
adequate and properly arranged traffic and parking facilities and landscaping. The project
shall be arranged in an attractive and efficient manner, convenient, pleasant and safe to use,
and fitting harmoniously into, and having no adverse effects upon, adjoining or surrounding
properties.
D. Permitted Uses
The uses permitted in an integrated neighborhood shopping center shall be those retail
business, commercial, and service uses permitted in the B-1 District, and the uses permitted
in an integrated community shopping center shall be the same kinds of uses as permitted in
the B-2 District. No residential uses, commercial uses first permitted in B-3 and B-4
Districts, or industrial uses, shall be permitted, or any use other than such as is necessary or
desirable to supply with goods or services the surrounding neighborhood or community.
E. Minimum Design Standards
The following minimum standards shall be met in the design of an integrated neighborhood
or community shopping center:
Building Heights: No building shall exceed two and one-half stories or thirty-five (35) feet
in height.
Yards and Landscaping: No building shall be less than fifty (50) feet distant from any
boundary of the tract on which the shopping center is located. The center shall be
permanently screened from all abutting properties located in any Residence District by an
appropriate wall of acceptable design, except for necessary entrances and exits, from all
properties located across the street and within one-hundred (100) feet from such center in
any Residence District, by a wall or hedge not less than three (3) feet in height. The exact
type and nature of such screening shall be determined by the Planning Commission
Tract Coverage: The ground area occupied by all the buildings shall not exceed in the
aggregate twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the lot or tract.
Customer Parking Spaces: Notwithstanding any other requirement of this Ordinance,
there shall be provided not less than three (3) square feet of automobile parking space with
suitable access, for each square foot of gross floor devoted to use by patrons.
Loading Space: Notwithstanding any other requirements of this Ordinance, there shall be
provided one (1) off-street loading or unloading space for each twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet or fraction thereof of aggregate floor space of all buildings in the center. At least
one-third of the spaces required shall be sufficient in area and vertical clearance to
accommodate trucks of the tractor-trailer type.
45
F. Submission and Approval of Final Development Plan
Submission to Commission: Upon determination by the Commission that the proposed
integrated neighborhood shopping center or community shopping center, as the case may be,
as shown by the preliminary plan, appears to conform to the requirements of this Section,
and all other applicable requirements of this Ordinance, the proponents shall prepare and
submit a final development plan, which shall incorporate any changes or modifications
required or suggested by the Commission.
Recommendation to the Governing Body of Luzerne County and Public Hearing: If
the final development plan is found to comply with requirements set forth in this Section
and other applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the Commission shall submit said plan
with its report and recommendations, together with the required application by the
proponents of the necessary change in zoning classification of the site of the proposed
center, to the Governing Body of Luzerne County - and copies thereof to the Borough
Council or Board of Township Commissioners, or Township Supervisors having
jurisdiction over the area involved - which shall hold a public hearing on both the
development plan and application for a change in zoning.
Possible Modification and Zoning: Following a public hearing, the Governing Body of
Luzerne County may modify the plan, consistent with the intent and meaning of this
Ordinance, and may rezone the property to the classification permitting the proposed center,
for development in substantial conformity with the final plan, as approved by the Governing
Body of Luzerne County.
Adjustments in Carrying Out The Plan: After the final development plan has been
approved by the Governing Body of Luzerne County, and in the course of carrying out this
plan, adjustments or re-arrangements of buildings, parking areas, loading areas, entrances,
heights, or yards, may be requested by the proponents, and, provided such requests conform
to the standards established by the final development plan and this Ordinance, such
adjustments or re-arrangements may be authorized by the Commission.
46
Planned Residential Developments
A. Application of Comprehensive Plan
Every application for a planned residential development (PRD) shall be based on,
and consistent with, and interpreted in relation to, the Comprehensive Plan of
Luzerne County.
B. Referral to Municipality
Every application for a PRD shall be referred to the Planning Commission and
governing body of the municipality in which it is located and 30 days shall be
given to submit comments or forfeit the right to review.
C. Standards and Conditions for PRD’s
Permitted Uses: The permitted land use requirements of the zone within which the
PRD unit is located shall apply with the exception that:
Open space reservations shall be considered cause for population density and
building intensity increases, and for this purpose the permitted type of dwelling
units may include single-family detached homes, townhouses, garden apartments
or high-rise apartments provided:
In PRDs of less than 50 acres, only the uses permitted in the Zoning District may
be used.
In PRDs of 50 acres or more, a maximum of 20% of the dwellings located within
C-1, A-1, S-1, R-1 and R-2 Districts may be multiple dwellings. A maximum of
one acre of the commercial and professional uses are permitted, for each 100
dwelling units, when planned and gauged primarily for the service and convenience
of residents located in the development, and shall be authorized only to the extent
that such uses are not available in reasonable proximity.
In tracts of land of two-hundred (200) or more acres, additional uses may be
permitted if approved by the Governing Body of Luzerne County.
47
D. Prohibited Locations
PRDs are prohibited in commercial, mining, and industrial zoning districts.
Density and Intensity of Land Use
Number of Dwelling Units Permitted:
The maximum number of dwelling units that may be approved in a PRD shall be
computed by dividing the net development area by the minimum lot or lot area per
dwelling unit required by the district or districts in which the area is located. The
area of land set aside for common space or recreational use shall be included in the
net development area.
Lot Area: No lot or area per dwelling unit in any district listed below shall be
reduced in area below the following minimum standards:
Permitted PRD
Required Lot Size Lot Size
Zoning District (Sq. Ft. or Acres) (Sq. Ft. or Acres)
C-1 2 acres 40,000
A-1 1 acre 20,000
S-1 20,000(1) 12,000(1)
11,250(2) 9,000(2)
R-1 20,000(1) 12,000(1)
11,250(2) 9,000(2)
7,200(3) 6,000(3)
R-2 20,000(1) 12,000(1)
11,250(2) 9,000(2)
6,000(3) 6,000(3)
3,500/D.U. 3,000/D.U.
R-3 6,000 6,000
2,000/D.U. 1,500/D.U.
(1). Neither public water nor sewer.
(2). Individual sewage system on each lot, but public water; or individual water system on each lot, but
public sewers.
(3). Public water and sewer.
Note: D.U. - Dwelling Unit
48
Ownership and Subdivision: The tract or parcel of land involved must be either
in one ownership or the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of all
the property included (the holder of a written option to purchase land, and a
redeveloper under contract with the Redevelopment Agency to acquire land by
purchase or lease, shall for purposes of such application be deemed to be an owner
of such land), or by any governmental agency including a Redevelopment Agency.
It must constitute an area of at least twenty acres or be bounded on all sides by
streets, public open spaces, or the boundary lines of less restrictive use districts.
The application may include a proposed subsequent division of the tract or parcel
of land involved into one or more separately-owned and operated units. Such
proposed subsequent division, if approved along with the PRD, shall be permissible
without further approval; otherwise, subsequent division of a PRD shall be
permitted only upon application to the Governing Body of Luzerne County through
the Planning Commission as provided in the PRD Section.
Standards and Other Conditions
Open Space: Areas set aside for open space under this Ordinance shall be
consistent with the comprehensive plan of the County or municipality for
future land use. Any such area shall not contain any structure other than one
related to a recreational use.
Within the PRD, common open space shall be set aside for the use and benefit of
the residents of the PRD.
The deed or deeds to any land set aside as open space must contain a restriction,
in a form acceptable to the Governing Body of Luzerne County (Body), to be duly
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in and for said Luzerne County,
eliminating the possibility of further subdivision of said open space in the future.
The developer of a PRD shall make adequate provision for the ownership and
continuing maintenance of open space and improvements thereon by the
establishment of a homeowners organization which is approved by the Body. Such
homeowners’ organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of any or all of
the open space in any manner whatsoever, except to a separate organization of
homeowners’ conceived and established to own and maintain said open space from
being dedicated to the public by the acceptance of a deed of dedication by the Body,
at its sole discretion.
The developer of a PRD shall submit full details concerning the proposed
homeowners’ organization, its powers, rights, duties, responsibilities, etc., in regard
to the ownership, and maintenance of the common open space, which shall be
subject to approval by the Body. No final plan shall be approved by the Body
without such prior approval.
49
Other Standards: The following requirements shall apply to single-family
detached units:
The lot for each home shall have a width at the building line of not less than 60 feet
and a width at the street line not less than 50 feet; the building area shall not exceed
20% of the lot area. There shall be a front yard on each street on which the lot abuts
the depth of which shall be at least 40 feet. There shall be two (2) side yards, one on
each side of the building, together having an aggregate width of not less than 25
feet, but neither having a width of less than 10 feet. There shall be a rear yard, the
depth of which shall be at least 30 feet.
The following requirements shall apply to single-family semi-detached homes:
The lot for each home shall have a width at the building line and at the street line of
not less than 50 feet. The building area shall not exceed 30% of the lot area. There
shall be a front yard on each street on which the lot abuts, the depth of which shall
be at least 30 feet. There shall be one side yard for each home which shall be
at least 15 feet wide. There shall be a rear yard, the depth of which shall be at least
30 feet.
The following requirements shall apply to single-family attached homes:
The minimum lot size shall be 6,000 sq. ft. The lot for each home shall have a
width of not less than 30 feet at the building line and at the street line. No
individual section of cluster or group housing shall contain more than 6 singlefamily
townhouses. Each single-family townhouse shall have a setback of not
less than 40 feet from an interior road right-of-way within the PRD. No part of
any section of cluster or group housing shall be erected within 150 feet of any other
building or structure in the PRD.
Each single-family townhouse shall contain at least 1200 sq. ft. of habitable floor
area. In no case shall any building or structure exceed 30 feet in height above the
ground slab.
Each dwelling unit shall have 2 off-street parking spaces. The county or municipality
concerned shall not be obligated to accept the dedication of streets and/or
roads within the PRD, but the PRD however, must conform to all the requirements
applicable to the size, design and construction of municipal roads and streets.
Flexibility of a municipality to complement the existing neighboring properties and
the municipality as a whole is a prime objective of this Ordinance; the combination
of uniqueness and beauty of design and architecture in a PRD is encouraged.
50
E. Enforcement and Modification of the Provisions of the Plan
To further the mutual interest of the residents of the PRD and of the public in the
preservation of the integrity of the development plan, as finally approved, and to
insure that modifications, if any, in the development plan shall not impair the
reasonable reliance of the said residents upon the provisions of the development
plan, and not result in changes that would adversely affect the public interest, the
enforcement and modification of the provisions of the development plan as finally
approved, whether those are recorded by plat, covenant, easement, or otherwise
shall be subject to the following provisions:
The provisions of the development plan relating to the use, bulk and location of
buildings and structures, the quantity and location of common open space (except
as otherwise provided in the PRD Section), and the intensity of use or the density
of residential unit shall run in favor of Luzerne County, and shall be enforceable in
law or in equity by Luzerne County without limitation on any powers of regulation
otherwise granted Luzerne County.
All provisions of the development plan shall run in favor of the residents of the
PRD, but only to the extent expressly provided in the development plan and in
accordance with the terms of the development plan, and to that extent said provision
whether recorded by plat, covenant, easement or otherwise, may be enforced
at law or equity by said residents acting individually, jointly or through an
organization designated in the development plan to act on their behalf, provided,
however, that no provision of the development plan shall be implied to exist in
favor of residents of the PRD except as to those portions of the development plan
which have been finally approved and have been recorded.
All those provisions of the development plan authorized to be enforced by Luzerne
County under this section may be modified, removed or released by the Governing
Body of Luzerne County (Body) except grants or easements relating to the service or
equipment of a public utility subject to the following conditions:
No such modification, removal, or release of the provision of the development
plan by the municipality shall affect the rights of the residents of the PRD to
maintain and enforce those provisions, at law or equity, as provided in this
section;
No modification, removal or release of the provisions of the development plan
by the County shall be permitted except upon a finding by the Body following a
public hearing thereon pursuant to public notice called and held in accordance with
the provisions of this article, that the same is consistent with the efficient
development and preservation of the entire PRD, does not adversely affect either the
enjoyment of land abutting upon or across the street from the PRD or the public
interest, and is not granted solely to confer a special benefit upon any person;
51
Residents of the PRD may, to the extent and in the manner expressly authorized
by the provisions of the development plan, modify, remove or release their rights
to enforce the provisions of the development plan, but no such action shall affect
the right of the County to enforce the provisions of the development plan in
accordance with the provisions of this Section.
F. Application for Tentative Approval of a PRD
The application for tentative approval of a PRD shall include a written statement by
the landowner(s) setting forth the reasons why, in his opinion, a PRD would be in
the public interest and would be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the
County or Municipality.
The Planning Commission of Luzerne County shall determine whether or not the
PRD conforms with the Comprehensive Plan of Luzerne County and/or the
Municipality in which it is located, and particularly the Land Use Plan in the
Comprehensive Plan, and shall review the application for tentative approval, and
make recommendation to the Governing Body of Luzerne County.
An application for tentative approval of a PRD shall be informative and shall
contain a detailed plan consisting of the following:
The location, size, soil conditions and topography of the entire tract and adjacent
properties;
The nature and interest of any and all owners of the tract, as well as the owners
of all adjacent neighboring tracts of land;
The density of land use to be allocated to parts of the tract to be developed;
The location and size of the common open space;
The specific details of the proposed homeowners’ organization created to own,
maintain and improve the open space, along with the proposed deed restrictions,
homeowners’ agreements, etc. concerning ownership and maintenance of said
open space;
The feasibility studies of public water and public sanitary sewer lines and treatment
plants, and the location and size of storm water facilities made by an engineer
licensed to practice in Pennsylvania, and the recommendations of the Pennsylvania.
Department of Environmental Protection on the proposed water and sewer systems;
The use, dimension, location, architectural design and elevation of all buildings and
structures, including architectural schematics;
52
The covenants, restrictions, grants of easements, or any other restrictions to be
imposed on the use of land, buildings, and structures, including the location of
the proposed easements for public parking;
The provisions for parking of vehicles and the location and width of all proposed
streets and public and/or private rights-of way;
The existing zoning applicable to said tract, and the required modifications in the
County or Municipality land regulations, otherwise applicable to the subject
property;
The specific use of the open spaces, and the condition of said open space at such
time it is turned over to the homeowners’ organization and the proposed dates or
dates thereof;In the event that the application for preliminary approval calls for a
development of the entire tract over a period of time, the time schedule proposed for
such development, as well as a time schedule showing approximately when
applications for final approval of all sections will be filed; all such time schedules
shall be up-updated annually until development is completed and accepted, and shall
be changed only with the approval of the Governing Body of Luzerne County.
The application for tentative and final approval of a development plan for a PRD
shall be in lieu of all other procedures and approvals, otherwise required pursuant
to the Luzerne County Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations.
G. Public Hearings
Within 60 days after the filing of an application for tentative approval of a PRD,
a public hearing pursuant to public notice on said application shall be held by the
Governing Body of Luzerne County (Body) in the manner prescribed for the
enactment of an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance. The chairman, or in his
absence, the acting chairman, of the Body may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing shall be given
under oath and every party of record at a hearing shall have the right to cross
examine adverse witnesses.
A verbatim record of the hearing shall be caused to be made by the Body whenever
such records are requested by any party to the proceedings; but the cost of making
and transcribing such a record shall be borne by the party requesting it and the
expense of copies of such record shall be borne by those who wish to obtain such
copies. All exhibits accepted in evidence shall be identified and duly preserved, or if
not accepted in evidence, shall be properly identified and the reason for the
exclusion clearly noted in the record.
53
The Body may continue the hearing from time to time, and may refer the matter back
to the County Planning Commissions for a report, provided, however, that in any
event, the public hearing(s) shall be concluded within 60 days after the date of the
first public hearing.
H. The Findings
The Body, within 30 days following the conclusion of the public hearing provided
for in this article, shall be official written communication to the landowner either:
Grant tentative approval of the development plan as submitted;
Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions not included in the
development plan as submitted; or Deny tentative approval to the development plan.
Failure to so act within said period shall be deemed to be a grant of tentative
approval of the development plan as submitted. In the event, however, that
tentative approval is granted subject to conditions, the landowner may, within 30
days after receiving a copy of the official written communication of the Body notify
such Body of his refusal to accept all such conditions, in which case, the Body shall
be deemed to have denied tentative approval of the development plan. In the event
the landowner does not, within said period, notify the Body of his refusal to accept
all said conditions, tentative approval of the development plan with all said
conditions shall stand as granted.
The grant or denial of tentative approval by official written communication shall
include not only conclusions but also findings of fact related to the specific
proposal and shall set forth the reasons for grant, with or without conditions, or
for the denial, and said communications shall set forth with particularity in what
respects the development plan would or would not be in the public interest
including but not limited to findings of fact and conclusions on the following:
In those respects in which the development plan is or is not consistent with the
comprehensive plan for the development of the County or the Municipality.
The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning and subdivision
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property including but not limited
to density, bulk and use, and the reasons why such departures are or are not deemed
to be in the public interest.
The purpose, location and amount of the common open space in the PRD, the
reliability of the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common open
space, and the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the common
open space as related to the proposed density and type of residential development
54
The physical design of the development plan and the manner in which said design
does or does not make adequate provision for public services, provide adequate
control over vehicular traffic, and further the amenities of light and air, recreation
and visual enjoyment.
The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed PRD to the neighborhood
in which it is proposed to be established; and
In case of a development plan which proposed development over a period of years,
the sufficiency of the terms and conditions intended to protect the interests of the
public and of the residents of the PRD in the integrity of the development plans.
In the event a development plan is granted tentative approval, with or without
conditions, the Body may set forth in the official written communication the time
within which an application for final approval of the development plan shall be filed
or, in the case of a development plan which provides for development over a period
of years, the periods of time within which applications for final approval of each part
thereof shall be filed. Except upon the consent of the landowner, the time so
established between grant of tentative approval and an application for final approval
shall not be less than 3 months and, in the case of developments over a period of
years, the time between applications for final approval of each part of a plan shall
not be less than 12 months.
I. Status of Plan After Tentative Approval
The official written communication provided for in this article shall be certified by
the County Manager and shall be filed in his office, and a certified copy shall be
mailed to the landowner. Where tentative approval has been granted, the same shall
be noted on the zoning map in the office of the Zoning Officer of Luzerne County.
J. Application for Final Approval
An application for final approval may be for all the land included in a development
plan or, to the extent set forth in the tentative approval, for a section thereof. Said
application shall be made to the Body and within the time(s) specified by the official
written communication granting tentative approval. The application shall include any
drawings, specifications, easements, performance bond and such other requirements
as may be specified by ordinance, as well as any conditions set forth in the official
written communication at the time of tentative approval. A public hearing on an
application for final approval of the development plan or part thereof shall not be
required provided the development plan, of the part thereof, submitted for final
approval, is in compliance with the development plan theretofore given tentative
approval and with any specified conditions attached thereto. The Body may refer it
to the County Planning Commission for recommendation.
55
In the event the application for final approval has been filed, together with all drawings,
specifications and other documents in support thereof, and as required by the
ordinance and the official written communication of tentative approval, the Body
shall, within 30 days of filing, grant such development plan final approval, provided
it conforms with the tentative approval.
In the event the development plan as submitted contains variations from the
development plan given tentative approval, the Body may refuse to grant final
approval and shall, within 30 days of the filing of the application for final approval,
so advise the reasons why one or more of said variations are not in the public
interest. In the event of such refusal, the landowner may either: refile his application
for final approval without the variations projected, or
File a written request with the Body that it hold a public hearing on his application
for final approval. If the landowner wishes to take either such alternate actions, he
may do so at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply for final approval, or
within 30 additional days if the time for applying for final approval shall have
already passed at the time when the landowner was advised that the development
plan was not in substantial compliance. In the event the landowner shall fail to take
either of these alternate actions within said time, he shall be deemed to have
abandoned the development plan. Any such public hearing shall be held pursuant to
public notice within 30 days after the request for the hearing is made by the
landowner and the hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in this
Ordinance for public hearings on applications for tentative approval. Within 30 days
after the conclusion of the hearing, the Body shall by official written communication
either grant final approval to the development plan or deny final approval. The grant
or denial of final approval of the development plan shall, in cases arising under this
section, be in the form and contain the findings required for an application for
tentative approval set forth in the PRD section.
A development plan, or any part thereof, which has been given final approval shall
be so certified without delay by the Body and shall be filed of record forthwith in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds before any development shall take place in
accordance therewith. Upon the filing of record of the development plan the zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the land included in such plan
shall cease to apply thereto. Pending completion within a reasonable time of said
PRD or of that part thereof as the case may be, that has been finally approved, no
modifications of the provisions of said development plan, of part thereof, as finally
approved, shall be made except with the consent of the landowner.
In the event that a development plan, or a section thereof, is given final approval
and thereafter the landowner shall abandon such plan of the section thereof that
has been finally approved, and shall so notify the Body in writing; or in the event the
landowner shall fail to commence and carry out the PRD within such reasonable
period of time as may be fixed by ordinance after final approval has been granted, no
56
development or further development shall take place on the property included in the
development plan until after the said property is re-subdivided and re-classified by
enactment of an amendment to the Luzerne County Zoning Ordinance in the manner
prescribed in such Ordinance.
Plans submitted for final approval shall be prepared with the Subdivision Regulations
of Luzerne County and all construction shall be in accordance with the
Subdivision Regulations and all other codes and ordinances of Luz. Co., except
those excluded under this Section. The Subdivision Regulations of Luz.Co., as
amended, shall govern the construction and acceptance of all public improvements.
6.16 Public and Parochial Schools and Colleges, and Private Schools and Colleges for
Academic Instruction
These structures shall be located not less than 50 feet from any other lot in an S-1 or R-1
District, and not less than 20 feet from any lot in an R-2 or R-3 District.
6.17 Race Track (Horse)
Commercial race horse tracks must have all activities, including all buildings, not less than
200 feet from any residence district or any lot occupied by a dwelling, school, church, or
institution for human care. Traffic in connection with race tracks, must be arranged to cause
a minimum of congestion.
6.18 Race Tracks (Automobile, Including Go-Cart Areas and Midget Race Tracks)
Automobile race tracks shall require the approval of the Zoning Hearing Board.
Automobile race tracks shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from any Residence District.
The Board shall consider the noise factor, and require noise deadening devices, or other
means, to prevent the noise from becoming objectionable to surrounding areas.
6.19 Solid Waste Disposal Areas
Plans for solid waste disposal areas shall be in harmony with existing surrounding uses or
those proposed in the Land Use Plan, and the approval of the Department of Environmental
Protection and the Pennsylvania Department of Mines and Mineral Industries as to fire
hazards.
6.20 Sawmills
Sawmills in Agricultural Zoning Districts shall require approval of the Zoning Hearing
Board. The Board shall approve only temporary sawmills in this District, and shall require a
minimum distance of 1,000 feet from Residence Districts.
57
6.21 Sewage Disposal Plants
Plans for sewage disposal plants must be in harmony with surrounding uses and the written
approval of the Department of Environmental Protection must be obtained.
6.22 Swimming Pools, Private, or Community or Club
A. Private Swimming Pools
A private swimming pool, but not including farm ponds, as regulated herein, shall be any
pool, permanently attached to the ground, not located within a completely enclosed building,
and containing, or normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point greater than
one and one-half feet. No such swimming pool shall be allowed in a C-1, A-1, or any
Residence District except as an accessory use and unless it complies with the following
conditions and requirements:
The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the enjoyment of the occupants of the
principal use of the property on which it is located, and their guests, and no fee shall be
charged.
Yard requirements shall be the same as those required for unattached accessory structures.
The swimming pool, or the entire property on which it is located, shall be so walled or
fenced so as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street or from adjacent
properties, said fence or wall to be not less than 4 feet in height and maintained in good
condition, and grounded for electricity. This section applies to both inground and aboveground
pools, except as noted below.
The requirements of the above paragraph regarding walls and/or fences shall not apply to
above-ground swimming pools if the side walls of such pools are at least 4 feet in height (as
measured from the surrounding ground level) and if decked, secured by a locked gate. If
access is provided by a retractable ladder, it must be removed when pool is not in use.
B. Community or Club Swimming Pools
A community or club swimming pool shall be any pool constructed by an association of
property owners, or by a private club solely for use and enjoyment by members of the
association or club and their families and guests of members. Community and club
swimming pools shall comply with the following conditions and requirements:
The pool and accessory structures thereto, including the areas used by the bathers, shall not
be closer than 100 feet to any property line of the property on which it is located.
58
The swimming pool and all of the area used by the bathers shall be so walled or fenced as to
prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street or adjacent properties. The said
fence or wall shall not be less than 4 feet in height, grounded for electricity, and maintained
in good condition. The area surrounding the enclosure, except for the parking spaces, shall
be suitably landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs and trees, and maintained in good condition.
6.23 Tourist Homes
For tourist homes in R-2 and R-3 Districts, not more than 4 guests are permitted, as well as
an unlighted sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area, or a lighted sign not exceeding 3
square feet in area with enclosed lighting through translucent glass or by blue or green neon.
6.24 Mobile Homes, Trailers, and Mobile Home or Trailer Parks
A. Mobile Homes and Trailers
A trailer or mobile home is permitted in A-1 and C-1 Districts on wheels on a 2-year permit,
provided utilities are properly provided for, subject to removal in 90 days if the area is
rezoned residential. Temporary permits may be obtained in the same districts, without
permanent installation of utilities, provided sanitary facilities are properly provided for.
However, a mobile home may obtain a permanent permit in the same districts, provided that
the following conditions are met:
It is placed upon a suitable permanent, wholly-enclosed foundation;
Its location on the lot conforms in every respect to the setbacks required for a single-family
dwelling and individual sewage disposal facilities are provided.
A mobile home may be occupied as a single-family dwelling, as defined in Article 11 and
may be located upon a permitted lot, within a Residence District, provided that the
following conditions are met:
It is placed upon a suitable, permanent, wholly-enclosed foundation;
The structure, its design, and minimum interior building area, not including any basement, is
as provided in Article 5 heretofore, its individual sewage disposal facilities, and its location
upon the lot, conform in every respect to every other Article or provision of this Ordinance
relating to single-family dwellings within a Residence District. The establishment, use,
location and design of such mobile home within a Residence District must not, under any
circumstances, appreciably detract from the character of the area surrounding it, as
determined by the Zoning Hearing Board.
No trailer or mobile home shall be used outside of a permitted trailer or mobile home park,
to provide living quarters or space for the conduct of business, except as stated in Article
6.24A or except that it may be used temporarily for office purposes during the construction
of a principal building or a road in any district other than a Residence District, or in a
59
Residence District with approval of the Board, on the issuance of a temporary permit by the
Zoning Officer.
B. Trailer or Mobile Home Parks
Trailer or Mobile Home Parks, where permitted, shall observe the following requirements:
No trailer or mobile home park shall have an area less than 5 acres, nor an average gross
area per trailer or mobile home of less than 3,000 square feet.
Every trailer or mobile home shall be supplied with a potable water service. Mobile homes
shall be connected to a sanitary sewer and an approved sewage disposal system. Trailers
shall be provided with a common sewage disposal system in order that the removal and
disposing of sewage from trailer holding tanks is accomplished in a sanitary manner. Toilet
facilities for the public, which are separate for each sex, shall be provided on the premises.
Sewage systems for mobile homes or trailers shall be approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
A safe, usable recreation area shall be conveniently located in every trailer or mobile home
park and shall contain a total area equivalent to an allowance of 300 square feet per trailer,
which shall not be less than 10% of the gross area of the trailer or mobile home park.
No trailer or mobile home shall be located less than 50 feet from an abutting property in a
C-1, A-1, or Residence, or M-1 District.
The trailer or mobile home park shall be permanently landscaped and maintained in good
condition.
All requests to make temporary mobile home parks permanent, which mobile home parks
occurred as a result of the flood caused by Hurricane Agnes during the time zoning was
suspended for housing for flood sufferers by the State Council of Civil Defense, must first
be submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board for consideration as a Use by Special Exception,
in conformity with Section 8.42 of this Ordinance and all other Sections of this Ordinance
regulating Special Exceptions. After action is taken upon the application by the Zoning
Hearing Board, said application and decision shall then be certified to the Zoning Officer to
comply with the procedure for rezoning as set forth in this Ordinance under Article 10 and
all Sections thereof.
Except for trailers or mobile homes offered for sale on trailer or mobile home sales lots, or
those for which the necessary permits have been obtained, the parking of a trailer or mobile
home outside of a permitted trailer or mobile home park in any district for 48 hours or more
shall be prohibited, except as permitted in Section 6.24C.
60
C. Camping and Recreational Equipment
Any owner of camping and recreational equipment, including but not limited to, travel
trailers, pick-up coaches, motorized homes, and boat trailers, may park or store such
equipment on private residential property subject to the following conditions:
Such parked or stored camping and recreational equipment shall never be occupied or used
for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes.
If the camping or recreational equipment is parked or stored outside of a building, it shall be
parked or stored, if possible, to the rear of the building line of the lot, and in all cases, shall
at least be parked or stored to the rear of the front building line of the lot.
Notwithstanding the provisions stated in the above paragraph, camping and recreation
equipment may be parked anywhere on the premises while actually being loaded or
unloaded.
6.25 Accessory Structures
A. Attached Accessory Structures
Accessory structures which are attached to the principal building shall comply with all the
yard requirements for a principal structure.
B. Unattached Accessory Structures
Unattached accessory structures in residence districts shall be erected within the rear yard,
provided they conform to the following conditions:
Maximum height - Fifteen (15) feet, except in the A-1 district.
An accessory structure shall not be less than five (5) feet from the side lot line, except by
consent in writing of the adjoining lot owner.
Side yard (corner) - same as for a principal structure.
An accessory structure shall not be less than three (3) feet from the rear lot line, except when
the structure abuts an alley, in which case, 10 feet shall be required.
Unattached accessory structures in districts other than residence districts shall comply with
the front and side yard requirements for the principal structure. They shall have a rear yard
of ten (10) feet, except as otherwise specified in this Ordinance.
If there is no principal use structure on a lot, or section of a lot divided by a road or alley, the
first accessory use structure built must comply with the principal use requirements.
61
6.26 Camps
The Zoning Hearing Board shall require the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
6.27 Storage of Explosives
The Board shall determine that the use does not conflict with any State or Federal laws, and
shall check to see that the utmost in safety is provided for, that the area is not developed or
developing, and enough open space acquired by the applicant to protect nearby properties.
6.28 Rooming or Boarding Houses
No more than two (2) roomers will be permitted for each bedroom and 80 square feet of
bedroom space per roomer will be required. Smoke alarms and fire extinguishers will be
provided for each bedroom, and in one general location. The applicant will provide proof of
notification of the local fire and police providers. Applicants for Personal Care Boarding or
Domicillary Care Houses shall present documentation of proof submittal to the
Pennsylvania Licensing Agencies Department of Public Welfare or Office for the Aging,
and must conform to the Department of Labor and Industry Standards.
6.29 Adult Entertainment/Bookstore (Theater)
No operation under this category shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the
following:
1. A church;
2. A school, nursery, daycare center, library, college, or university;
3. The boundary of any Residence District (R-1, R-2, R-3, S-1) or the property line of a
lot devoted to residential use;
4. A public recreational facility;
5. Another operation under this category;
This measurement shall be made in a straight line, from the nearest portion of the structure
used as this type use to the nearest property line of the above-listed uses.
Operations under this category shall not be open nor conduct activity between the hours of
12:00 AM (midnight) to 12:00 PM (noon).
62
6.30 Correctional Institutions
Applications for Correctional Institutions may only be approved as Special Exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board (Board) and shall demonstrate to the Board and provide information
that the following requirements are being fully satisfied:
A. That traffic, sanitary and environmental safety measures will be provided and be operational
and fully useable before such operations or activities and functions commence; and
B. That light fixtures for security and night operations are positioned and designed to avoid
glare and safety hazards on adjacent roadways or properties and nuisance effects on the
nearby area. Lighting shall be directed to shine away from abutting properties and into the
Institution’s property; and
C. A formal written standing commitment from the highest responsible official and/or policy
board that operational policies, practices (including maximum inmate number) and staffing
plans will provide on-going security and control to prevent unauthorized trespass and litter
on adjacent properties or unreasonable risk to safety of nearby residents; and
D. An Emergency Response Plan which guarantees that the facility owner will either provide
directly or provide to the municipality whatever supplementary equipment, personnel and
financial resources as deemed necessary by the municipality to properly train and develop
the necessary capability for effective response to fire, explosion, riot, epidemic, toxic spill,
or other identifiable potential incident; and
E. A communications plan which defines in detail the manner in which municipal officials,
broadcast and print news media, and any appropriate public safety officials will be
immediately notified and fully briefed on listed reportable incidents, including their ultimate
disposition and preventative measures being undertaken to prevent their recurrence as well
as a mechanism for advisory input from Luzerne County, the Luzerne County Planning
Commission and the host municipality to the owner; and
F. An accountability chart which identifies the on-site and parent organization chain of
command by position and name of incumbents, such names to be regularly updated; and
G. A Maintenance Plan which assures that the physical appearance and utility functions, as well
as residential and food processing, storage and serving areas will be kept in a sanitary and
secure condition with reasonable effort to assure that the value of adjacent properties will
not be adversely affected; and
H. That Correctional institution principal and accessory structures shall be a minimum distance
of 300 feet from any property line; and
I. That the applicant shall establish and maintain a 50 ft. landscaped buffer area around the
perimeter of the site and the landscaping plans shall be reviewed by the Board as part of the
63
Special Exception Plan rather that requiring any necessary variances, with security as a
primary consideration, and the Board shall take into account the security plan in considering
any modifications of required landscape planting and/or buffer area;
J. All permits, licenses and approvals required from Federal or State Agencies must be secured
with documentation supplied with the application or said requirement shall become a
condition of approval.
A. Nothing in this section or this Ordinance is intended nor shall be applied or
interpreted to attempt to regulate those aspects of correctional institutions which are
specifically regulated by the PA Department of Corrections or the US Department of
Justice, provided that the above essential precautions are defined by such regulations
in as much detail as required herein. The intent of this section is to provide a
mechanism whereby Luzerne County and the municipality can assure that the site
planning and site location of such activities and facilities complies with reasonable
precautions for public safety, public health and protection of nearby property values.
B. No Correctional Institution shall be located less than 1000 feet from any of the
following:
K. A residential dwelling
L. A zoning boundary of any residential zoning district
M. A place of worship
N. A school, child care facility, park, public playground or similar recreational facility
A. Measurement: Measurements of the required distance shall be made in a straight
line, from the nearest portion of the Correctional Institution’s property boundary
line, to the nearest property line of the above noted uses, or district.
B. A Zoning/building permit may not be issued until the proposed Correctional
Institution has received final land development plan approval from the Luzerne
County Planning Commission.
6.31 Crematory: A solid 6 ft. high fence (Subject to the provisions of Section 7.02 D), or
evergreen type plantings of similar height, shall be provided along all property lines abutting
any Residence District, or residential street
64
ARTICLE 7 - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
7.01 Existing Lots of Record
Any lot of record existing at the effective date of this Ordinance in any C-1, A-1, or RDistrict,
may be used for the erection of a single-family dwelling, even though its area and
width is less than the minimum requirements set forth herein, except as set for hereafter.
Where yard spaces do not meet the requirements of the C-1, A-1, or R Districts as given in
Table 5, variances may be requested of the Board as indicated in Section 8.44. Where two
(2) adjacent lots of record with less than the required area and width are held by one (1)
owner, the request for a permit shall be referred to the Board, which may require that the
two (2) lots be combined and used for one (1) main building. Where three (3) or more
adjacent lots of record with less than the required area and width are held by one (1) owner,
the Board may require replatting to fewer lots which would comply with the minimum
requirements of this Ordinance.
7.02 Yards
A. Front Yards
In any A-1 or “R” District, the front yard depth for any residential building hereafter erected,
shall be the average of the front yard depths of the lots immediately adjoining on each side,
provided such adjoining lots are improved with principal buildings situated within 200 feet
of the joint side property line, but where said immediately adjoining lots are not both so
improved, then the depth of the front yard of any building hereafter erected shall not be less
than the average depth of the front yards of all improved lots in the same block front within
200 feet on each side thereof, provided that no dwelling shall be required to be set back
more than 60 feet in the C-1 and A-1 Districts or more than 50 feet in ‘R’ Districts, and
shall not be less than ten (10) feet.
In any “R” District, where a lot runs through a block from street to street, a front yard as
required by this Ordinance shall be provided along each street lot line which is not a side
street lot line.
In any “B” District, the front yard setback of any building or other structure hereafter erected
shall be the average of the front yard depths of the lots immediately adjoining on each side,
but where said immediately adjoining lots are not both so improved, then the depth of the
front yard of any building hereafter erected shall not be less than the average depth of the
front yards of all lots within 100 feet on each side thereof which are improved as described
above.
65
B. Side Yards
The Board may authorize the required width of one side yard for a single or two-family
dwelling to be reduced to not less than three (3) feet, provided that the combined side yards
shall not be less than the required minimum, and provided the distance between the
proposed dwelling, and another dwelling, existing or proposed on an adjacent lot, is not less
than the required minimum sum of the two (2) side yards.
Where the side wall of a building is irregular, or not parallel with the side lot line, the
average width of the side yard shall not be less than the otherwise required least width,
provided that the side yards shall not be narrower at any point than five (5) feet where the
Ordinance would ordinarily would require five (5) feet or more.
C. Other Yards
Non-residential buildings constructed or uses hereafter established shall not be located or
conducted closer to any lot line in a C-1, A-1 or “R” District than the distance specified in
the following schedule, except as provided in Section 7.2 D or Section 6.14D:
Minimum Side or Use
Rear Yard (Feet)
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
50 Off-street parking spaces and access drives for nonresidential
uses
80 Churches, schools, and public or semi-public
buildings
100 Recreation facilities, entertainment facilities, motels
trailer camps, strip mining, culm banks
150 Facilities for the commercial boarding or care of
domestic animals, outside sale or storage of building
material or construction equipment, auto salvage
operations, breakers, and truck terminals
For non-residential uses listed in the Table above abutting a lot in a C-1, A-1 or “R”
District, the minimum yards may be reduced to ten percent (10%) of the above requirements
if acceptable landscaping or screening, approved by the Zoning Officer, is provided. Such
screening shall be a masonry wall or solid fence, between five (5) and six (6) feet in height,
maintained in good condition and free from all advertising or other signs. Landscaping,
provided in lieu of such wall or fence, shall consist of a strip of land not less than 15 feet in
width, planted with an evergreen hedge or dense planting of evergreen shrubs, not less than
five (5) feet in height.
66
D. Projections Into Yards and Courts
A wall or fence under six (6) feet in height, or higher if a retaining wall, may be erected
within the limits of any yard or outer court and may not block visibility from side streets, or
adjoining property driveways.
Patios, terraces and open porches may be located in side and rear yards, not closer than three
(3) feet to any adjacent property line. If located closer than eight (8) feet in any District
except an R-3 District, or five (5) feet in an R-3 District, they shall be adequately screened
from the adjoining lot.
Chimneys, leaders, cornices, eaves, gutters and bay windows, and the like, may extend not
more than 18 inches into any required yard, except that fully cantilevered projections no less
than seven (7) feet in height are permitted in commercial districts up to the property line.
Utility facilities necessary to serving any area are exempt from height limitations applicable
to the various zoning districts.
Ramp entranceways to structures for disabled persons shall be exempt from setback
requirements.
7.03 Regulations Governing Communications Antennas and Communications Equipment
Buildings
A. Building mounted Communications Antennas shall not be located on any single family, two
family, or multiple family dwelling. Building mounted Communications Antennas shall be
permitted to exceed the height of the applicable zoning district by no more than twenty (20)
feet.
B. Omni-directional or whip Communications Antennas shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in
height and seven (7) inches in diameter,
C. Directional or panel Communications Antennas shall not exceed five (5) feet in height and
three (3) feet in width.
D. Any applicant proposing Communications Antennas to be mounted on a building or other
structure shall submit evidence from a Pa. registered professional engineer
certifying that the proposed installation will not exceed the structural capacity of the
building or other structure, considering wind and other loads associated with the
antenna location.
E. Any applicant proposing Communications Antennas to be mounted on a building
or other structure shall submit detailed construction and elevation drawings
indicating how the antennas will be mounted on the structure for review for
compliance with the applicable local municipal building code.
67
F. Any applicant proposing Communications Antennas to be mounted on a building
or other structure shall submit evidence of agreements and/or easements necessary
to provide access to the building or structure on which the antennas are to be mounted
so that installation and maintenance of the antennas and Communications
Equipment Building can be accomplished.
G. Communications Antennas shall comply with all applicable standards established
by the FCC governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation. Communications
Antennas shall not cause radio frequency interference with other communications facilities
located in Luzerne County.
H. A Communications Equipment Building shall be subject to the height and setback
requirements of the applicable zoning district for an accessory structure.
I. The owner or operator of Communications Antennas shall be licensed by the FCC to operate
such antennas.
ARTICLE 8 - ZONING HEARING BOARD
8.01 Organization and Procedure
A. Organization
The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of three (3) members to be appointed by the
Governing Body of Luzerne County, one (1) of whom shall be designated to serve until the
first day of January following the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance, one (1) until the first of
the second January thereafter, and one (1) until the first day of the third January thereafter.
On the expiration of their appointed terms, their successors shall be appointed for a three (3)
year term. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member. At the expiration
of a member’s term, he shall remain in office until he is reappointed or replaced.
B. Procedure
The Board shall organize and adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent with this Ordinance
or the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247.
C. Meetings
Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as
the Board in its rules of procedure may specify. The Chairman, or in his absence the acting
Chairman, or Hearing Officer appointed from the membership of the Board, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and
papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the parties. All meetings of the
68
Board shall be open to the public. The Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be,
shall keep minutes of the proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question,
or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of the
examinations and other official actions. The records of the Board shall be kept in the office
of the Zoning Officer and shall be a public record. The Board shall meet at least once a
month, if it has any cases to come before it.
D. Quorum
For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall not be less than
two (2) members of the Board, but the Board may appoint a Hearing Officer from its own
membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf, and the parties may waive further action
by the Board as provided in Section 908, Act 247, Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
8.02 Applications and Appeals To The Board
A. Applications
Application for special exception, in cases in which the Board has original jurisdiction,
under the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be filed with the Zoning Officer who shall
transmit same to the Board.
B. Application Requirements
Applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer upon such forms and accompanied by
such data and information as may be prescribed for that purpose by him or the Board, so as
to assure the fullest practicable presentations of facts for the record. Each application shall
be verified in writing by the owner or majority of owners for the area proposed for
development or use, attesting to the truth and correctness of all facts and information
presented with the application. It shall contain an assessment map of the subject property,
and for all of the properties within 100 feet, a listing of the name and address of property
owners. The Zoning Officer shall check the application to determine whether it conforms
with the requirements listed above, and if satisfactory, shall immediately submit it to the
office of the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. Appeals
Appeals may be taken by an officer of the County or the city, borough or township affected,
or by any other person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Officer or other
administrative official or agency. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after said
decision, by filing with the Zoning Officer a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.
The Zoning Officer shall arrange for the proper notices, and shall bring the appeal before the
Board at its next meeting. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny to the
69
appellant the right to proceed directly in court, where appropriate, pursuant to Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure, Sections 1091 to 1098 relating to mandamus.
D. Stay of Proceedings
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the
Zoning Officer shall certify to the Board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with
it, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by the Common Pleas
Court, after notice to the Officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
E. Decision Of The Board
The Board may in conformity with the provisions of this Article reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and
shall make such order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be
made and to that end, shall have all powers of the Zoning Officer from whom the appeal is
taken.
F. Refiling Of Disapproved or Withdrawn Cases
If a case is disapproved by the Board, thereafter the Board shall take no further action on
another case for substantially the same proposal on the same property, until one (1) year
after the date of such disapproval. If a case before the Board is advertised, and thereafter
withdrawn by the applicant before or at the meeting of the Board, he shall be precluded from
filing another application for substantially the same proposal on the same premises for six
(6) months, and the case shall be re-advertised.
G. Transcript Fees
The cost of the original transcript and any additional copies shall be paid by the person
appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is made. In other cases the parties
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof and any additional copies.
H. Filing
The Board may require the applicant to furnish such information as it deems necessary when
filing an appeal.
70
8.03 Hearings
Upon filing of an appeal or application, the Board shall fix a time and place for a hearing,
and give due notice as follows:
A. Public Notice
“Public Notice”, notice given not more than ten (10) days and not less than seven (7) days in
advance of any public hearing required by Act 247, Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code. Such notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular
nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The hearings of the Board shall be public. However, the Board may go into executive
session.
B. Adjourned Hearings
Upon the day for hearing any application or appeal, the Board may adjourn in order to
permit the obtaining of additional information or to cause such further notice as it deems
proper to be served upon such other property owners as it decides may be substantially
interested in said application or appeal. In the case of an adjourned hearing, persons
previously notified and persons already heard need not be notified of the time of resumption
of said hearing unless the Board so decides, provided the Board publicly states the date of
hearing at the time, otherwise they shall be notified.
C. Decisions Of The Board
The Board shall decide all applications and appeals within 45 days after the final hearing
thereon. Notice of decision shall be given to all parties so requesting. The Board’s decision
shall be binding on the Zoning Officer, and he shall incorporate the terms and conditions of
the same in any permit issued. If the Board does not render its decision within 45 days of the
final hearing, it shall be deemed that the Board has decided in favor of the party making the
request.
8.04 Powers, And Limitations of Powers, Of The Board
A. Administrative Review
The Board shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by the
Zoning Officer or other administrative official or agency, based on or made in the
enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.
71
B. Standards for Communications Towers
1. The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licensed by the FCC to operate a Communications
Tower, if applicable, and Communications Antennas.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed Communications Tower and
Communications Antennas thereon comply with all applicable standards established by the
FCC governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
3. Communications Towers shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), Commonwealth Bureau of Aviation and applicable Airport
Zoning Regulations.
4 . An y a p p l i c a n t p r o p o s i n g c o n s t r u c t i o n o f a n ew Communications Tower
shall demonstrate that a good faith effort has been made to obtain permission to mount the
Communications Antennas on an existing building, structure, or
Communications Tower. A good faith effort shall require that all owners of a
potentially suitable s t r u c t u r e wi t h i n a two -mi l e ( 2 ) r a d i u s o f t h e
Communications Tower site be contacted and that one (1) or more of the following
reasons for not selecting such structure apply:
5. The proposed antennas and related equipment would exceed the structural
capacity of the existing structure and its reinforcements cannot be accomplished at a
reasonable cost.
6 . The propos ed ant enna s and r e l a t ed e q u i pme n t wo u l d c a u s e r a d i o
f r e q u e n c y interference with other existing equipment for that existing structure and the
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
7. Such exi s t ing s t ructures do not have adequate location, space, access, or
height to accommodate the proposed equipment or to perform its intended function.
8. Addition of the proposed antennas and related equipment would result in
electromagnetic radiation from such structure exceeding applicable standards established by
the FCC governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
9. A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with the owners of such
structures.
10. Access shall be provided to the Communications Tower and Communications
Equipment Building by means of a public street or easement to a public street. The
easement shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width and shall be improved to a
width of at least ten (10) feet with a dust-free, all weather surface for its entire length.
72
11. Communications Tower may be located on a lot occupied by other principal
structures and may occupy a leased parcel wi thin a lot meet ing the minimum
lot s ize requirements for the zoning district.
12. Land development approval shall not be required for a lease parcel on which a
Communications Tower is proposed to be constructed, provided the Communications
Equipment Building is unmanned.
13. Subdivision approval shall be required for a lease parcel on which a Communications
Tower is proposed to be constructed. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
height of the Communications Tower is the minimum height necessary to perform
its function.
14. In all zoning districts except Mining (M-1), the maximum height of any Communications
Tower shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet; provided, however, that such height may be
increased to no more than two hundred (200) feet, provided the required setbacks from
adjoining property lines (not lease lines) are increased by one (1) foot for each one
(1) foot of height in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet. In the Mining (M-1) zoning
district, the maximum height of any Communication Tower shall be one hundred
eighty (180) feet.
15. The foundation and base of any Communications Tower located adjacent to any
residentially occupied property, or adjacent to any residential zone, shall be set back from a
property line (not lease line), at least one hundred (100) feet and shall be set back from
any other property line (not lease line) at least fifty (50) feet.
16. The base of a Communications tower shall be landscaped s o a s t o s c r e e n t h e
f o u n d a t i o n a n d b a s e a n d Communications Equipment Building from
abutting properties.The Communications Equipment Building shall comply with the
required setbacks and height requirements of the applicable zoning district for an accessory
structure.
17. The applicant shall submit certification from a Pa, registered professional engineer
that a proposed Communi cat ions Tower wi l l be des igned and constructed in
accordance with the current Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and
Antenna Supporting Structures, published by the Electrical Industrial Associations
/ Telecommunications Industry Association
18. The applicant shall submit a copy of its current FCC license; the name,
address, and emergency telephone number for the operator of the Communications
Tower; and a Certificate of Insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the
minimum amount $1,000,000 per occur rence cover ing the Communications
Tower, Communications Antennas, Communications Equipment and
73
Communications Building. Proof of said insurance certificate to be submitted
annually to the Luzerne County Planning Commission.
19. All guy wires associated with guyed Communications Towers shall be clearly
marked so as to be visible at all times and shall be included within a fenced enclosure.
20. The site of a Communications Tower shall be secured by a fence with a maximum height of
eight (8) feet to limit accessibility by the general public. No signs or lights shall be mounted
on a Communications Tower, except as may be required by the FCC, FAA, Luzerne
County, or other governmental agency which has jurisdiction.
21. If a Communications Tower remains unused for a period of twelve (12) consecutive
months, the owner or operator shall dismantle and remove the Communications Tower
within six (6) months of the expiration of such twelve (12) month period.
22. One off street parking space shall be provided within the fenced area.
C. Special Exceptions
The Board shall have the power to hear and decide requests for special exceptions set forth
in this Ordinance as follows, but not limited to: Articles 2.05, 2.06, 4.01, 4.02, 4.03, 4.04,
4.05, 4.06, 4.07, 4.08, 4.09, 4.10, 4.11, 4.13J, 6.14C, 6.15B, 6.18, 6.20, 6.24A, 6.27, and
7.1.
In considering an application for special exception, the Board shall give due regard to the
nature and condition of all adjacent uses and structures; and in authorizing a special
exception, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to
those expressed in this Ordinance for the particular special exception, as the Board may
deem necessary to implement the purposes of this Ordinance.
D. Temporary Uses And Permits
In addition to permitting the special exception heretofore specified, the Board shall have
authority to hear and decide on requests for temporary structures and uses in any district for
a purpose or use that does not conform to the regulations prescribed elsewhere in this
Ordinance for the district in which it is located, provided that such use be of a temporary
nature which does not involve the erection of a substantial structure. Any request for such
structure or use, when approved, shall be granted in the form of a temporary and revocable
permit, for not more than a 12-month period, subject to such conditions as will safeguard the
public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare.
74
E. Interpretations Of The Zoning Map
Where the street or lot layout actually on the ground, or as recorded, differs from the street
and lot lines as shown on the Zoning Map, the Board, after notice to the owners of the
property and after public hearing, shall interpret the map in such a way as to carry out the
intent and purpose of this Ordinance, and shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact,
which shall become part of the record on appeal to court. In case of any question as to the
location of any boundary line between zoning districts, a request for interpretation of the
Zoning Map may be made to the Board, who, after a public hearing, shall decide all
questions of interpretation and shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact, which shall
become part of the record on appeal to Court.
8.41 Variances
On an appeal from an order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Officer,
or any other administrative officer or agency, the Board may grant a variance in the
application of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, only if all of the following findings
are made: (except for industrial variances where a substantial number of persons will be
employed or retained and where more flexibility may be exercised).
That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity,
narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other
physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is
due to such conditions, and not to circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located;
That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the
property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of
the property;
That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant;
That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public
welfare; and
That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief
and will represent the least modification possible of the regulations in issue. In granting any
variance, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of the Zoning Ordinance.
75
8.42 Specific Limitations Of Powers Of The Board
The Board does not have the power to amend any zoning ordinance, to rezone any land, to
declare this Zoning Ordinance or any amendment thereto invalid, or to allow any use not
permitted by this Zoning Ordinance.
The fact that a property owner will suffer financial hardship if not granted a special
exception or a variance from the Zoning Ordinance, is of itself insufficient ground for
granting a variance.
ARTICLE 9 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
9.01 Administration
A. Zoning Officer
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered by the Luzerne County Planning
Director as Zoning Officer, the office of which is hereby established.
The duties of the Zoning Officer shall be: to receive and check all applications for zoning
permits and certificates of occupancy.
To issue zoning permits and certificates of occupancy only for construction and uses which
are in accordance with the regulations of this Ordinance and subsequent amendments, or
through Board or Court approval. Zoning permits and certificates of occupancy shall not be
issued where the request concerns a lot, parcel or tract in a subdivision required to be
approved under the applicable Subdivision Regulations, which subdivision has not had the
required approval.
To record and file all applications for zoning permits and certificates of occupancy together
with accompanying plans and documents and keep them for public record.
The Zoning Officer shall issue certificates of occupancy for non-conforming uses. He shall
examine them periodically to determine that they do not expand beyond the limitations
prescribed in the Ordinance.
Upon specific request of the Commission or Board, to furnish such facts, records and similar
information, which will assist such body in reaching the decision.
To be responsible for keeping this Ordinance including the Zoning Map, up to date, and to
include any amendments thereto.
76
If the Zoning Officer shall find that any provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he
shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of
illegal uses of land, buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of
additions, alterations or structural changes thereto; order discontinuance of any illegal work
being done;or shall take any other action authorized by this Ordinance to insure compliance
with or prevent violation of its provisions.
B. Zoning Permits
A zoning permit shall be required prior to the erection, construction, moving or alteration of
any building, structure or portion thereof, but not including normal repairs, maintenance, or
interior remodeling.
Applications for zoning permits shall be made in writing to the Zoning Officer and shall
contain all information necessary to ascertain whether the proposed erection, construction,
alteration or use complies with the provisions of the Ordinance including the following:
Plan in duplicate drawn to scale indicating:
Actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon;
Exact size and location on the lot of all buildings and other structures, if any, and the
location and dimensions of proposed buildings and other structures or additions;
Existing and proposed uses, showing the number of families the building is designed to
accommodate.
Applications for zoning permits shall be granted or refused within 15 days from date of
application. One (1) copy of the plan shall be returned to the applicant marked either
approved or disapproved and attested to same by the signature of the Zoning Officer. The
second copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be filed in the office of the Zoning Officer.
C. Certificates of Occupancy
A certificate of occupancy shall be required prior to the occupation for use or change of use
of land, building or structure, except for uses accessory to private residences, private
recreation or agricultural uses.
Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made in writing to the Zoning
Officer:
When use of premises involves a new building or structure, or additions to an existing
building or structure, such application shall be made at the same time application for a
zoning permit is made.
77
When no construction or alteration is involved, application to occupy and use land may be
made at any time. Such application shall contain all information necessary for the Zoning
Officer to determine whether the proposed occupation and use of land conforms to the
provisions of this Ordinance.
An application for a certificate of occupancy shall be granted or refused within fifteen (15)
days after the Zoning Officer has been officially notified of (a) completion of construction,
or (b) application to occupy and use land where no construction is involved.
D. Enforcement
This Ordinance shall be administered by the Zoning Officer of Luzerne County. No permit
or certificate of occupancy provided for in this Ordinance shall be granted by him for any
purpose except in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, or with a decision of
the Board or the courts.
E. Violations
Whenever a violation of this Ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person
may file a written complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof, which shall be filed
with the Zoning Officer. He shall acknowledge such complaint, immediately investigate,
and take action thereon as provided in this Ordinance.
9.02 Schedule of Fees (See Section 9.02 at the end of this Ordinance)
9.03 Enforcement
A. Enforcement Notice
If it appears to Luzerne County that a violation of the Zoning Ordinance has occurred,
Luzerne County shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement notice as
provided in this section.
The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel on which the
violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement
notices regarding that parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of
record.
An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the County intends to
take action;
The location of the property in violation;
78
The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not been met,
citing in each instance the applicable provisions of the Ordinance;
The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and the date before
which the steps must be completed;
That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board within a
prescribed period of time in accordance with procedures set forth in the Ordinance;
That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended by appeal
to the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
B. Causes of Action
In case of any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in violation of the
Luzerne County Zoning Ordinance, an officer of Luzerne County or any aggrieved owner or
tenant of real property who shows that his property or person will be substantially affected
by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action
or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or
land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting
a violation. When any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that
action shall be served upon the municipality at least 30 days prior to the time the action is
begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the governing body of Luzerne County. No
such action may be maintained until such notice has been given.
C. Jurisdiction
District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings brought under Section 9.3D.
D. Enforcement Remedies
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation
of the provisions of the Luzerne County Zoning Ordinance, shall upon being found liable
therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by Luzerne County, pay a judgment
of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by
Luzerne County. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, Luzerne County may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice determining that there has been a violation
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or
corporation violating the Ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in
which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
79
following the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice and thereafter
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs,
and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of this zoning ordinance shall be
paid over to Luzerne County.
The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown,
tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or
entity other than Luzerne County the right to commence any action or enforcement pursuant
to this section before a District Justice. Aggrieved owners or tenants must commence equity
actions at the county court level.
ARTICLE 10 - AMENDMENTS TO MAP OR TEXT
10.01 General
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practices
require, the Governing Body of Luzerne County by Ordinance, may, after receipt of
recommendation thereon from the Planning Commission, and subject to the procedures
provided by law, amend, supplement or change the regulations, district boundaries or
classifications of property, now or hereafter established by this Ordinance or amendments
thereof.
10.2 Procedure For Change In Zoning District
A. Applications
Applications for any change in the text of the Zoning Ordinance or of district boundaries or
classifications of property shown on the Zoning Map, shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer upon such forms and accompanied by such data and information as may be
prescribed for that purpose by him, so as to insure the fullest practicable presentations of
facts for the record. Each application for a change of district boundaries or classification of
property shall be verified by at least one of the owners or lessees of property within the area
proposed to be reclassified, attesting to the truth and correctness of all facts and information
presented with the application. It shall contain a map of the area proposed to be rezoned, and
the area within 200 feet, giving the name and address of property owners and all district
boundary lines, and streets and alleys located therein. The Zoning Officer shall check the
application to determine whether it conforms with the requirements listed above, and if
satisfactory, shall immediately submit it to the Office of the Commission Amendments to
the Zoning Ordinance may also be initiated by the Commission by resolution, and
recommended to the Governing Body of Luzerne County for adoption.
80
B Action of Commission
The Commission may recommend that the application be granted as requested, or it may
recommend a modification of the zoning amendment requested in the application, or it may
recommend that the application be not granted. These recommendations shall then be
certified to the Governing Body of Luzerne County.
C. Public Hearings by the Governing Body of Luzerne County.
After receiving from the Commission the certification of said recommendations on the
proposed amendment, and before adoption of such amendment, the Governing Body of
Luzerne County (Body) shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of the first publication of
which shall not be more than thirty (30) days and not less than fourteen (14) days from the
date of the hearing. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. It shall be published once
each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality affected by the amendment. The notice shall state the purpose, place or places
and times at which the proposed amendment to the Ordinance, including text and maps, may
be examined.
The Body, through the Zoning Officer, shall give notice of the time, place and purpose of
public hearings to be held by it on proposed amendments or supplements, by mailing a
postal card or letter notice to the owners of all properties lying within 200 feet of any part of
the property proposed to be changed. The failure to notify as provided in this Section, shall
not invalidate any recommendations adopted hereunder; it being the intention of this Section
to provide, so far as may be possible, due notice to the persons substantially interested in the
proposed change that an application is pending before the Body, proposing to make a change
in the Zoning Map or the regulations set forth in this Ordinance. In the case of storage of
explosives, in addition to the above, property owners within 500 feet of the structure in
which the explosives are stored, shall also be notified.
If the proposed amendment involves a zoning map change, notice of said public hearing
shall be conspicuously posted by Luzerne County at points deemed sufficient by Luzerne
County along the perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The affected
tract or area shall be posted at least one week prior to the date of the hearing.
If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed amendment is changed
substantially, or is revised, to include land previously not affected by it, the governing body
shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the
amendment.
81
D. Action of the Governing Body of Luzerne County.
The Governing Body of Luzerne County shall consider the recommendations of the
Planning Commission, and other information given at its public hearing, and vote on the
proposed amendment to the text or map of the Zoning Ordinance. The applicant and others
so requesting, shall receive notice of the decision of the Governing Body of Luzerne
County, through the Zoning Officer.
ARTICLE 11 - DEFINITIONS
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall be used in the
interpretations and construction of this Ordinance, and words used in the present tense
include the future; the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural, the singular;
the word “building” shall include arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented,
leased, or intended to be used; and the word “shall” is mandatory and not directory.
Accessory Use: A use or structure subordinate to the principal use of a building on the
same lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building.
Adult Bookstore (Theater): An establishment having as a significant or substantial
portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, other periodicals, or films, video tape
recordings for viewing off or on the premises which display specified anatomical areas or
specified sexual activities ( see Adult Entertainment definition).
Adult Entertainment: Any operation or facility providing as a primary or accessory use
acts, shows, performances, pictures, books, magazines or models for the purpose of
displaying specified anatomical areas or engaging in specified sexual activities. This shall
include bartenders, waiters, waitresses, other employees, agents, contractors or customers
exposing specified anatomical areas, or engaging in specified sexual activities. These
facilities shall include, but not be limited to: BYOB Club, nude modeling studio, massage
parlors, etc.
A. Specified Anatomical Areas: Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola, human genitals in an aroused state, whether covered or not covered.
B. Specified Sexual Activities: Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, bondage, sadomasochism, fondling or other erotic touching of
human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
82
Agriculture: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying,
pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry
husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for farm homes, and packing, treating or
storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall
be secondary to that of normal agriculture activities, and provided further that the above
uses shall not include commercial hog farms or fur farms, and excluding fertilizer plants or
sale of fertilizer, feed stores, tanneries, and similar objectionable uses.
Alley: A public or private way affording secondary means of access to abutting property.
Board or Zoning Hearing Board: The Zoning Hearing Board appointed by the Governing
Body of Luzerne County in connection with the Luzerne County Zoning Ordinance.
Building: Any structure for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels.
Building Height: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point on the coping of
a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves
and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
Commission, Planning Commission, County Planning or Luzerne County Planning
Commission: The Luzerne County Planning Commission of Luzerne County,
Pennsylvania.
Communications Antenna: Any device used for transmission or reception of
radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile radio service or
any other wireless communications signals, including without limitation, omnidirectional
or whip antennas, directional, and panel antennas owned or operated by any
person or entity licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to
operate such device, This definition shall not include private residence mounted satellite
dishes, or television antennas or amateur radio equipment including without
limitation ham or citizen band radio antennas.
Communications Equipment Building: An unmanned building or cabinet
containing communications equipment required for the operation of Communications
Antennas and covering an area on the ground not greater than 250 square feet.
Communications Tower: A structure other than a building, such as a monopole,
self supporting, or guyed tower, designed and used to support Communications Antennas.
Correctional Institutions: A jail, or other institutional facility, used to confine and/or
provide treatment, or rehabilitation, of violators of criminal laws, including juvenile
inmates/detainees and including facilities for persons who are participating in supervised
work release programs, whether such facilities provide confinement for all of each 24 hour
period, or only a portion thereof, but not including temporary holding facilities that are
83
necessary to a police station. These uses include, but are not limited to, detention centers,
honor camps, houses of correction, jails, juvenile detention centers, penitentiaries, prison
farms, reformatories, training schools for delinquents, offenders, and other adjudicated
individuals.
Crematory: A facility used for incineration of deceased individuals.
Districts: A portion of the territory of Luzerne County, within which certain regulations
and requirements, or various combinations thereof, apply under the provisions of this
Ordinance. The term “R” or Residence District shall include “S-1”, “R-1”, “R-2”, and “R-3”
districts. The term “B” or Business District shall include the “B-1”, “B-2”, “B-3” and “B-4”
districts.
Drive-In Commercial Uses: Any retail commercial use providing considerable off-street
parking and catering primarily to vehicular trade such as drive-in restaurants, drive-in
theaters and similar uses.
Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used for residential
purposes.
Dwelling, Single-Family: A detached building arranged or used for occupancy by one (1)
family.
Dwelling, Two-Family: A detached or semi-detached building where not more than two
(2) individual family or dwelling units are entirely separated by vertical walls or horizontal
floors, unpierced except by access to the outside or to a common cellar.
Dwelling, Multiple: A building used or designed as a residence for three (3) or more
families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking therein, including
apartment houses, apartment hotels, flats, townhouses and group houses.
Dwelling Unit: A dwelling unit consists of one (1) or more rooms for living purposes,
together with separate cooking and sanitary facilities used or intended to be used by one (1)
or more persons living together and maintaining a common household, and accessible from
the outdoors either directly, or through an entrance hall shared with other dwelling units.
Entertainment Facilities: Any activity conducted for gain which is generally related to the
entertainment field, such as motion picture theaters, bowling alleys, roller skating rinks,
miniature golf, golf driving ranges, commercial swimming pools, carnivals, and related
uses.
84
Family:
A. A single person occupying a dwelling unit and maintaining a household.
B. Two or more persons related by blood or marriage, occupying a dwelling unit, living
together and maintaining a common household, including not more than one boarder,
roomer or lodger.
C. Not more than three (3) unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit, living together and
maintaining a common household.
Farm: An area of land not less than five (5) acres in size, and used for agricultural
purposes, as defined under “Agriculture”.
Flood: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
Flood-Fringe: That portion of the One Hundred (100) Year flood plain outside the
floodway.
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the One Hundred (100) Year flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Floor Area: For the purpose of applying the requirements for off-street parking and
loading, “floor area”, in the case of offices, merchandising or service types of uses, shall
mean the gross floor area used or intended to be used by tenants, or for service to the public
as customers, patrons, clients or patients, including areas occupied by fixtures and
equipment used for display or sale of merchandise. It shall not include areas used principally
for non-public purposes such as storage, incidental repair, processing or packaging of
merchandise, for shop windows, for offices incidental to the management or maintenance of
stores or buildings, for toilet or rest rooms, for utilities or for dressing rooms, fitting or
alteration rooms.
Garage, Private: A space or structure on the same lot with or in the building to which it is
accessory, for storage only, having no public shop or service in connection therewith, and in
which no occupation, business or industry is conducted. Except on farms, only one (1)
commercial motor vehicle not exceeding two (2) tons capacity or weight may be parked in a
private garage, or driveway.
Garage, Service: A garage, other than a private garage, where motor driven vehicles are
stored, equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
85
Governing Body of Luzerne County or Body: The organization designated by
Pennsylvania Code, or a Home Rule Charter, to conduct the business and functions of
Luzerne County.
Height of a Communications Tower: The vertical distance measured from the
ground level to the highest point on a Communications Tower, including antennas mounted
on the tower.
Hotel: A building designed or used primarily as a temporary abiding place in which lodging
is provided for compensation, with or without meals, containing ten (10) or more guest
rooms, and having an outside entrance in common.
Junk Yard: A place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold
exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled, including auto
wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards, and places or yards for use of
salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, but excluding such
uses when conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, and excluding pawn
shops and establishments for the sale, purchase, or storage of used cars in operable
condition, salvaged machinery, used furniture, and household equipment, and the processing
of used, discarded or salvaged materials as part of the manufacturing operations.
Landowner: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder of an
option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any
condition), a lessee having a remaining term of not less than forty (40) years, or other person
having a proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to be a landowner for the purposes of
this act.
Lot: A parcel of land abutting on a street, whose area, in addition to the parts thereof
occupied or which may thereafter be occupied by a principal building or one (1) unit group
of buildings and its accessory buildings is sufficient to provide the open spaces required by
this Ordinance.
Lot, Corner: A lot abutting on, and at the intersection of, two (2) or more streets, or upon
two (2) parts of the same street, where in either case the interior angle formed by
intersection of the street lines does not exceed 135 degrees.
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot or through lot.
Lot of Record: Any lot which individually, or as part of a subdivision, has been recorded
in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Luzerne County, Pennsylvania.
Lot Width: The width of a lot at the front building line, measured at right angles to its
depth.
86
Mortuaries: A building, or part thereof, used for funeral services. These activities may
include embalming, preparation of the dead for burial, autopsies, storage of funeral supplies
and vehicles; but shall not include a Crematory.
Motel, Motor or Tourist Court: One (1) or more buildings for the accommodation of
transient guests, chiefly motorists, containing guest rooms for rent, each of which has a
separate outside entrance.
No-Impact Home Occupations: A business conducted from a residence which involves
no customer traffic, pickup, delivery, or removal functions in excess normal.
Non-Conforming Building or Structure: A lawful building or other structure which does
not conform to one (1) or more of the applicable area regulations of the district in which it is
located, either on the effective date of this Ordinance, or as a result of a subsequent
amendment thereto.
Non-Conforming Use: The legal use of land, or a building or other structure, which does
not conform to the applicable use regulations of the district in which it is located, either on
the effective date of this Ordinance, or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto.
One Hundred Year Flood: A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every One
Hundred (100) years (i.e., that has a one (1) percent chance of occurring each year, although
the flood may occur in any year.
One Hundred (100) Year Floodplain District or Area: The district (s) or area(s) that has
a one (1) percent chance of being flooded in any given year.
Outdoor Advertisement: An advertisement used outdoors, including painted walls, or
rock face, of a product or service unrelated to the use of the land or structure on which it is
located, but not including official notices or directional road signs of a government body.
Parking Area: A parking lot or garage, used for parking of automobiles, available to the
public, and which is not an accessory use.
Personal Care Boarding or Domiciliary Care Houses: Operations meeting the criteria of
“Rooming or Boarding Houses”, plus providing of personal care including, but not limited
to money management, transportation, medical assistance, nutritional guidance, dressing and
hygiene. Also those operations which obtain their boarders from the Pennsylvania Office for
the Aging or other Social Service Agencies.
Personal Services: Any enterprise conducted for gain, which primarily offers services to
the general public such as shoe repair, valet service, watch repairing, barber shops, beauty
parlors, and related activities.
87
Planned Residential Development (PRD): An area of land, controlled by a landowner, to
be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling units, the development plan for
which does not correspond in lot size, bulk or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage and
required open space to the regulations established in any one (1) residential district created,
from time to time, under the provisions of the Luzerne County Zoning Ordinance.
Professional Offices: The use of offices and related spaces for such professional services
as provided by doctors, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers, and realtors.
Public Communications Transmission Tower: A structure, owned and operated by a
public utility electric company regulated by the Pa. Public Utility Commission,
designed and used to support overhead electricity transmission lines.
Public Uses: Public schools, parks, and administrative, cultural and service buildings and
telephone exchange buildings, but not including public land or buildings devoted primarily
or solely to the storage and maintenance of equipment and material.
Recreational Facilities, Commercial: Those recreation facilities operated as a business
and open to the general public for a fee.
Recreation Facilities, Private: Group recreation facilities other than commercial, or public
recreation uses, not operated for profit, and open only to its members.
Rooming or Boarding House: A building or part thereof, other than hotel or restaurant,
where meals and/or lodging are provided for compensation, for four (4) or more persons not
related to the resident family.
Semi-Public Uses: Churches, Sunday schools, parochial schools, colleges, hospitals, and
other institutions of an educational, religious, charitable or philanthropic nature.
Shopping Center: A retail commercial area designed as a unit, with adequate off-street
parking area, and usually consisting of several one-story buildings.
Sign: An advertisement displayed outside a building, pertaining to a product, service or
name, related directly to the permitted activity carried on and use of the lot on which it is
placed, including painted walls or structures.
Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface
of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, the space between such floor and
the ceiling above it. A basement shall be counted as a story if its ceiling is over six (6) feet
above the average level of the finished ground surface adjoining the exterior walls of such
story, or if it is used for business or dwelling purposes.
Structure: Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land
or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
88
Structural Alteration: Any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls,
columns, beams, or girders.
Telephone Exchange Building: A building and its equipment erected and used for the
purpose of facilitating transmission and exchange of telephone and radio messages between
subscribers, provided that in a residential district such building shall conform to the
architectural design of the neighborhood, and shall not include public access or business
facilities, storage of materials, trucks or repair facilities, or housing of repair crews.
Tourist Home: A rooming house primarily for transient guests.
Trailer or Mobile Home:
A. Mobile Home: A use designed to look like a single-family home, to be occupied by
a single-family, transportable, which may be towed on its own running gear, and which may
be temporarily or permanently affixed to real estate, used for non-transient residence
purposes, and constructed with the same, or similar, electrical, plumbing and sanitary
facilities as immobile housing.
B. Travel Trailer: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be
used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, permanently
identified “travel trailer” by the manufacturer of the trailer and, when factory equipped for
the road, having a body width not exceeding eight (8) feet, and being of any length, provided
its gross weight does not exceed 4500 pounds, or being of any weight, provided its body
length does not exceed 29 feet.
C. Pick-Up Coach: A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pick-up or
truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary
dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses.
D. Motorized Homes: A portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral
part of a self-propelled vehicle.
Trailer or Mobile Home Park: A tract of land specifically planned and equipped to
accommodate residential trailers or mobile homes for temporary or continuing occupancy,
including all buildings, structures, tents, vehicles, utilities, and accessories used or intended
as equipment for such trailer or mobile home park.
Trailer, Smaller Utility: Any trailer usually drawn by passenger automobile, used for the
occasional transport of personal effects.
89
Utilities: The erection, construction, alternation or maintenance by public utilities or
municipal or other governmental agencies, or underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam
or water transmission systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems and
their essential buildings, excluding Communications Towers and Communications
Antennas, as defined herein.
Ventilating Shafts: Any structure designed to furnish air and/or power, (including
transformation and conversion of said power) to underground coal mines.
Yard: Any open space located on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground up, except for accessory buildings, or such projections as are
expressly permitted in this Ordinance. The minimum depth or width of a yard shall consist
of the horizontal distance between the lot lines and the nearest point of the foundation wall
of the main building.
Yard, Front: An open space extending the full width of the lot between a building and the
front lot line, measured from the front property line or Edge-of-pave, whichever is closer to
the building, but in no case shall it be measured from the center line of the road.
Yard, Rear: An open space extending the full width of the lot between the building and the
rear lot line.
Yard, Side: An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard, between a
building and the nearest side lot line.
Zoning Certificate: The written authorization issued by the Zoning Officer, for the use of
land, or buildings or other structures.
Zoning Map: The map or maps containing the zoning districts of Luzerne County,
Pennsylvania, together with all amendments subsequently adopted.
Zoning Officer: The Zoning Officer or his authorized representative, appointed by the
Governing Body of Luzerne County of Luzerne County.
90
ARTICLE 12 - INTERPRETATION AND VALIDITY
12.01 Interpretation
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall be held to be
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort,
morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this Ordinance to interfere with
or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or
issued, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this Ordinance, or which shall be
adopted or issued, pursuant to law, relating to the use of buildings or premises and likewise
not in conflict with this Ordinance; nor is it intended by this Ordinance to interfere with or
abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties.
12.02 Validity
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or phrase of this Ordinance is for any
reason held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance.
12.03 Repeal
All ordinances or parts thereof which are in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance
are hereby repeated.
12.04 Effective Date
This Ordinance shall become effective from and after the date of its approval and adoption
as provided by law.
91
ARTICLE 13 - FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT(S)
13.1 General Provisions
A. Purpose
The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of property and life, the creation of
health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the
extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief,
and the impairment of the tax base by:
Regulating uses, activities, and development which, acting alone or in combination with
other existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause increases in flood
heights, velocities and frequencies;
Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development from locating within areas
subject to flooding;
Requiring all those uses, activities and developments that do occur in identified One
Hundred (100) Year flood plain districts to be protected and/or flood proofed against
flooding and flood damage.
Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are unsuited for intended
purposes because of flood hazards.
B. Applicability
These provisions shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the Luzerne County
Zoning Ordinance and shown on the Official Zoning Map as being located within the
boundaries of the various One Hundred (100)Year flood plain district(s).
C. Interpretation of District Boundaries
Where interpretation is needed concerning the exact location of any boundary of the various
One Hundred (100) Year flood plain district(s), the Zoning Hearing Board shall make the
necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the district
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the Board and to
submit his own technical evidence if he so desires.
D. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this Ordinance is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study.
Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or
92
natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This Ordinance
does not imply that areas outside the One Hundred (100)Year flood plain district(s), or that
land uses permitted within such districts, will be free from flooding or flood damages.
This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of Luzerne County or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
13.2 Establishment of Zoning Districts(s)
A. Basis For District Delineation
The various One Hundred (100) flood plain districts include all identified One Hundred
(100)Year flood plain districts within each municipality of the County subject to the
provisions of this Ordinance. Sources of information used as a basis for the identification
and delineation of One Hundred (100) Year flood plain districts, will include but not be
limited to, the National Flood Insurance Program Data, United States Geological Survey
Maps and the United States Army Corps of Engineers Flood Plain Information.
Where available, the final, or most recent, National Flood Insurance Study and the Flood
Hazard Boundary Maps, shall take precedence over all other information.
Certain municipalities subject to the provisions of this Ordinance will have areas which
have been delineated by the Federal Insurance Administration as being within the One
Hundred (100) Year flood plain, but for which there is incomplete, or total lack of
information concerning the One (100) Hundred Year flood elevation. In such instances, if
any supplemental information is available which contains more complete information
concerning the One (100) Hundred Year flood elevation, then such information shall be
used wherever possible.
B. Identification of One (100) Hundred Year Flood Plain Districts
The One (100) Hundred Year Floodway District (FW) is that area designated to carry and
discharge the waters of the One Hundred ( 100) Year flood, without increasing the water
surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point. Such districts are based
upon delineation of a floodway districts(s) in the National Flood Insurance studies and
accompanying maps.
The One Hundred (100) Year Flood Fringe District (FF) is that position of the One
Hundred (100)Year flood plain outside the floodway. The delineation of such districts is
based upon the One Hundred (100) Year flood profiles and floodway delineations contained
in the National Flood Insurance studies and accompanying maps.
The One Hundred (100) Year General Flood Conservation District (FA) is that identified
One Hundred (100) Year flood plain district for which no flood elevation information is
93
provided. Such area is shown as Zone A in the National Flood Insurance Study and
accompanying maps, if such study is available, or the Official Flood Hazard Boundary
Maps. In this case, supplemental data must be used to determine the One Hundred (100)
Year flood elevation. Supplemental data may be maps and/or studies from the United States,
Geological Survey, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Soil Conservation Services, etc.
The One Hundred (100) Year Special Flood Conservation District (FO) is that identified
One Hundred (100) Year flood plain district having shallow flood depths (between 1 and 3
feet) and/or unpredictable flow paths. Such district is shown as AO in the National Flood
Insurance Studies and accompanying maps, if such study is available.
C. Zoning Map
The boundaries of the various One Hundred (100) Year flood plain district(s) are established
as shown on the Official Zoning Maps of the County of Luzerne, which are declared to be a
part of this Ordinance, and which shall be kept on file at the Office of the Luzerne County
Planning Commission.
D. District Boundary Changes
The delineation of the various One Hundred (100) Year flood plain district(s) may be
revised by the Governing Body of Luzerne County where natural or man-made changes have
occurred, and/or where the need for such revisions are documented by additional and/or
more detailed studies conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the
Susquehanna River Basin Commission or other qualified agency or individual. Any such
changes shall first be approved by FEMA.
E. Overlay To Existing Ordinance(s)
The various One Hundred (100) Year flood plain district(s) shall be overlays to the existing
underlying district(s) as shown on the Official Zoning Maps of the County of Luzerne, and
as such, the provisions for those districts shall serve as a supplement to the underlying
district provisions. Where there happens to be any conflict between the provisions or
requirements of any of the One Hundred (100) Year flood plain district(s) and those of any
underlying districts, the more restrictive provisions and/or those pertaining to the One
Hundred (100) Year various flood plain district(s) shall apply.
13.3 District Provisions
All uses, activities, and development occurring within the various One Hundred (100) Year
flood plain district(s) shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of
this Ordinance and with all other applicable codes and ordinances such as Building Code or
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
94
Under no circumstances shall any use, activity and/or development adversely affect the
capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other
drainage facility or system.
Where there is any proposed change to a watercourse, a permit must first be obtained from
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. The community shall notify
adjacent communities of such proposed change, with copies of notification going to FEMA
and PEMA.
A. Floodway District (FW)
In the One Hundred (100) Year Floodway District, no structural development shall be
permitted except where the effect of such development on flood heights is fully offset by
accompanying stream improvements which have been approved by all appropriate local
and/or State authorities.
B. Uses Permitted By Right
The following uses and activities are permitted provided that they are in compliance with
the provisions of the underlying district and are not prohibited by any other ordinance, and
provided that they do not require structures, fill or storage of materials and equipment:
Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, and wild crop harvesting.
Public and private recreational uses and activities such as parks, day camps, picnic grounds,
golf courses, boat launching and swimming areas, hiking and horseback riding trails,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, trap and skeet ranges, and
hunting and fishing areas.
Accessory residential uses such as yard areas, gardens, play areas, and pervious parking
areas.
Accessory industrial and commercial uses such as yard areas, pervious parking and loading
areas, airport landing strips, etc.
C. Uses Permitted By Special Exception
The following uses and activities may be permitted by Special Exception provided that they
are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and are not prohibited by any
other ordinance.
Structures accessory to the uses and activities in Section 13.3 B.
95
Utilities and public facilities and improvements such as railroads, streets, bridges,
transmission lines, pipe lines, water and sewage treatment plants, and other similar or
related uses.
Water-related uses and activities such as marinas, docks, wharves, piers, etc.
Extraction of sand, gravel, and other materials.
Temporary uses such as circuses, carnivals, and similar activities.
Storage of materials and equipment provided that they are not buoyant, flammable or
explosive, and are not subject to major damage by flooding, or provided that such material
and equipment is firmly anchored to prevent flotation or movement, and/or can be readily
moved from the area within the time available after flood warning.
Other similar uses and activities provided that they do not increase flood heights and
velocities.
All uses, activities, and structural developments, shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the flood proofing provisions contained in all other applicable codes and ordinances.
D. Considerations For Special Exceptions and Variances
In passing upon applications for special exceptions and variances in the various One
Hundred (100) Year flood plain district(s), the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider all
relevant factors specified in other sections of the ordinance.
The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by
encroachments, the danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to
the injury of others, and the safety of access to the property in time of flood or by ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
The proposed water supply and the sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to
prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions.
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owners.
The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.
96
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development
anticipated in the foreseeable future.
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management
program for the area. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site, and such other factors which are relevant
to the purposes of this ordinance.
E. One Hundred (100) Year Flood Fringe (FF), One Hundred (100) Year General Flood
Conservation (FA) and One Hundred (100) Year Special Flood Conservation (FC)
Districts
In the One Hundred (100) Year FF and FA Districts, the development and/or use of land
shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the underlying district provided that
all such uses, activities, and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with
the flood proofing and related provisions contained in all other applicable codes and
ordinances. In the One Hundred (100) Year Special Flood Conservation (FO) District, the
same provisions as above shall apply; however, specific uses shall be flood proofed and/or
elevated above the crown of the nearest street and/or road as set forth in all applicable
Building Codes and/or Building Permit Ordinances, and the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinances.
Under no circumstances, however, shall materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or
which at times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, be stored
below an elevation of one and one-half feet above the One Hundred (100) Year flood
elevation.
13.4 Existing Structures And/Or Uses In The One Hundred (100) Year Flood Plain
District(s)
A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of
these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions, may be continued
subject to the following conditions:
Existing structures and/or uses located in the One Hundred (100) Year Floodway District
shall not be expanded or enlarged (unless the effect of the proposed expansion or
enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying stream improvements).
The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an
existing structure and/or use regardless of location in the various One Hundred (100) Year
Flood Plain District(s), to an extent or amount of fifty (50) percent or more of its value, shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this and any other applicable
ordinance. Uses or adjuncts thereof which are, or become, nuisances, shall not be permitted
to continue.
97
LUZERNE COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION
ZONING FEE SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2012
Section 9.02 Schedule of Fees:
Application Type Fee
Zoning Permits:
Residential $ 85.00 per unit
Commercial and Industrial* Commercial Industrial
Less than $ 50,000 $ 480.00 $ 725.00
$ 50,000 to $ 100,000 $ 780.00 $1025.00
For each additional $ 1,000, or
portion thereof, over $ 100,000,
an additional fee of $4/$1,000 $5/$1,000
· No permit under this section shall exceed $ 25,000.
·
Communications (Cell) Towers $ 1000.00
Outdoor Advertisements $ 800.00
Other Principal Buildings/Uses
(e.g., churches, schools, public buildings) $ 85.00
Signs $ 85.00
Additions and Accessory Uses:
Residential – Accessory Uses Up To 1000 Sq. Ft. $ 45.00
Residential - Accessory Uses 1001 Sq. Ft. and Greater
And In-Ground Pools $ 50.00
Residential – Additions $ 50.00
Commercial $ 230.00
Industrial $ 430.00
All Other $ 85.00
Occupancy Permits:
Residential $ 37.00
Commercial (Including Home Occupations) $ 85.00
Industrial $ 200.00
98
Mining, Junkyards, Solid Waste Disposal, Waste
Transfer Facility and Extraction and Storage Of
Gas and Oil $ 1,500.00
All Others $ 65.00
Zoning Hearing Board Applications:
Residential (Single Family Residences) $ 210.00
Residential (Multiple Unit Structures) $ 650.00
Commercial and Industrial $ 710.00
Home Occupation $ 375.00
All Other $ 190.00
Amendments to Zoning Map, or Text-- $ 700.00
Planned Residential Developments $ 1000.00
Correctional Institution $ 1000.00
SUBDIVISION
AND
LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE OF
LUZERNE COUNTY
PENNSYLVANIA
ORIGINALLY ADOPTED: November 14, 1963
LATEST TEXT AMENDMENT: September 25, 2012
2
MUNICIPALITIES UNDER COUNTY JURISDICTION
ZONING SUBDIVISION
1. AVOCA BOROUGH
2. CONYNGHAM TOWNSHIP
3. COURTDALE BOROUGH
4. DUPONT BOROUGH
5. DURYEA BOROUGH
6. FAIRMOUNT TOWNSHIP
7. HUGHESTOWN BOROUGH
8. HUNLOCK TOWNSHIP
9. HUNTINGTON TOWNSHIP
10. JEDDO BOROUGH
11. LAFLIN BOROUGH
12. LAKE TOWNSHIP
13. LUZERNE BOROUGH
14. NEW COLUMBUS BOROUGH
15. NEWPORT TOWNSHIP
16. PRINGLE BOROUGH
17. ROSS TOWNSHIP
18. UNION TOWNSHIP
19. WARRIOR RUN BOROUGH
20. WEST WYOMING BOROUGH
21. WYOMING BOROUGH
22. YATESVILLE BOROUGH
1. AVOCA BOROUGH
2. CONYNGHAM TOWNSHIP
3. COURTDALE BOROUGH
4. DALLAS BOROUGH
5. DUPONT BOROUGH
6. DURYEA BOROUGH
7. EXETER TOWNSHIP
8. FAIRMOUNT TOWNSHIP
9. HUGHESTOWN BOROUGH
10. HUNLOCK TOWNSHIP
11. HUNTINGTON TOWNSHIP
12. JEDDO BOROUGH
13. LAFLIN BOROUGH
14. LAKE TOWNSHIP
15. LUZERNE BOROUGH
16. NEW COLUMBUS BOROUGH
17. NEWPORT TOWNSHIP
18. PLYMOUTH BOROUGH
19. PLYMOUTH TOWNSHIP
20. PRINGLE BOROUGH
21. ROSS TOWNSHIP
22. SHICKSHINNY BOROUGH
23. UNION TOWNSHIP
24. WARRIOR RUN BOROUGH
25. WEST PITTSTON BOROUGH
26. WEST WYOMING BOROUGH
27. WYOMING BOROUGH
28. YATESVILLE BOROUGH
3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section Page
1 GRANT OF POWER AND LIMITS OF REGULATIONS……………………………….. 4
2 OBJECTIVES........................................................................................................................................... 5
3 SHORT TITLE ....................................................................................................................................... 6
4 PROCEDURE ........................................................................................................................................ 6
5 DESIGN STANDARDS....................................................................................................................... 9
6 IMPROVEMENTS .............................................................................................................................. 15
7 PLAN REQUIREMENTS................................................................................................................... 24
8 MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS...................................................................................... 30
9 DEFINITIONS..................................................................................................................................... 31
10 VALIDITY ............................................................................................................................................ 34
11 REVISION AND AMENDMENT................................................................................................... 34
12 REMEDIES ........................................................................................................................................... 34
13 ENACTMENT ..................................................................................................................................... 36
14 FLOOD CONTROL............................................................................................................................. 36
APPENDIX
A STORM DRAINAGE RUNOFF CALCULATIONS.....................................................................40
B STREET SIGNS, NAMES AND HOUSE NUMBERS...................................................................44
C GENERAL STORMWATER ORDINANCE..........................................................................46
7.11 FEES ................................................................................................................................................... 55
4
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
F O R
LUZERNE COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE CONTROL OF THE SUBDIVISION AND LAND
DEVELOPMENT IN LUZERNE COUNTY AND THE APPROVAL OF PLATS AND LAND WITHIN
THE JURISDICTION OF THE GOVERNING BODY OF LUZERNE COUNTY.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF LUZERNE COUNTY,
PENNSYLVANIA, AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1
1.1 Section 501, Article V, of Act 247 of the Session of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
amended by Act 93 and subsequent amendments, gives the governing bodies of counties
authority to regulate subdivision and land development within the County by enacting a
subdivision and land development ordinance. Provisions in the Act are as follows: The
ordinance may require that all plats of land lying within the municipality shall be submitted
for approval to the governing body or in lieu thereof to a planning agency designated in the
ordinance of this purpose. All powers granted herein to the governing body or the planning
agency shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of the subdivision and land
development ordinance. In the case of any development governed by the Planned
Residential Section of the Luzerne County Zoning Ordinance, however the applicable
provisions of the subdivision and land development ordinance shall be as modified by such
ordinance and the rights and duties of the parties thereto shall be governed by said Section
of the Zoning Ordinance.
When any county has adopted a subdivision and land development ordinance in accordance
with the terms of Article V, a certified copy of the ordinance shall be sent to every city
borough, incorporated town or township within the county. All amendments shall also be
sent to the aforementioned municipalities. The powers of governing bodies of counties to
enact, amend and repeal subdivision and land development ordinances shall be limited to
land in those cities, boroughs, incorporated towns and townships wholly or partly within
the county which have no subdivision and land development ordinance in effect at the time
a subdivision and land development ordinance is introduced before the governing body of
the county; and until the city, borough, incorporated town or township subdivision and land
development ordinance is in effect and a certified copy of such ordinance is filed with the
county planning agency, if one exists. The enactment of a subdivision and land development
ordinance by any municipality, other than a county, whose land is subject to a county
subdivision and land development ordinance, shall act as a repeal protanto of the county
5
subdivision and land development ordinance within the municipality adopting such
ordinance. However, applications for subdivision and
land development located within a city, borough, incorporated town or township having
adopted a subdivision and land development located within a city, borough, incorporated
town or township having adopted a subdivision and land development ordinance as set forth
in this article shall be forwarded upon receipt by the municipality to the County Planning
agency for review and report: Provided, that such municipalities shall not approve such
applications until the County report is received or until the expiration of thirty (30) days
from the date the application was forwarded to the County. Furthermore, all
subdivision/land development plats sent to the County for review shall be accompanied by
the then prevailing fees of the Commission. These fees shall be paid by the developer.
Governing Body of Luzerne County of Luzerne County hereby designates the Luzerne
County Planning Commission as the agency to act on all subdivisions and land
developments under jurisdiction of this Ordinance.
SECTION 2 OBJECTIVES
In the enactment of this Ordinance the Governing Body of Luzerne County propose to
accomplish the following objectives of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience,
order, prosperity or welfare of the present and future inhabitants of Luzerne County,
Pennsylvania:
2.1 To set up a standard set of minimum regulations to guide sub-dividers, architects, and engineers
in the design and development of subdivisions.
2.2 To provide protection for the lot purchasers and the local government in the installation of proper
utilities and improvements by the sub-divider.
2.3 To provide adequate light and air by controlling lot size and land development, preventing on
one hand excessive concentration of population, and on the other hand, excessive and
wasteful scattering of population.
2.4 To reduce the waste of excessive amounts of roads through poor design, or
excessive costs of roads or grading of lots by not fitting the roads to the contour of land.
2.5 To secure safety from fire and other dangers.
6
2.6 To make adequate provision for transportation, water flowage, water supply, drainage, sanitation,
educational opportunities, recreation, protection of the tax base, securing economy in
government expenditures, and the protection of both urban and nonurban developments.
2.7 To reduce erosion and sedimentation resulting from earth moving activities related to
subdivision and land development and/or from lack of protective cover which already
exists on land to be subdivided and/or developed.
SECTION 3 SHORT TITLE
The official name of this Ordinance shall be the "Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance of Luzerne County, Pennsylvania."
SECTION 4 PROCEDURE
4.1 Preliminary Considerations.
4.11 Regulatory.
4.111 Grading - No person, firm or corporation proposing to make or have subdivision or land
development, within the area of jurisdiction of this Ordinance, shall proceed with any
grading before obtaining from the Commission the approval of the Preliminary Plat of the
proposed subdivision or land development, and no lots shall be delivered or agreements for
sale or lease made for lots in any subdivision or any land development, before obtaining
from the Commission the approval of the Final Plat of the proposed subdivision or land
development and duly recorded in the Office of the Luzerne County Recorder of Deeds.
4.112 Access - Drainage - Geology - No land shall be subdivided for residential use or used for land
development (a) unless adequate access to the land over adequate streets or thoroughfares
exists or will be provided by the developer, (b) in case such land is considered by the
Commission to be unsuitable for such use by reason of flooding or improper drainage,
objectionable earth and rock formation, subsidence, topography or any other feature harmful
to the health and safety of possible residents and the community as a whole.
4.12 Advisory
In order to make the most of the opportunities related to the subdivision and to conserve
time, effort, and expense, the developer should consult with the Director of Planning, the
Subdivision Administrator, the County Engineer and other relevant public officials prior to
the preparation of the Preliminary Plan of the subdivision; this informal review should
prevent unnecessary and costly revisions. Requirements for land use and rezoning,
thoroughfares, school and recreational sites, shopping centers, community facilities,
7
sanitation, water supply and drainage, and relationship to other developments, existing and
proposed, in the vicinity, should be determined in advance of the preparation of the
subdivision plat of land development. The developer should contact the officials of the
municipality in which the subdivision is located and also the "U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development" if he contemplates obtaining Federal Housing Insurance to
determine whether any of their requirements, particularly road construction, are of a higher
standard than required in this Ordinance. A thorough estimate of the situation will result in
sound decisions with respect to the form, character, and extent of the proposed subdivision
and land development.
4.2 Applications for Approval.
4.21 Preliminary Plan
4.211 Submission - A developer desiring approval of a plat of a subdivision or land development of
any land lying within the jurisdiction of the Commission, will submit three (3) sets of all required
documentation (Additional sets if required by the Commission) including, but not limited to; profiles,
cross-sections, percolation data, and any other necessary material, including a copy of the current deed.
4.212 Approval - After an application for approval of a Preliminary Plat of a subdivision or land
development has been filed, the Commission will send one (1) copy to the Engineer, and one (1) copy
to the governing body or planning commission (if any) of the municipality in which the subdivision or
land development is located. Notification of the application is sent to the Pa. Department of
Environmental Protection. The applicant will submit appropriate information to the Luzerne
Conservation District and all applicable Federal and State agencies, if required. Upon resolution of all
comments from the appropriate reviewing agencies, Engineer and Commission, the Commission will
schedule a public meeting for consideration of Preliminary, or Final, Plan approval. The Preliminary
Plat shall be effective for three (3) years, at the end of which Final Approval of the subdivision must
have been obtained from the Commission. Any Plat not receiving Final Approval within the time period
set forth herein shall be null and void, and the developer shall be required to resubmit a new Plat for
Preliminary Approval subject to all new zoning and subdivision amendments. No subdivision or land
development plan approval shall be granted for any property or properties unless they meet all
requirements(use, lot size, setbacks, etc.) of the Luzerne County Zoning Ordinance, and must not be
the subject of a zoning violation as evidenced by a Notice of Violation Letter, or any other enforcement
proceeding.
4.22 The Final Plan
4.221 Submission - The developer, upon completion of all improvements required by this Ordinance or a
guarantee that such improvements will be completed as needed as given in Section 7.24, shall file with
8
the Commission the Final Record Plat of the subdivision land development for final approval, at least
two (2) week prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission, which plat
or land development shall conform in every respect with the requirements specified in Section 7 of this
Ordinance. The Final or Record Plat of any portion of a large subdivision or land development,
the preliminary plat or land development of which has been approved by the Commission, may be
submitted for final approval. Three (3) black line or blue prints of the Final or Record Plat shall be
submitted accompanied by a deed to all lands to be dedicated to the public.
4.222 Checking - The Commission and/or the Engineer will examine the Final Plat to ascertain: (a) the technical
details of the plat itself have been checked and found satisfactory, and (b) all required improvements
have been filed for completion of work as specified in Section 7.24 of this Ordinance.
4.223 Approval - The Commission, after said copy of the Final Plat has been checked and provided that the
Final Plat is found to conform with the Preliminary Plat as approved, will approve the Final Plat and
enter such approval thereon in writing by its Chairman, The approval of the Final or Record Plat by the
Commission shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the public or the dedication
of any street or other proposed public way, space, or area shown on said Nat. If the Final Plat differs
substantially from the Preliminary Plat, the commission may require a new Preliminary Plat to be
submitted, or require the sub-divider to make necessary changes in the Final Plat. No subdivision or
land development final plan approval shall be granted for any property or properties, unless they meet
all requirements (use, lot size, setbacks, etc.) of the Luzerne County Zoning Ordinance, and they must
not be the subject of a zoning violation as evidenced by a Notice of Violation Letter, or any other
enforcement proceeding.
4.224 Referral to Governing Body for Acceptance of Street - The Commission then will transmit one (1) prints
of the Final Plat to the governing body of the municipality, in which the subdivision or land
development lies, for action on any proposed dedication. If the governing body will not accept the
streets, the developer has the right to amend said plat, and resubmit it for approval to the Commission.
4.225 Recording Plat The sub-divider shall record the Final Plat in the Office of the Luzerne County Recorder
of Deeds within ninety (90) days after its approval by the Commission. The recorded Final Plat shall
officially note the approval of the Commission. Within two (2) weeks after recording the Final Plat
the developer shall furnish the Commission with a copy of the Recorder's certificate to assure the
Final Plat is properly recorded. No land in a subdivision or land development shall be sold, leased or
transferred prior to the approval and recording of the Final Plat. If the developer fails to record the
Final Plat within the ninety (90) day period, the action of the Commission shall be null and void,
unless an extension of time is granted in writing by the Commission upon written request by the
developer.
9
SECTION 5 DESIGN STANDARDS
The Preliminary Plan of the subdivision of land development shall substantially conform to
the following principles and standards of design.
5.1 The Commission shall require the developer to provide for the reservation of schools, recreation
areas or other public uses when the proposed subdivision or land development involves twenty-five
(25) or more lots or dwelling units or when said public uses have been shown on the County
Comprehensive Plan, or when the Commission makes a determination that a particular site is necessary.
Required dedication shall be determined by the following method:
5.11 The dedicated land must be suitable in size, shape, topography and general character for the
proposed street
5.12 The dedicated land may not exceed 0.04 acres of land for each lot or dwelling unit shown on the
Final Plat.
5.2 Streets.
5.21 The street and alley layout shall conform to any plans adopted by the Commission for the
development of the neighborhood in which the proposed subdivision is located and shall provide
access to all lots and parcels of land within the subdivision. Where streets intersect other streets, offsets
shall not be created. The minimum distance between centerlines of parallel or approximately parallel
streets intersecting a cross street from the opposite direction shall be one hundred twenty (120) feet.
5.22 Proposed streets shall be oriented generally in an east-west direction, except where topography or other
consideration suggest otherwise.
5.23 Where appropriate, proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary line of the tract being subdivided so
as to eventually provide for normal circulation of traffic within the vicinity.
5.24 Whenever there exists a dedicated or platted portion of a street or alley along a boundary of the tract being
subdivided, the remainder of said street or alley to the prescribed width shall be platted within the
proposed subdivision where this would not adversely affect the proposed subdivision.
5.25 Alleys shall ordinarily not be provided in residential districts but shall be included in commercial and
industrial areas where needed for loading and unloading or access purposes and, where platted, shall
be at least twenty (20) feet in width.
10
5.26 At intersections of streets, the property line corners shall be rounded by arcs with radii of not less
than fifteen (15) feet, or by chords of such arcs. For streets other than residential streets, the Commission
may require a larger radius.
5.27 Street curbs or edges of pavement at street intersections where they are required shall be rounded off
concentrically with property lines.
5.28 At intersections of streets and alleys, property line corners shall be rounded by arcs of at least twenty (20)
feet radii or by chords of such arcs.
5.29 Collector or Minor Streets intersecting an Arterial Street shall have a minimum distance of seven hundred
fifty (750) feet between center lines. The angle of intersection of two (2) streets shall not be less than
sixty (60) degrees.
5.30 Intersections of more than two (2) streets at one (1) point are prohibited.
5.31 Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a railroad, or arterial road, provision shall be
made for a Parallel Street, properly buffered by a planting strip from said railroad or arterial road, or a
parallel street at a distance acceptable for the appropriate use of the land between the arterial road and
such street, or by a series of cul-de-sacs or short loops entered from and planned at right angles to such
parallel street with the rear lines of their terminal lots abutting on the arterial road. Lots abutting a
railroad or arterial road in the rear shall have a rear yard with a minimum depth of seventy-five (75)
feet. (The rear yard is the closest portion of a major structure on the lot of the railroad or arterial road
right-of-way).
5.32 Street and Alley Right-of-Way Widths. Streets other than residential streets shall have such rightof-
way widths as the Commission shall deem to be necessary in view of the function and prospective
traffic load of the particular street or part thereof. The minimum right-of-way width of Residential
Streets shall be as follows:
1. Arterial Street - Eighty (80) feet, except where increased by the Commission
2. Collector Street - Sixty (60) feet.
3. Minor Street - Fifty (50) feet.
4. Alley – Twenty (20) feet.
11
5.33 Horizontal Visibility.
Streets shall be so laid out that there will be unobstructed sight distances along the center lines thereof,
measured from a point five (5) feet above the proposed grade line, to permit horizontal visibility as
follows:
5.331 Arterial Streets - Six hundred (600) feet or more.
5.332 Collector Streets - Three hundred (300) feet or more.
5.333 Minor Streets - One hundred and fifty (150) feet or more.
5.34 Between reversed curves on arterial streets, a tangent of not less than two hundred (200) feet
shall be provided, and on feeder and residential streets such a tangent shall not be less than
one hundred (100) feet.
5.35 Street Grades
5.351 Center line grades shall not exceed the following:
5.3511 Arterial Streets - Five (5) percent.
5.3512 Collector Streets - Seven (7) percent.
5.3513 Minor Streets - Ten (10) percent in exceptional circumstances, sixteen (16) percent may be
permitted, at the discretion of the Commission, for short distances on straight roads.
5.352 Horizontal curvature measured along the center line shall have a minimum radius as follows,
unless topographic or other conditions are such that in the circumstances of the particular
case; the indicated radius is not feasible and the commission is of the opinion that a lesser
radius would adequately protect the public interest.
5.3521 Arterial Streets - Eighteen hundred (1800) feet.
5.3522 Collector Streets - Three hundred (300) feet.
5.3523 Minor Streets - One hundred (100) feet.
5.353 Minimum Grade.
12
The minimum grade of any street gutter shall not be less than five tenths (0.5) of one percent for cement
concrete pavements or streets with cement concrete gutters, and one percent (1%) for bituminous
pavements.
5.36 Pavement Widths.
5.3611 Arterial Street - Forty (40) feet.
5.3612 Collector Street - Thirty-four (34) feet.
5.3613 Minor Street.-
5.36131 Minimum lot area below 20,000 square feet: Twenty-Eight (28) feet.
5.36132 Minimum lot area 20,000 square feet or more: Twenty-Two (22) feet.
5.3614 Alleys: Eighteen (18) feet.
5.362 Pavement Design:
5.3621 Pavement for streets which are under the jurisdiction of the county shall be constructed over a
suitable sub-grade in accordance with one of the following designs:
1. Sub-Base
Asphalt Binder Course
Asphalt Wearing Course
2. Sub-Base
Asphalt Binder Course
Asphalt Wearing Course
3. Sub-Base Asphalt
Wearing Course
Type
2-A Modified
ID-2A ID-2A
2-A Modified ID-
2A ID-2A
BCBC
ID-2A
Thickness
8 inches
1 1/2 inches
1 inch
7 inches
2 inches
1 inch
5 inches
1 1/2 inches
5.3622 Materials shall meet the design and gradation requirements of Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Specification Form 408, 1976.
5.3623 Suitability of sub-grade shall be as determined by the County Engineer.
13
5.3624 Where sub-grade characteristics may permit pavement design less than specified above, the
developer must submit with his preliminary application sub-grade test results verifying the
California Bearing Ratio and drainage characteristics of the sub-grade over which the pavement
is to be constructed. Tests must be performed by a recognized independent testing laboratory
acceptable to the County Engineer. Sub-grade samples must be taken and tested under the
direction of the County Engineer or his authorized representative at one hundred (100) foot
intervals minimum along the full length of the proposed streets.
5.3625 When lot area is 20,000 square feet or greater, a stabilized shoulder area of at least five (5) feet
shall be constructed on both sides of new pavement to facilitate parking off the road cartway. A
minimum design criteria shall consist of six (6) inches of compacted 2A modified stone.
Bituminous curbs will not be acceptable at any time.
5.37 Cul-de-sac Streets.
5.371 Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet in
length and must have six (6) or more residential properties fronting same.
5.372 Cul-de-sac streets on which six (6) or more residential properties front, shall terminate in a circular
right-of-way with a minimum diameter of one hundred (100) feet overall, and eighty (80) feet to
the outer pavement edge or curb line.
5.4 Blocks.
5.41 Residential blocks shall ordinarily not exceed twelve hundred (1,200) feet in length, and
commercial blocks - six hundred (600) feet - except for unit shopping centers.
5.42 Blocks shall be of sufficient width to permit two tiers of lots with appropriate depth except
where an interior street parallels an Arterial Street, or except where it backs up to a railroad,
creek, or un-subdivided area.
5.43 Walks.
Pedestrian interior walks maybe required where necessary to assist circulation or provide access to
community facilities. Such cross walks shall have a right-of-way width of not less than ten (10) feet
5.5 Lots.
14
5.51 All lots shall abut on a public street or private street except that one lot is permitted to be developed
using an easement, but no further lots are permitted to use this easement on the tract being divided,
unless it is improved to Ordinance standards, and such easement is provided for in the appropriate deed
and recorded.
5.511 Side lot lines of lots shall be at right angles to street lines when street runs with the cardinal
directions (N-S or E-W).
5.512 Pointed or very irregular lots shall be avoided.
5.52 Double frontage lots shall not be platted. Should the Commission allow such platting under
Section 8.1, a planting screen (acceptable to our engineer) twenty (20) feet wide shall be
provided along the rear of the lot along a major traffic street, railroad or any other traffic mode
deemed necessary by the Commission.
5.53 Lot Width and Area for Residential Lots.
Within the area of jurisdiction of this Ordinance, the widths and areas of lots shall be not less than
provided in the appropriate Zoning Ordinance for the district in which the subdivision is located.
5.54 The depth-to-width ratio of the usable area of a lot shall be ordinarily at a maximum
of 3.0 to 1.0.
5.55 Corner residential lots shall be wider than interior lots to permit equal setbacks from both streets
to a distance as required by Section 5.7, except where lots are back to back.
5.56 Wherever possible, unit shopping centers, based upon sound development standards, shall be
designed, in contrast to the platting of lots for individual commercial use. Any lot not to be used
for residential purposes shall have its proposed use indicated.
5.57 If remnants of land exist after subdividing, they shall be incorporated in existing or proposed
lots, or reserved for public use if acceptable to the Commission and to the municipality.
5.58 Any lot area identified as lying within the One Hundred (100) Year Floodway will not be
included as part of the required lot area as designated per its appropriate zoning district. The
delineation of the One Hundred (100) Year Floodway will be determined by those maps
produced by the National Insurance Program for the municipality. If, for some reason, floodway
15
maps are approximated or non-existent, the developer will use the best data available to
determine floodway location.
5.6 Easements.
Where alleys are not provided, easements for underground or overhead utilities shall be provided. For
such easements the maximum width the Commission shall require is twelve (12) feet, generally six (6)
feet on both sides of a property line. Before determining the location of easements, the plan shall be
discussed with the local public utilities to assure the proper location of easements for the installation of
such service.
SECTION 6 IMPROVEMENTS
6.1 Required Improvements.
6.11 The Final Plan of the subdivision shall conform to the following standards of improvements.
6.111 Monuments.
6.1111 Monuments shall be of concrete or stone with a minimum of size (6) inches by thirty-six
(36) inches, and shall be marked with a brass dowel.
6.1112 Monuments shall be placed so that the scored or marked point shall coincide exactly with the
intersection of lines to be marked, and shall be set so that the top of the monument is level
with the surface of the surrounding ground.
6.1113 Monuments shall be set:
6.11131 At the intersection of all lines forming angles in the boundary of the subdivision.
6.1114 Any monuments that are removed shall be replaced by a Registered Land Surveyor at the
expense of the person moving them.
6.112 Streets.
6.1121 Streets (and alleys where provided) shall be graded, surfaced, and improved to the grades and
dimensions shown on plans, profiles and cross-sections submitted by the sub-divider
according to the specifications as set forth in this Ordinance.
6.1122 Prior to placing the street surface, adequate sub-surface drainage for the streets and all sub
surface utilities as acceptable to the Commission shall be provided or installed by the subdivider.
16
6.1123 Private streets shall meet the following requirements:
6.11231 The street or streets shall meet all design and improvements standards of the
Luzerne County Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
6.11232 That the street or streets do not interrupt the public street circulation pattern,
existing, developing, or planned.
6.11233 That an offer to dedicate the street shall be made only for the street as a whole.
6.113 Sewers
6.1131 Within a municipality having an approved municipal (1) sewer system, which is one thousand (1,000)
feet or less from the subdivision or land development, and which is of sufficient size, the sub-divider
shall provide the subdivision or land development with a complete sanitary sewer system to be
connected to the municipal sanitary system, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Sanitary
Authority/PaDEP.
6.1132 Within a municipality not having a municipal(1)sewer system, or within a municipality have a municipal
sewer system which is not reasonably accessible to the subdivision or land development, and where the
Master Plan for Water Supply and Wastewater Management of Luzerne County recommends that the
subdivision be served by a sewer system other than individual conventional septic tanks, within the
foreseeable future, the developer shall have prepared by an engineer registered to practice in
Pennsylvania, a sewage feasibility study which shall indicate whether a public sewage system is
feasible or not. The engineer doing this study shall determine that a public sewer system should be
installed prior to erection of homes or at some future time, or that a public sewage system is not feasible.
The feasibility study shall take into account, but not be limited to the following:
1. Size of subdivision as submitted.
2. Ultimate total anticipated future size of subdivision.
3. Density of homes reasonably expected to be built in the subdivision within S (five) year periods.
4. Character and type of the subdivision, e.g. vacation or seasonal dwellings or year around
permanent homes.
5. Cost of the recommended sewer system; and
6. Topography and subsurface conditions of the land.
17
(1) Municipal as used herein means one or more political subdivisions such as a city, borough, township
or county, or a municipal authority of one or more of such political subdivision.
After due consideration of said feasibility study, the commission may require the installation of a
complete sewer system, should it deem it to be necessary, or may require capped sewers. However, the
Commission shall give due consideration to the use of individual conventional septic tanks or aerobic
systems, and disposal fields, and/or neighborhood disposal systems, subject to the minimum
requirements of Act 537, "The Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act" and the standards and regulations
adopted pursuant to such Act, and the Master Plan for Water Supply and Wastewater Development of
Luzerne County.
6.1133 In this paragraph "6.114 Water", the phrase "the developer shall provide" shall be interpreted to mean
that the developer shall install the facility referred to, or whenever a separate sewage disposal unit or
water supply on individual lots is to be provided, that the developer shall require, as a condition of the
sale of each lot or parcel in the subdivision, that the facilities referred to in these paragraphs shall be
installed by the owner of the lot in accordance with this Ordinance, when a principal building is
constructed.
6.114 Water
6.1141 All new subdivisions and land developments shall utilize an approved public distribution system for the
water supply where geographical location and accessibility to a common water source make this type
of public system possible.
6.1142 The plans for the installation of the mains of public water supply system shall be prepared by the
developer with the cooperation of the applicable Water Utility Company and approved by an engineer.
Upon completion of the water supply installation, one (1) copy of the plan for such system as built shall
be filed with the Commission and the Municipality.
18
6.1143 Within a municipality not having a municipal water system, or within a municipality having a
municipal water system which is not reasonably accessible to the subdivision, and where the
commission has received a recommendation that the subdivision be served by a central water system,
other than individual conventional on-lot wells, the developer shall have prepared by an engineer
registered to practice in Pennsylvania, a feasibility study for a public water system shall be installed
prior to the erection of homes, or at some future time, or that a public water system is not feasible. The
feasibility study shall take into account, but need not be limited to the following:
1. Size of subdivision as submitted.
2. Ultimate total anticipated future size of subdivision.
3. Density of homes reasonably expected to be built in the subdivision within five (5) year periods.
4. Character and type of the subdivision, e.g. vacation or seasonal dwelling; or year around permanent
dwellings.
5. Cost of the recommended water system; and
6. Topography and subsurface conditions of the land.
After due consideration of said feasibility study, the Commission may require a public water system to
be installed by the developer or may permit on-wells, after reviewing the Master Plan for Water Supply
and Wastewater Development of Luzerne County, and consulting with the Department of
Environmental Resources
6.115 Storm Drainage Systems. (Also, Refer to the Countywide Stormwater Management Plan and
Ordinance adopted in 2010)
6.1151 Storm drainage systems shall be provided in order to:
6.11511 Permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses except as modified by stormwater detention
facilities required by Section 6.1152 or open channels pursuant to Section 6.11535;
6.11512 Ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the line of streets;
6.11513 Intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals related to the extent and grade of the area
drained;
6.11514 Provide positive drainage away from on-site sewage disposal system;
19
6.11515 Take surface water from the bottom of vertical grades, and lead water from springs. Use of
cross gutters at street intersections elsewhere is prohibited.
6.11516 Prevent overloading of drainage systems and watercourses downstream as a result of increased
runoff caused by the proposed development.
6.1152 General Requirements
6.11521 A site drainage plan for the proposed subdivision tract shall be prepared which illustrates the
following information:
6.115211 Mapping of the watershed area or areas in which the proposed subdivision is located.
6.115212 Calculations of runoff for all points of runoff concentration.
6.115213 Complete drainage systems for the subdivision. All existing drainage features which are to be
incorporated in the design shall be so identified. If the subdivision is to be developed in stages,
a general drainage plan for the entire subdivision shall be presented with the first stage, and
appropriate development stages for the drainage system indicated.
6.1153 The existing points of natural drainage discharge onto adjacent property shall not be
altered without the written approval of the affected landowners.
6.11531 No stormwater runoff or natural drainage shall be so diverted as to overload existing drainage
systems, or create flooding or the need for additional drainage structures on other private
properties or public lands, without approved provisions being made by the developer for properly
handling such conditions.
6.11532 Storm drainage systems shall be designed to convey through land development the peak runoff
that will occur when all tributary areas upstream are developed to the extent reasonable projected
during the next twenty-five (25) years. The calculation of this runoff rate shall take into account
the land use and development regulations including runoff controls in effect in the tributary areas.
6.11533 Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse other than permanent streams, there shall be
provided a drainage easement conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse. The
width of the easement shall be adequate to provide for unimpeded flow of storm runoff based on
calculations made in conformance with Section 6.1155 and to provide a freeboard allowance of
onehalf (0.5) foot above the design water surface level. The terms of the easement shall prohibit
excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations which may adversely affect the
flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement. Also, periodic cutting of vegetation in
all portions of the easement shall be required.
20
6.11534 Drainage facilities that are located on State Highway right-of-way shall be approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and a letter indicating such approval shall be
directed to the County Planning Commission.
6.11535 All streets shall be designed so as to provide for the discharge of surface water away from their
right-of-way.
6.11536 When it can be shown to the satisfaction of the County Engineer that, due to topographic
conditions, natural drainage swales on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and grade of such natural
drainage swales. Capacities of open channels shall be calculated using the Manning Equation as
explained in Appendix A.
6.11537 Storm drainage facilities and appurtenances shall be so designed and provided as to
minimize erosion in water course channels and at all points of discharge,
6.1154 Stormwater Detention (Also refer to the Countywide Stormwater Management
Ordinance adopted in 2010)
6.11541 Stormwater detention facilities shall be used whenever increased runoff from the land
development would over load drainage systems or cause significant increases in flood levels in any
watercourses downstream. This will determined by comparing the increase in existing runoff rates and
capacity of downstream drainage systems and watercourses.
6.11542 Whenever detention facilities are required under Section 6.11541, facilities will be
designed to provide that the peak runoff rate at all points of discharge from the site, when developed,
will not exceed the peak runoff rate at each of those points prior to development.
6.11543 Where detention facilities are included as part of the storm drainage system, the following
provisions will apply:
Detention ponds shall be designed so that they return to ninety percent (90%) dry conditions within
approximately twelve (12) hours after the termination of the storm, unless the County Engineer finds
that down-stream conditions may warrant other design criteria for stormwater release.
6.11544 The developer shall demonstrate that such ponds are designed, protected and/or located to
assure that public safety is maximized and health problems are prevented.
6.11545 The developer shall verify that the operation of the detention facilities will not aggravate
potential downstream peaking conditions.
6.11546 Emergency overflow facilities shall be provided for detention facilities to handle runoff in
excess of design flow.
21
6.11547 If the lands of the proposed land development will remain of common ownership, the
developer shall provide written assurances to the County that the detention ponds will be properly
maintained.
6.11548 If the lands of the proposed land development will be conveyed to one or more separate
owners, the developer shall provide written assurances to the County that the detention ponds will be
properly maintained.
6.1155 Calculations of Runoff and Design Storm Frequency.
6.11551 Storm drainage systems required by this Ordinance shall be designed to provide protection
from a 10 to 100 year storm as determined by the County Engineer. A 10 year design storm would be
appropriate where a storm in excess of the design storm
would have minor impact such as inconvenience to traffic on local streets. A 100 year design storm
would cause damage to existing or future structures or their contents.
6.11552 Stormwater runoff from watersheds of 200 or less acres may be calculated by the rational
method as described in Appendix A.(2)
6.11553 Stormwater runoff from watersheds of more than 200 acres shall be calculated using the
soil cover complex method developed by the Soil Conservation Service or other appropriate method
acceptable to the County
6.11554 The Manning Equation explained in Appendix A shall be used in calculating capacities of
watercourses and storm sewers, except culverts which shall be designed using methods acceptable to
the County Engineer.
6.11555 Complete detailed drainage calculations certified by the design engineer shall be submitted
to the County Engineer.
6.1156 Improvement Specifications.
6.11561 Inlets shall be designed and/or located to prevent hazardous conditions for vehicles, bicycles or
pedestrians.
6.11562 The County Engineer shall add additional specifications which may be necessary for
1. Spacing and type of inlets and manholes.
2. Minimum pipe sizes.
3. Materials and construction methods.
22
4. The County Engineer may want to specify different requirements or alternate methods of
calculating runoff.
6.116 Sidewalks and Curbs
Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of every street when building lots are 15,000 square feet or
less. They should be constructed of Portland Cement Concrete four (4) inches thick, reinforced with
minimum 6x6 -10/10 welded wire mesh over four (4) inches of compacted gravel or crushed stone, and
four (4) feet wide on a Minor or Collector street, or five (5) feet wide on an Arterial Street, and located
within the street right-of-way. Where the sidewalk is part of the driveway, it should be a minimum of
six (6) inches thick of concrete with 6 x 6 -10/10 welded wire mesh reinforcement. Sidewalks shall be
placed 36" from the curb, and sloped 1/4 inch per foot towards the street. Concrete curbs shall be
required on both sides of street where the building lots are less than 20,000 square feet. Curbs will be
constructed in accordance with PaDOT Road Construction Standards. (RD-64 or current STD).
Curbs shall be depressed at driveway locations and shall be so designated on the plan. Driveway
depressions shall be constructed in accordance with PaDOT RD Standards.
When concrete curbs and sidewalks are required by this Ordinance, curb cuts must be designed so as
to accommodate the current specifications as set forth in Title III of the Americans With Disabilities
Act of 1990 (ADA).
6.117 Street Signs and Street Names
Street signs and street names shall be approved by the Luzerne County Planning
Commission/Engineer and shall be installed by the developer at the intersection of all streets and
highways, and at such other locations as may be determined by the Luzerne County Planning
Commission/Engineer.
Street signs and street names shall be coordinated with the appropriate agencies, i.e., post office, fire
department and Civil Defense for their use in the delivery of emergency services. (See Appendix B).
6.118 House Numbers
All house numbers shall be accordance with the established system of the County. Numbers shall be
referred to Luzerne County 911. (See Appendix B).
6.119 Street Lights
23
In any proposed subdivision or land development involving twenty (20) or more lots or dwelling units,
a street light meeting the specifications of the local electric utility shall be installed at one corner of
every intersection.
6.120 Fire Hydrants
Fire hydrants shall be installed wherever the County Engineer determines there is an adequate water supply
system, and shall be spaced to provide a hydrant within five hundred (500) of any property lines.
6.121 Street Trees
Street trees shall be provided by the developer in any subdivision or land development involving
ten (10) or more lots or dwelling units having an average lot size or area per dwelling unit of
(15,000) or less square feet. Street trees shall be of a deciduous hardwood type with spacing as
approved by the Commission, and be planted between the sidewalks and the building line at such
a distance not to affect the sidewalk, but at least three (3) feet from the sidewalk, and shall have
a minimum caliper of two (2) inches.
6.122 Filing Plans and Profiles
Upon the completion of the improvements in a subdivision, if changes have been made from those
submitted with the final plan, plans and profiles for the same as constructed shall be filed with the
Commission.
6.123 Prior to starting any improvements, the County Engineer or his authorized
representative is to be notified at least 48 hours in advance. The County Engineer or his authorized
representative shall inspect the work as it starts, and periodically as it progresses, to ensure
compliance with requirements of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and the
approved plat. Underground utilities (sanitary and storm sewer, water lines, electric distribution,
gas et cetera), and base courses of roads shall not be covered until such inspection is complete and
work approved by the County Engineer and his authorized representative.
24
SECTION 7 PLAN REQUIREMENTS
7.1 Preliminary Plat
7.11 The applicant will submit an application, a zoning data sheet, the required number of plans
(preliminary or final), all other pertinent data designated by the Ordinance and all required
fees simultaneously to the Planning Commission.
Failure on the part of the applicant to provide any of the above data to the Planning Commission will
result in an incomplete application. Processing of the subdivision/land development application will
not begin until such times as the Planning Commission deems the application complete.
Fees for subdivision/land development will be as shown in Section 7.11 at the end of this Ordinance.
7.12 The Preliminary Plat of the subdivision or land development shall be drawn to a scale of fifty
(50) feet to one (1) inch or one hundred (100) feet to one (10 inch. The Preliminary Plat shall
show:
7.121 Proposed name of the subdivision or land development.
(1) Impervious cover will be determined by, not limited to, structures, roadways sidewalks, parking
lots, etc.
(2) As required by any adopted Stormwater Management Plans governing municipalities within
Luzerne County.
7.122 Names and addresses of owner and sub-divider, land planning consultant, architect or landscape
architect, register surveyor or registered engineer who prepared the plat or land development.
7.123 Street layout, showing the names (which, when not extensions of existing streets, shall not
duplicate other names of streets, in the municipality), and widths of right-of-way of streets, and
widths of alleys.
7.124 Layout of lots, showing dimensions and numbers.
7.125 Parcels of land proposed to be reserved for schools, parks, playgrounds or other public semipublic
or community purposes.
7.126 Legend and notes.
25
7.127 Building setbacks of front yard lines, side yard lines, and rear yard lines.
7.128 Graphic scale, north point and date.
7.129 Preliminary profiles, typical cross-sections and specifications for proposed street improvements.
7.130 Preliminary profiles and other explanatory data concerning the installation of sanitary and storm
sewage systems.
7.131 A location map showing subdivision or land development site, and location; major existing
thoroughfares related to the subdivision or land development, including the distance therefrom;
title, graphic scale, north point and date.
7.132 Contours shall be shown at vertical intervals of two (2) feet except as noted below. For land areas
sloping more than fifteen percent (15%), contours shall be shown at vertical intervals of five (5)
feet.
7.133 Tract boundary line, showing dimensions, bearings and comers.
7.134 Existing streets and rights-of-way on or adjoining the site, including dedicated widths, roadway
widths, approximate gradients, types and widths of pavements, curbs, sidewalks and other
pertinent data.
7.135 Easements - location, widths and purposes.
7.136 Proposed utilities, including sanitary and storm sewers, other storm sewers, other
drainage facilities; water lines, gas mains, electric utilities and other facilities. Size or capacity of each
should be shown and the location of or distance to each existing utility indicated.
7.137 Existing platting of adjacent land. All existing buildings, sewers, water mains,
culverts, petroleum or high pressure gas lines and fire hydrants, on or adjoining the site.
7.138 Areas subject to periodic flooding.
7.139 Other features or conditions which would affect the subdivision or land development favorable or
adversely including future subsidence or mine fires. Filled land shall include the depth, type of
fill, date of fill, and whether and how it was compacted. Filled areas shall have adequate stability
before lots are sold, to be certified by the developer's engineer, and checked by the Luzerne
County Engineer. For subdivisions over mining areas, a mining report shall be submitted.
7.140 A copy of the protective covenants or private restriction to be incorporated in the deeds.
26
7.141 Site data including the number of residential lots, required lot sizes, actual lot size, the acreage of
the subdivision, the acreage in proposed recreation areas, and the number and type of dwelling
units proposed, if any.
7.142 Two (2) copies of soil survey data of site shall accompany the Preliminary Plat. Two (2) copies
of results of percolation tests made in accordance with specifications of the Department of
Environmental Protection. These items shall be provided by the developer.
7.143 Estimated amount (sq. ft.) of impervious cover, which shall include, but not limited to, any roof,
parking/driveway areas, patios, new streets and sidewalks.
7.144 A tract map depicting all prior subdivisions, both Commission approved and not, and their dates
of inception from the original tract retroactive to January 1, 1980.
7.145 All requirements for any approved Stormwater Management Plan, map and model ordinance for
specific watersheds within Luzerne County must be completed. All subdivisions not subject to
this must adhere to Section 6.115.
7.2 Final Plat.
The Final Plat shall meet the following specifications:
7.21 The Final Plan may include all or only a part of the area of the Preliminary Plat as proposed in the
application.
7.22 The original drawing of the plat of the subdivision shall be twenty-two (22) by thirtysix (36) inches
or made in multiples of this size and cut along match lines. Note: Maximum size of map record plat
book is 24" x 39". Plan shall be drawn at a scale of fifty (50) or one hundred (100) feet to the inch.
7.23 The following basic information shall be shown:
7.2311 Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings, which provide a survey of the tract,
closing with an error of not more than one (1) foot in five thousand (5,000) feet.
7.2312 Accurate distances and directions to the nearest established street corners or official monuments.
Reference corners shall be accurately described on the plan.
27
7.2313 Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets intersecting the boundaries of the tract.
7.2314 The latest source of title to the land as shown by the deed, page number and book of the County
Recorder of Deeds, accompanied by an affidavit that the applicant is the owner or equitable
owner of the land proposed to be subdivided.
7.2315 Street names
7.2316 Complete cure data for all curves included in the plan.
7.2317 Street lines with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths of feet, with angles to the nearest
one (1) minute of street, alley, and lot lines.
7.2318 Lot numbers, dimensions, and area of subdivisions.
7.2319 Easements for utilities and any limitations on such easements.
7.2320 Accurate dimensions of any property to be reserved for public, semi-public, or community use.
7.2321 Location, type, material, and size of all monuments and lot makers.
7.2322 Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become covenants in the deeds for lots
should be in separate instrument, referenced to the drawing.
7.2323 Name of the sub-divider or land development.
7.2324 Name and address of the owner and developer.
7.2325 North point, graphic scale, and date.
7.2326 Certification by a registered professional engineer and/or registered land surveyor to the effect
that (1) the plat or land development represents a survey made by him and that all monuments
indicated thereon actually exist and their location, size and material are currently shown; and (2)
that all engineering and surveying requirements of this Ordinance have been fully compiled with.
7.2527 Proposed dedication of streets and other public property should be indicated.
7.2328 A place on the plat for approval by the Commission. This should include a
Chairman/Witness/Date Lines.
28
7.2329 Front and any rear yard setback lines, the minimum as fixed by the applicable Zoning Ordinance,
or any other setbacks lines established by the Ordinance or by the public authority, or those
specified in the deed restrictions, whichever is greater.
7.2330 Final profiles, cross-sections and specifications for street improvements, and sanitary and storm
sewage, and water distribution systems shall be shown on one (1) or more separate sheets.
However, typical cross-section of streets shall be shown on the record plat.
7.24 Guarantee of Improvements
7.241 In submitting the Final Plan to the commission, the sub-divider shall either have satisfactorily
completed all improvements required in the Preliminary Plat as evidenced by the County
Engineer’s inspection, or shall provide for the deposit with the County of a financial security
(performance bond, letter of credit, escrow account, cash, or other financial instrument
acceptable to the Planning Commission) in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of
improvements which are required to secure to the public the completion of any improvements
which may be required and which shall be an open-ended non-expiring term, at the control of the
Commission, and for an amount to be determined by the County Engineer.
7.242 Release from Improvement Bond.
1. When the developer has completed all the necessary and appropriate improvements, the developer
shall notify the commission, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the County Engineer. The Commission
shall within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorized the County Engineer to
inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The County Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid
improvements. The County Engineer shall, thereupon, file a report in writing, with the Commission,
and shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered mail. The
report shall be made and mailed within thirty (30) days after receipt by the County Engineer of the
aforesaid authorization from the Commission; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate
approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said improvements, or
any portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the County Engineer, said report
shall contain a statement of reasons for such non-approval or rejection.
2. The Commission shall notify the developer, within fifteen (15) days of the Engineer's report, in
writing, by certified or registered mail of the action of said Commission with relation thereto.
3. If the Commission or the County Engineer fails to comply with the time limitation provisions
contained herein, all improvements will be deemed to have been approved and the developer shall
be released from all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or other security agreement.
29
4. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the
Commission, the developer shall proceed to complete the same and, upon completion, the same
procedure of notification, as outlined herein„ shall be followed.
5. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the developer's right to contest or
question by legal proceedings or otherwise, any determination of the Commission or the County
Engineer.
6. Where herein a reference is made to the County Engineer, he shall be duly registered professional
engineer employed by the County or engaged as a consultant thereto.
7.243 The developer shall also place in a separate escrow account an amount of fifteen (15) percent of the County
Engineer's or other designated person's estimate of the cost of all improvements required by this
Ordinance, guaranteeing that the developer shall maintain all such improvements in good condition for
a period of one (1) year after completion of construction and installation of all such improvements.
Maintenance of all required improvements shall include, but not be limited to the following:
7.2431 Guaranteeing and securing the correction of any defect in material or workmanship furnished for
such improvement latent in character, and not discernible at the time of final inspection or
acceptance by the governing body, and
7.2432 Guaranteeing against any damage to such improvements by reason of the settling of the ground,
base or foundation thereof
7.25 Release From Maintenance Bond
The developer shall follow the procedural section of Section 7.242 when seeking release of the
maintenance bond. Land developments which will remain in one ownership shall be exempted from
the requirement to place a one (1) year Maintenance Bond as specified in Section 7.242.
7.26 Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements.
The County of Luzerne shall have the power to initiate any necessary legal action against the developer
to complete any required improvements as provided in the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, or approved Final Plat or any written agreements upon which the County and the developer
may have entered. In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been installed
within the period established in connection with the Final Plat, the County of Luzerne shall access the
financial guarantee to complete the improvements.
SECTION 8 MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
8.1 In any particular case where the developer or his engineer can show by plan and written
statement that, by reason of exceptional topographic or other physical conditions or an
30
unusual financial burden on the developer, which is unique and not common to other
developers in the same area or municipality, strict compliance with any requirements of this
Ordinance would cause exceptional and undue hardship, the Commission may relax such
requirements to the extent deemed just and proper, so as to relieve such difficulty or
hardship; provided such relief may be granted without detriment of the public good and
without impairing the intent and purpose of this Ordinance or the desirable general
development of the neighborhood and the community in accordance with any adopted longrange
plan. Any codification thus granted shall be entered in the minutes of the Commission
setting forth the reasons which, in the opinion of the Commission, justified the modification.
8.2 Subdivision/Land Development
8.21 Major Subdivision I
A subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land along any existing public street or road, not
involving the opening, widening or extension of any street or road, nor the extension of any
public/municipal improvements and not affecting the remainder of the lot, tract or parcel or
adjoining property, and not involving more than ten (10) lots, may submit a Final Plat under
Section 7 for approval and if the Commission, acting through the Director of Planning or
the Subdivision Administrator, is satisfied that such proposed subdivision is consistent with
the present land use, may approve such plats.
8.22 Major Subdivision II - Commission Approval Required.
A subdivision of any lot, tract, or parcel of land, not classified under Section 8.21, having
eleven (11) or more lots, and/or any size subdivision requiring a new street or road or
extensions of public/municipal facilities, or the creation of any public/municipal
improvements. Subdivisions governed by this section will require Commission approval.
Included in this section is any subdivision which is a cumulative division of property from
the original tract. It will be at the discretion of the Subdivision Administrator and/or
Director of Planning as to whether a cumulative division requires the Commission's
review/approval.
31
SECTION 9 DEFINITIONS
9.1 For the purpose of this Ordinance, words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
term "shall" is always mandatory; other terms or words used shall be interpreted or defined
as follows:
9.11 Alley - A permanent service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting lands.
9.12 Application for Development - Every application whether preliminary or final is required to be
filed and approved prior to start of construction or development, including but not limited
to an application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plan, or for the
approval of a development plan.
9.13 Blocks - Property bounded on one side by a street and the other three sides, by a street
railroad right-of-way, waterway, un-subdivided area, or other definite barrier.
9.14 Building Setback Line - The minimum distance from any lot line to any building or structure to
be erected on the lot.
9.15 Commission, Planning Commission, or County Planning Commission - The Luzerne County
Planning Commission.
9.17 County - Luzerne County, Pennsylvania.
9.18 Cul-de-sac - (Court or Dead End Street) - A short street having one end open to traffic and being
permanently terminated by a vehicle turn-around.
9.19 Developer - Any land owner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with the permission of such
landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land
or land
9.20 Easement - A grant by the property owner to the use of strip of land by the public, a
corporation, or persons for specified purposes.
9.21 Engineer - The person designated by the Commission by resolution for the purposes of this
Ordinance, who shall be a professional engineer, licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
9.22 Governing Body - The local governing body in which the subdivision or land development is
located.
32
9.22 A Governing Body of Luzerne County – The organization designated by Pennsylvania Code,
or a Home Rule Charter, to conduct the business and functions of Luzerne County.
9.23 Land Development – Any of the following activities:
1. The improvements of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any
purpose involving:
(a) a group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially
or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(b) the division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or
among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
2. A subdivision of land.
3. Exemptions.
(a) The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or single-family semidetached
dwelling into not more than three residential units.
(b) The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings on a lot or lots
subordinated to an existing principal building.
4. All land development will be considered major and will require Commission approval.
9.24 Lot - A portion of subdivision, or other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of
ownership or for development.
9.25 Plat or Plot - The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether preliminary
or final.
9.26 Street - Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, valley,
viaduct, and any other ways, used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians
whether public or private.
33
9.261 Arterial Streets - Are those serving a large volume of comparatively high-speed and long distant
traffic, including all facilities classified as main and secondary highways by the Pa. Department
of Transportation.
9.262 Collector Streets - Are those which in addition to giving access to abutting properties, intercept
minor streets and provide routes carrying considerable volume of traffic to community facilities
and to major traffic streets.
9.263 Minor Streets - Are those used primarily to provide access to abutting properties.
9.27 Subdivision - The division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or
devisees, transfer of ownership or building lot development: provided, however, that the
subdivision by a lease of land for agricultural purposes of parcels of more than ten (10) acres, not
involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted. This
definition shall include the combination of contiguous, adjacent parcels which results in the
negation or removal of a previous existing lot line (Commonly referred to as “reverse
subdivisions”).
9.28 Unit Shopping Center - Shopping centers designed as a unit with off-street parking and controlled
circulation.
9.29 Flood - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved
in order to discharge that One Hundred (100) Year Flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
9.30 Flood Fringe - That portion of the One Hundred (100) Year Flood Plain outside the floodway.
9.31 Floodway - The channel of river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge that One Hundred (100) Year Flood without cumulatively increasing
the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
9.32 One Hundred Year Flood - A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every One Hundred
(100) Years (i.e. that has a one (%) percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood may
occur in any year).
9.33 One Hundred (100) Year Flood Plain Area(s) or District(s) - The area(s) or district(s) that has a one
percent (1%) chance of being flooded in any given year.
34
SECTION 10 VALIDITY
If any section, clause, provision or portion of the Ordinance shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect any
other section, clause, provision or portion of this Ordinance.
SECTION 11 REVISION AND AMENDMENT
The Governing Body of Luzerne County may, from time to time, amend this Ordinance by
appropriate action taken after a public hearing on said proposed revisions. Public notice
shall be given of the date, time and place of such public hearings, together with a summary
setting forth the principal provisions of such amendments, indicating the place or places
where copies of the proposed amendments may be examined. In case of an amendment
other than that prepared by the Commission, the Governing Body of Luzerne County shall
submit each such amendment to the Commission for recommendations at least thirty (30)
days prior to the date fixed for the public hearing on such amendment.
SECTION 12 REMEDIES
12.1 Preventive Remedies.
1 In addition to other remedies, the Commission may institute and maintain appropriate
actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate violations, to prevent unlawful
construction, to recover damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building,
structure or premises. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer
or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the
seller or transferor from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
2. The Commission may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to
further improve or develop any real property which has been developed or which has
resulted from a subdivision of real property in violation of any ordinance adopted
pursuant to this article. This authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply to
any of the following applicants:
(a) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(b) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such violation without regard
as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the
violation.
35
(c). The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation
without regard as to whether such current owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the
violation.
(d). The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee has actual or
constructive knowledge of violation.
As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting or an approval to any such owner,
current owner, vendee or lessee of the development of any such real property, the Commission may
require compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the property at the time the
applicant acquired an interest in such real property.
12.2 Jurisdiction.- District justices shall have initial jurisdiction in proceeding brought under Section
12.3.
12.3 Enforcement Remedies.
1. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the provisions of any subdivision
or land development ordinance enacted under this act or prior enabling laws shall, upon being found
liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Commission, pay a judgment
of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Commission as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until
the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the Commission may enforce the judgment, pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the district justice determining that there has been a violation further determines that there
was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating, in which event there shall
be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the district justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation.
2. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling
the per diem judgment pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
3. Nothing contained in this section shall be constructed or interpreted to grant to any person or entity
other than the Commission the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to the
section.
36
SECTION 13 ENACTMENT
This Ordinance shall be force and effect as of November 14, 1963 and as amended
thereafter.
SECTION 14 FLOOD CONTROL
14.1 General Provisions.
The provisions contained in this section shall apply only when a proposed subdivision or
land development is to be located within or adjacent to any area which is subject to flooding
from a One Hundred (100) Year Flood within the jurisdiction of the Luzerne County
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and shall be supplementary to the provisions
contained elsewhere in the Ordinance.
14.11 The specific purpose of these provisions is:
14.111 To regulate the subdivision and/or land development of One Hundred (100) Year Flood Plain
Areas in order to promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the County;
14.112 To require that each subdivision lot in One Hundred (100) Year Flood Plain Areas be provided
with a safe building site with adequate access; and that public facilities which serve such uses
be designed and installed to preclude flood damage at the time of initial construction;
14.113 To protect individuals from buying land which is unsuitable for use because of flood hazards
by prohibiting the subdivision and/or land development of unprotected flood plain areas in
the One Hundred (100) Year Flood Plain.
14.12 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
This Ordinance supersedes any other County Ordinances currently in effect in flood plain
areas. Where there is conflict between this and any other County Ordinance the more
restrictive shall apply.
14.13 County Liability.
The grant of a permit or approval of a subdivision and/or land development plan in the
identified One Hundred (100) Year Flood Plain Areas shall not constitute a representation,
guarantee, or warranty of any kind by Luzerne County or by any official or employee
thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use, and shall create no liability upon
the County, its officials or employees.
14.2 Application Procedures and Plat Requirements.
37
14.21 Preliminary Plan Requirements.
14.211 A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or land development with respect to
the municipality's One Hundred (100) Year Flood Plain Areas including information on, but not
limited to, the One Hundred (100) Year Flood Elevations, boundaries of One Hundred (100) year
Flood Plain Areas, proposed lots and sites, fills, flood or erosion protective facilities, and areas
subject to special deed restrictions.
14.212 Where the subdivision and/or land development lies partially or completely in the One Hundred
(100) Year Flood Plain Areas, or where the subdivision and/or land development borders on the
One Hundred (100) Year Flood Plain Areas, the Preliminary Plan map shall include detailed
information giving the location and elevation of proposed roads, public utilities, and building
sites. All such maps shall also show contours at intervals of two (2) or five (5) feet depending
upon the slope of the land and identify accurately the boundaries of the flood plain areas.
14.22 Final Plan Requirements.
The following information shall be required as part of the Final Plan:
14.221 All information required for the submission of the Preliminary Plan incorporating any changes
requested by the County.
14.222 A map showing the exact location and elevation of all proposed buildings, structures, roads, and
public utilities to be constructed in One Hundred (100) Year Flood Plain Areas. All such maps
shall show contours at intervals of two (2) feet and identify accurately the boundaries of the flood
plain areas.
14.3 Design and Standards and Improvements.
14.31 General.
14.311 Where not prohibited by this or any other laws or ordinances, land located in the One Hundred
(100) Year Flood Plain Area may be platted for development with the provisions that the
developer construct all buildings and structures to preclude flood damage in accordance
regulating such development.
14.312 Building sites for residences or any other type of dwelling or accommodation shall not be
permitted in any One Hundred (100) Year Floodway Area. Building sites for residences or any
38
other type of dwelling or accommodation may be permitted in the One Hundred (100) Year Flood
Way Area if the sites or first floors, including basements, are elevated to a height at least one and
one -half (1 1/2) feet above the elevation of the One Hundred (100) Year Flood. If fill is used to
raise the elevation of a site, the fill area shall extend out laterally for a distance of at least fifteen
(15) feet beyond the limits of the proposed structures.
14.313 Building sites for structures or buildings other than for residential uses shall also not be permitted
in any One Hundred (100) Year Floodway Area. Building sites for structures or buildings other
than for residential uses may be permitted in the One Hundred (100) Year Flood Way Area
subject of the provisions provided for in 14.312. However, the governing body may allow the
subdivision and/or sites for commercial and industrial uses at an elevation less than one and onehalf
(1 1/2) feet above the protects the area to that height or assures that the buildings or structures
will flood proofed at least up to that height.
14.314 If the County Planning Commission determines that only a part of a proposed plat can be safely
developed, it shall limit development to that part and shall require that development proceed
consistent with this determination.
14.315 When a developer does not intend to develop the plat himself and the County Planning
Commission determines that additional controls are required to insure safe development, it may
require the developer to impose appropriate deed restrictions on the land. Such deed restrictions
shall be inserted in every recorded plat.
14.32 Drainage Facilities.
Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of surface waters without damage to
persons or property. The system shall insure drainage at all points along streets, and provide
positive drainage away from buildings and on-site waste disposal sites.
The Planning Commission may require a primarily underground system to accommodate frequent
floods and a secondary surface to accommodate larger, less frequent floods.
Drainage plans shall be consistent with local and regional drainage plans. The facilities shall be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, and/or development adversely affect the capacity
of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or
system.
14.33 Streets.
39
The finished elevation of proposed streets shall be no less than the One Hundred (100) Year Flood
Elevation. The County Planning Commission may require, where necessary, profiles and elevation
of streets to determine compliance with this requirement. Drainage opening shall be sufficient to
discharge flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights.
14.34 Sewer Facilities.
All sanitary sewer systems located in the One Hundred (100) Year Flood Plain Areas, whether
public or private, shall be flood proofed up to a point one and one-half (1 1/2) feet above the One
Hundred (100) Year Flood Elevation.
The County Planning Commission may prohibit installation of sewage disposal facilities requiring
soil absorption systems where such systems will not function due to high ground water, flooding,
or unsuitable soil characteristics. The County Planning Commission may require that the developer
note on the face of the plat and in any deed of conveyance that soil absorption fields are prohibited
in the designated areas.
14.35 Water Facilities.
All water systems located in the One Hundred (100) Year Flood Plain Areas, whether public or
private, shall be flood proofed to a point, one and one half (1 1/2) feet above the One Hundred (100)
Year Flood Elevation.
14.36 Other Public Utilities and Facilities.
All other public and/or private utilities and facilities shall be elevated or flood proofed to a point
one and one half (1 1/2) feet above the One Hundred (100) Year Flood Elevation.
APPENDIX A
STORM DRAINAGE RUNOFF CALCULATION
40
Rational Formula.
1. The rational formula used in calculating runoff is Q=CIA. In this equation, Q is the peak runoff in
cubic feet per second, C is a runoff coefficient which depends on the nature of the land cover, I is the
intensity of rainfall in inches per hour for a duration equal to the time of concentration for the drainage
area involved and A is the watershed area in acres. The time of concentration is the time required for
runoff from the upper reaches of the watershed to reach the point for which runoff rates are being
calculated.
B. Values of Coefficient "C".
1 Runoff coefficients used in the rational formula shall be based on the guidelines in the following
table and acceptable to the municipal engineer.
RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS FOR THE RATIONAL METHOD
Type of Drainage Area
Commercial
Downtown (also shopping
Coefficient Source
centers)
Neighborhood
0.70 - 0.95 1
mixed residential & commercial
Residential Urban
0.50 - 0.70
Single-Family 0.30 - 0.50 1
Multi-Units 0.40 - 0.80 1
Suburban, Single-Family 0.25 - 0.40 1
Garden Apartments 0.50 - 0.70 1
Playgrounds 0.20 - 0.70 1
Industrial 0.50 - 0.90 1
Railroad Yards 0.20 - 0.35 1
Parks, Cemeteries, Golf Courses 0.15 - 0.30 2
Unimproved, with Vegetation 0.10 - 0,30 1
Lawns, Sandy Soil
Flat, 2% or less 0.05 - 0.10 1
Average, 2 to 7% 0.10 0.15 1
Steep, 7% or more
Lawns, Heavy Soil
0.15 - 0.20 1
Flat, 2% or less 0.13 - 0.17 1
Average, 2 to 7% 0.18 - 0.22 1
41
Steep, 7% or more
Woods, Heavy Brush
0.25 - 0.35 1
Gravel 0.15 - 0.35 2
Sandy Soil 0.15 - 0.30 2
Clay Soil 0.25 - 0.60 2
Bare, Cultivated, or Light Growth
Gravel 0.20 - 0.40 2
Sandy Soil 0.15 - 0.30 2
Clay Soil 0.35 - 0.75 2
Note: Lower portions of ranges apply to flat slopes and open soils; higher portions apply to steeper slopes
and tight or shallow soils.
Sources: (Applied with some modifications by G. Edwin Pidcock Co.)
1. Design and Construction of Sanitary and Storm Sewers - prepared by a Joint
Committee of American Society of Civil Engineers and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
2. Design Manual, Part 2, Chapter 12, Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
C. Values of Rainfall Intensity "I"
1. Rainfall intensities to be used in the rational formula are as follows:
FREQUENCY OF STORM (YEARS)
Time of
Concentration 5 10 25 100
Minutes
5 5.9 6.5 7.4 9.0
10 4,8 5.4 6.0 7.4
Character of Surface Coefficient Source
Pavement 0.75 - 0.95 2
Concrete or Bituminous Concrete 0.65 - 0.80 2
Surface Treated Roadway
earth, other
0.25 - 0,60 2 Gravel,
Roofs 0.75 - 0.95 1
42
15 4.0 4.6 5.2 6.4
20 3.6 4.0 4.5 5.7
25 3.1 3.6 4.0 5.0
30 2.8 3.2 3.6 4.5
35 2.5 2.9 3.3 4.1
40 13 2.6 3.0 3.8
45 2.1 2.4 2.8 3.5
3.3 •
50 2.0 2.2 2.6
55 1.8 2.1 2.5 3.1
60 1.7 2.0 2.4 2.9
D. Average Velocities for Overland Flow.
Engineers use several methods to determine the time of concentration for the drainage area in question.
Seelye's Nomograph is reproduced here. The average velocities for overland flow presented in Penn
DOT's Design manual are also widely used to determine the time of concentration. Any method
acceptable to the County Engineer may be used.
E. Manning's Equation.
1. Manning's equation to determine the velocity of flow in open channels and closed drains not
under pressure is listed below. The second equation is used to determine the capacity after the velocity
has been determined.
v = velocity in feet per second. n – coefficient
of roughness. a = cross-sectional area of flow
in square feet.
p = wetted perimeter, the length of the line of contact between the water and the bottom and
sides of the channel or pipe around the cross-section in feet. s = slope of the channel or pipe in
cubic feet per foot. q = capacity of the channel or pipe in cubic feet per second.
43
2. The coefficient of roughness used shall be as follows unless different coefficients are approved by the
county engineer.
0.015 for concrete pipes and paved channels. 0.021 for corrugated
metal pipes.
0.035 for earth ditches.
0.040 for vegetated channels.
F. Maximum Stream Velocities in Open Channels.
Well established grass on good soil:
Short pliant bladed grass 4-5
Bunch grass-soil exposed 2-4
Stiff stemmed grass 2-3
Earth without vegetation:
Fine sand or salt 1-2
Ordinary firm loam 2-3
Stiff clay 3-5
Clay and gravel 4-5
Course gravel 4-5
Soft shale
Other:
5-6
Bituminous or cement stabilized channels 6
Paved channels 10-15
APPENDIX B
STREET SIGNS, NAMES AND HOUSE NUMBERS.
1. Street Signs.
(a) Lettering on street name signs should be at least four (4) inches high.
Supplementary lettering to indicate the type of street (e.g., street, avenue, road,
etc.) may be smaller, but not less than two (2) inches high.
(b) The street sign should be reflectorized or illuminated. The legend and
background shall be of contrasting color (e.g., white lettering and green
background).
Material
Maximum Velocity
Feet per Second
44
(c) The street sign construction and construction materials utilized should reflect
durability, modern design, visibility, etc. Construction and materials are subject
to the Luzerne County Planning Commission /Engineer approval.
2. Street Names.
The preliminary plat shall indicate the proposed name of each street.
(a) Numerical names, (1st, 2nd, etc.); alphabetical letters (A, B, C) etc.); frivolous,
complicated, or undesirable names, and unconventional spelling are
unacceptable.
(b) Categories - large developments to use a single significant category (flowers,
trees, birds); small subdivisions should use the same category as the
surroundings or adjacent area, which helps establish locational identity.
(c) Name Duplication - Similar sounding names are considered to be duplication
regardless of spelling. No duplication of names is permitted within the projected
service area of a United States Post Office, 911 or local public agencies such as
fire and police department.
(d) Continuity - A continuous street, or one proposed to be continuous, should bear
the same name throughout, even though it changes directions.
The Planning Commission staff shall review the proposed names for
duplication, appropriateness and overall compliance with the street naming
policy. Street names must be approved before the final plat is submitted for
approval.
3. Housing Numbering.
(a) A numbering system shall be developed for each new development or subdivision to
facilitate residential identification. The preliminary plat shall indicate the proposed
street numbers for potential dwelling unites and places of business on all public and
private streets.
(b) Residential house numbers shall be limited to as few digits as necessary, Residential
house numbers shall begin with 1" or 2" at the entrance of the street and continue to the
end of the street with odd numbers on the left and even numbers on the right.
(c) Apartment complexes shall adhere to the low numbering system noted above for
residential street numbers.
(1) Each structure shall have a street number reflecting the policy.
45
(2) Individual units shall be identified in a manner meeting the intent of the policy
for residential numbering.
The Planning Commission staff will review the proposed street numbers as it deems necessary in order
to bring them into conformance with the numbering policy.
(1) The Commission staff may modify or amend the proposed numbers as it deems
necessary in order to bring them into conformance with the numbering policy.
(2) The Planning Commission staff shall keep a record of all numbers assigned under
this regulation.
The sub-divider shall include the approved numbering on the final map which is submitted to the
Planning Commission for final approval and recordation.
APPENDIX C
LUZERNE COUNTY
A C T 1 6 7
GENERAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 6194
A R T I C L E 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 101. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS
The governing body of the County finds that:
Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting from development
throughout a watershed increases flood flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and
sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines
floodplain management and flood control efforts in downstream communities, reduces
groundwater recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
46
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management including reasonable
regulation of development and activities causing accelerated erosion, is
fundamental to the public health, safety and welfare and the protection of the
people of Luzerne County and all the people of the Commonwealth, their
resources and the environment.
SECTION 102. PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the public health, safety and welfare within Luzerne
County Watersheds by minimizing the damages described in Section 101(A) of the Ordinance
by provisions designed to:
A. Control accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at their source by
regulating activities which cause such problems.
B. Utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage systems.
Encourage recharge of groundwater where appropriate.
D. Maintain the existing flows and quality of streams and water courses in the County and
Commonwealth.
E. Preserve and restore the flood carrying capacity of streams.
F Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater management structures which
are constructed in the County.
G. Provide performance standards and design criteria for watershed-wide stormwater
management and planning.
SECTION 103. STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Luzerne County is empowered to regulate these activities through the authority of the Act of October 4,
1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), the "Stormwater Management Act", and the third class County code.
SECTION 104. APPLICABILITY
This Ordinance shall only apply to those watershed areas of Luzerne County with officially adopted
stormwater management plans, maps and model ordinances.
This Ordinance shall only apply to permanent stormwater management facilities constructed as part of any
of the activities listed in this section.
47
The following activities are defined as Regulated Activities and shall be regulated by this Ordinance, except
those which meet the waiver specifications presented thereafter:
A. Land development.
B. Subdivision.
C. Construction of new or additional impervious or semi-pervious surfaces (driveways,
parking lots, etc.)
D. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
E. Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
F. Installation of stormwater systems or appurtenances thereto.
G. Earth disturbances greater than 30,000 square feet of total distributed area.
H. Forest Management operations.
SECTION 105. REPEALER
Any County ordinance inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Ordinance is hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.
SECTION 106. SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity of any the remaining provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 107. COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS.
Approvals issued pursuant to this Ordinance do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure
required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
48
ARTICLE II
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 201. REQUIREMENTS
All Definitions, General Requirements, Stormwater Management Districts or Areas, Implementation
Provisions, Calculation Methodology, Technical Requirements and Exemption Provisions, as detailed in
the following approved Stormwater Management Plans, Maps and Model Ordinances, shall be adhered to
for the drainage plans of their watersheds:
1. Lackawanna River Watershed.
2. Toby Creek Watershed.
The administration, review, inspection, fee collection, approval or disapproval, and fines/penalties,
associated with the requirements of the above referenced Drainage Plans, will be controlled by the Luzerne
County, or Local Municipal Subdivision/Land Development Ordinance. Where this Ordinance shall have
conflicting or additional requirements, the Luzerne County General Stormwater Management Ordinance
shall have control.
A R T I C L E I I I
DRAINAGE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 301. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
For any of the Regulated Activities of this Ordinance, prior to the final approval of subdivision and/or land
development plans, or the issuance of any permit, or the commencement of any land disturbances activity,
the owner, subdivider, developer or his agent shall have an approved Drainage Plan.
SECTION 302. DRAINAGE PLAN CON I ENTS
The Drainage Plan must follow the outline of submission requirements as noted in the Model Ordinance of
the approved Watershed Stormwater Management Plan.
SECTION 303. PLAN SUBMISSION
A. For Regulated Activities specified in Section 104.A., 104.B., 104.C. and 104.D.:
1. The Drainage Plan shall be submitted by the developer to the Luzerne County
Planning Commission as part of the Preliminary Plan submission for the
subdivision or land development.
2. Four (4) copies of the Drainage Plan shall be submitted unless additional copies
are requested by the Luzerne County Planning Commission.
49
B. For Regulated Activities specified in Sections 104.E. and 104.F., the Drainage Plan shall
be submitted by the developer as part of the DEP Permit application process under Chapter
105 (Darn Safety and Waterway Management) or Chapter 106 (Flood Plain Management)
or DEP' s Rules and Regulations.
SECTION 304 DRAINAGE PLAN REVIEW
The County Engineer shall review the Drainage plan for consistency with the adopted
Stormwater Management Plans, Maps and Model Ordinance and against any additional
storm drainage provisions contained in the County or local municipal subdivision and land
development ordinances, as applicable.
B. The County shall not approve any subdivision or land development if the Drainage Plan has been
found to be inconsistent with the approved Stormwater Management Plans, Maps and
Model Ordinance as determined by the County Engineer.
SECTION 305. MODIFICATION OF PLANS
A modification to a submitted Drainage Plan for a proposed development site which involves a change in
control methods or techniques, or which involves the relocation or redesign of control measures, or which
is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the Drainage Plan (as determined by the
County Engineer) shall require a resubmission of the modified Drainage Plan consistent with Section 303
subject to review per Section 304 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 306 FIARDSHIP WAIVER PROCEDURE
The Luzerne County Planning Commission may hear request for waivers where it is alleged that the
provisions of this (Act 167) Ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The waiver request
shall be in writing on an application form, promulgated by the County and a fee of $200 submitted to the
county Planning Commission and $500 to the County Road and Bridge Department. Four (4) copies of the
completed application form shall be provided to the Luzerne County Planning Commission. The application
shall fully document the nature of the alleged hardship.
The Luzerne County Planning Commission may grant a waiver provided that all of the following findings
are made in a given case:
A. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity of
lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar
to the particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of the approved Stormwater Plans, Maps and Model Ordinances in the
Stormwater Management District in which the property is located;
50
B. That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility
that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the
approved Stormwater Plans, Maps and Model Ordinances, including the "no harm"
provision, and that the authorization of a waiver is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the
property; -
C. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant; and
D. That the waiver, if authorized, will represent the minimum waiver that will afford
relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.
In granting any waiver, the Luzerne County Planning Commission may attach such reasonable conditions
and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of Act 167.
ARTICLE IV
INSPECTIONS
SECTION 401. SCHEDULE OF INSPECTIONS
A. The County Engineer or his designee shall inspect all phases of the installation of
the permanent stormwater control facilities and the completed installation.
B. If at any stage of the work the County Engineer determines the permanent
stormwater control facilities are not being installed in accordance with the approved
development plan, the County shall revoke any existing permits or approval until
the work is brought into compliance with the approved plan or until a revised
development plan is submitted and approved as required by Section 305.
A R T I C L E V
FEES AND EXPENSES
51
SECTION 501. GENERAL
The fee for Drainage Plan review and processing has been established in the Luzerne County
Subdivision/Land Development Ordinance.
SECTION 502. EXPENSES COVERED BY FEES. The
fees required shall at a minimum cover:
A. The review of the Drainage Plan by the County Engineer.
B. The site inspection.
C. The inspection of required controls and improvements during construction.
The final inspection upon completion of the controls and improvements required in
the plan.
E. Any additional work required to enforce any permit or approval provisions, correct
violations, and assure the completion of stipulated remedial actions.
A R T I C L E V I
MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES
SECTION 601. GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES
A. Single Entity Ownership
52
In all cases where the permanent stormwater runoff control facilities are designed to
manage runoff from property in a single entity ownership as defined below, the
maintenance responsibilities for the stormwater control into an agreement with the
County which specifies that the owner will properly maintain the facilities consistent
with accepted practice as determined by the County Engineer. The agreement shall
provide for regular inspections by the County and contain such provisions as
necessary to ensure timely correction of any maintenance deficiencies by the single
entity owner. A single entity owner shall be defined as an individual, association,
public or private corporation, partnership form, trust, estate or any other legal entity
empowered to own real estate.
B. Multiple Ownership
(1) In cases where the property controlled by the permanent stormwater control
facilities shall be in multiple ownership (i.e. many individual owners of various
portions or the property), the developer shall offer to dedicate the
permanent stormwater control facilities to the local municipality for maintenance.
The developer shall pay a fee to the local municipality corresponding to the present
worth of maintenance of the facilities for a ten-year period. The estimated annual
maintenance cost for the facilities shall be based on a fee schedule provided by the
local municipal engineer and adopted by the local municipality.
(2) If the local municipality does not accept the dedication of the stormwater
control facilities, the developer or a property owner association shall retain
ownership and the maintenance responsibilities. These cases shall be regulated by
Section 601.A
(3) In certain multiple ownership situations, the local municipality may benefit
by transferring the maintenance responsibility to an individual or group of
individuals residing within the controlled area. These individuals may have the
permanent stormwater control facilities adjacent to their lots or otherwise have an
interest in the proper maintenance of the facilities. In these instances, the local
municipality and the individual(s) may enter into a formal agreement for the
maintenance of the facilities. The local municipality shall maintain ownership of the
facilities and be responsible for periodic inspections.
SECTION 602. RIGHT-OF-WAY
Upon presentation of the proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of the County may enter at
reasonable times upon any property to investigate or ascertain whether proper maintenance is being
provided for any stormwater management facilities as provided in Section 601.
53
A R T I C L E V I I
FINES AND PENALTIES
SECTION 701. PROCEDURES
Any violation of this Ordinance, with the exception of Section 601 B. (1) (3), shall be subject to the
procedures outlines in Section 12, Remedies, of the Luzerne County Subdivision/Land Development.
Any violation of Section 601 B. (1) (3) of this Ordinance shall be governed by the local Municipal
Maintenance Agreement.
A R T I C L E V I I I
ADOPTION
SECTION 801. EFFECTIVE DATE
This Stormwater Management Ordinance shall take full force and effect from the date of passage. This
Ordinance, however, shall have no effect on subdivision and/or land development plans pending at the time
of passage of this to the County Planning Commission.
SECTION 802. PUBLIC HEARING
The public hearing for this Ordinance was held on May 25, 1994.
SECTION 803. ADOPTION DATE
The date of adoption of this Ordinance was June 1, 1994.
LUZERNE COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION
SUBDIVISION/LAND DEVELOPMENT FEE SCHEDULE
APPLICATIONS FILED UNDER COUNTY JURISDICTION
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2012
Section 7.11:
54
Administrative Review Fees payable to the Luzerne County Planning Commission:
Application type Fee
Subdivision $ 290.00, includes the first 4 lots
$ 50.00 additional fee for each lot over 4*
Land Development $ 780.00, plus $ 60 per unit. ( $ 840.00 min.)
Stormwater Plan** $ 275.00
Component 4B of Planning Land Module or PaDEP County Land Use Letter $ 25
Technical Review Fees payable to the Luzerne County Engineering Office:
Subdivision $ 240.00, plus $ 50 for each lot up to 5 ($ 340.00 Min.)*
$ 75.00 additional fee for each lot over 5.*
Land Development $ 700.00 for the first 40,000 sq. ft. of new impervious
cover.***
$ 80.00 for each additional 10,000 sq.ft. of impervious
cover, rounded up to the nearest whole 10,000
increment.***
$ 150.00 Re-Submission Review Fee*****
Stormwater Plan or Report**
$ 750.00
Site Inspection**** $ 150.00 each inspection
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ *
Fees determined by the number of lots created, including the residual lot.
** Review of either the Countywide, or specific watershed, Act 167 Stormwater Plan, or a Stormwater Report based upon
Section 6.115 and Appendix A, as determined by the Planning Commission staff.
*** Impervious cover includes, but is not limited to, structure, roadways, sidewalks, parking areas, stone or gravel areas,
etc. The amount of new impervious cover must be provided to verify the required fee.
**** Site inspection for release of Financial Security Guarantee shall be scheduled upon receipt of a written request and the
inspection fee for each inspection requested.
*****Each consolidated response(s) to the comment letter(s).
1
LUZERNE COUNTY SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
TEXT AMENDMENT
SUBDIVISION/LAND DEVELOPMENT FEE SCHEDULE
APPLICATIONS FILED UNDER COUNTY JURISDICTION
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2013
Revise Section 7.11 – Fees to read:
Administrative Review Fees payable to the Luzerne County Planning Commission:
Application type Fee
Subdivision $ 300.00, includes the first 4 lots
$ 50.00 additional fee for each lot over 4*
Land Development $ 800.00, plus $ 60 per unit. ( $ 860.00 min.)
Stormwater Plan** $ 275.00
Flood Plain Management $ 200.00 Additional fee for Section 14 review.
Component 4B of Planning Land Module or PaDEP County Land Use Letter $ 25
Technical Review Fees payable to the Luzerne County Engineering Office:
Subdivision $ 250.00, plus $ 50 for each lot up to 5 ($ 350.00 Min.)*
$ 80.00 additional fee for each lot over 5.*
Land Development $ 750.00 for the first 40,000 sq. ft. of new impervious
cover.***
$ 80.00 for each additional 10,000 sq.ft. of impervious
cover, rounded up to the nearest whole 10,000
increment.***
$ 150.00 Re-Submission Review Fee*****
Stormwater Plan or Report** $ 750.00
Flood Plain Management $ 300.00 Additional fee for Section 14 review.
Site Inspection**** $ 200.00 each inspection
(See following page for footnotes)
2
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Fees determined by the number of lots created, including the residual lot.
** Review of either the Countywide, or specific watershed, Act 167 Stormwater Plan, or a
Stormwater Report based upon Section 6.115 and Appendix A, as determined by the Planning
Commission and County Engineering Office staffs.
*** Impervious cover includes, but is not limited to, structure, roadways, sidewalks,
parking areas, stone or gravel areas, etc. The amount of new impervious cover must be
provided to verify the required fee.
**** Site inspection for release of Financial Security Guarantee shall be scheduled upon
receipt of a written request and the inspection fee for each inspection requested.
*****Each consolidated response(s) to the comment letter(s).
1
LUZERNE COUNTY SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
TEXT AMENDMENTS
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
Eliminate current Section 5.58 which reads: Any lot identified as lying with the One Hundred
(100) Year Floodway will not be included as part of the required lot area as designated per its
appropriate zoning district. The delineation of the One Hundred (100) Year floodway will be
determined by those maps produced by the National Insurance program for the municipality. If, for
some reason, floodway maps are approximated or non-existent, the developer will use the best data
available to determine floodway location.
Insert new Section 5.58 to read: Any lot, or portion of lot, identified as lying within the Floodway
will be reserved and noted as Non-Buildable, nor be included as part of the required lot area, as
designated by its appropriate zoning district. The delineation of the Floodway will be as shown on
the FIRM maps produced by FEMA as part of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
Eliminate current Section 7.138 which reads: Areas subject to periodic flooding.
Insert new Section 7.138 to read: Outline all identified areas of the Special Flood Hazard Area
and Floodway.
Eliminate in SECTION 9 – DEFINITIONS - 9.29 Flood, 9.30 Flood Fringe, 9.32 One Hundred
Year Flood, 9.33 One Hundred (100) Year Flood Plain Area(s) or District(s).
Eliminate current Section 9.31 Floodway which reads: The channel of river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge that One
Hundred (100) Year Flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one (1) foot.
Insert new Section 9.31 Floodway to read: –The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the one percent (1%) annual chance
flood event without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
Insert in Section 9 – DEFINITIONS -the following definitions to read:
9.29 One Percent (1%) Annual Chance Flood Event – A flood that has a one percent (1%)
chance of occurring in any one (1) year.
9.30 Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) – The area(s) that have a one percent (1%) chance
of being flooded in any year, as shown on the FEMA FIRM maps.
9.32 Base Flood Elevation (BFE) – The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) for Zones AE and AH, that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that
has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
2
Eliminate current SECTION 14 – FLOOD CONTROL (See the current Section 14 in the
Luzerne County Subdivision/Land Development Ordinance on line at the county’s website,
www.luzernecounty.org).
Insert new SECTION 14 – FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT to read:
14.1 General Provisions:
A. Intent
The intent of this section is to regulate subdivision and/or land development occurring in the
Special Flood Hazard Area in order to promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the
community, to provide safe building sites with public facilities to serve the sites designed and
installed at the time of initial construction to mitigate flood damage.
B. Applicability
The provisions of this Section shall apply when a proposed subdivision or land development
is located, wholly or partially, within the Special Flood Hazard Area, and in a municipality under
the jurisdiction of the Luzerne County Subdivision/Land Development Ordinance. These
provisions shall be supplementary to the other requirements of this Ordinance.
C. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This Section supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect in other
County or Local Municipal Ordinances. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in
full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict
between any of the provisions of this County Ordinance, or the decisions of the County Engineer,
the more restrictive shall apply.
D. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood mitigation sought by the provisions of this Section is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on accepted engineering methods of study. Larger
floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice
jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This Section does not imply that areas outside the
special Flood Hazard Area, or that land uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This Section shall not create liability on the part of Luzerne County or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Section or any
administrative decision made thereunder.
14.2 Application Procedures and Plat Requirements
A. Preliminary Plan Requirements
When a subdivision, or land development, is proposed that will be located wholly, or
partially, within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), a map sheet shall be provided showing the
boundary and area of the SFHA and the Floodway, if any. Additional detailed information shall be
3
provided either on the map sheet, or in attached documentation, to the satisfaction of the County
Engineer, concerning the following: proposed lots and sites, fill area and data, flood or erosion
protective facilities, special deed restrictions, contours at intervals of two (2) feet, the Base Flood
Elevation, location and elevation of all proposed buildings, elevation certificate for the building
sites, and the location and elevation of proposed roads and public utilities and the location and
details of the FEMA accepted benchmark elevation control. Where the Base Flood Elevation is not
available or when the County Engineer requires, hydrologic and hydraulic studies will be prepared
and submitted to determine and/or confirm the BFE and the Floodway. These studies shall be
undertaken only by Professional Engineers registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Final Plan Requirements
All information required in Section 14.2 A and other pertinent sections of this Ordinance,
plus all required information and plan revisions as requested by the Luzerne County Planning
Commission, the Luzerne County Engineer, and the local municipality where the application’s site
is located, if supported by the Luzerne County Planning Commission.
C. Application Coordination
All applications under this section shall be coordinated by the applicant with the Luzerne
County Zoning Ordinance, specifically Article 13, the local municipal Flood Plain Management
Ordinance, local municipal Flood Plain Administrator, building code officer and the UCC
requirements, the Luzerne Conservation District, and all other federal and state agencies having
jurisdiction over these issues.
14.3 Design Standards and Improvements
A. General
No building sites, construction of new structures, replacement or expansion of existing
structures, or the placement of fill, land contour or drainage pattern modification, will be allowed in
the Floodway.
Building sites, construction of new structures, replacement or expansion of existing
structures, shall be allowed in the Non-Floodway portions of the SFHA providing they are elevated
to one and one-half feet (1 & ½ Ft.) above the Base Flood Elevation and flood proof the
required utilities. The placement of fill shall also be allowed subject to the requirements of the local
municipal flood plain management ordinance as determined by the local municipal Flood Plain
Administrator and the County Engineer, and shall extend laterally at least fifteen (15) feet beyond
the building line from all Points, and shall only be used to the extent to which it does not adversely
affect adjacent properties or improvements.
B. Drainage Facilities
Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of storm water runoff in a
safe and efficient manner. The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge
of runoff onto adjacent properties. The requirements of any adopted Luzerne County Storm Water
4
Management Plans, Luzerne Conservation District and drainage rules in the local municipal
Flood Plain Management Ordinance must also be followed to the extent that the most restrictive
rules apply to the satisfaction of the County Engineer.
C. Street
The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than one (1) foot below the Base
Flood Elevation and shall be designed to the satisfaction of the County Engineer such that they
cannot be inundated by more than a ten (10) year storm protruding into the cartway. The applicant
shall provide the elevation of all streets.
D. Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities and Systems
The distribution and collection systems (new or replacement) shall be located, designed and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of flood waters. Sanitary
sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into
flood waters. On- lot sewage systems (septic, sand mounds, etc.) shall be prohibited in the SFHA
and a note shall be placed on the plot plan and in all deed conveyances that such systems are
prohibited, unless they are elevated one and one-half feet (1 & ½ ft.) above the Base Flood
Elevation and/or flood proofed, and approved by the local municipal Sewage Enforcement Officer
and the PA Department of Environmental Protection. The on-lot systems, if permitted, shall be so
located and designed to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a flood. All
sewage systems shall be waterproofed and pressure tested to the satisfaction of the County
Engineer.
E. Other Utilities
In the SFHA, all utilities shall be underground in a conduit which shall be waterproofed and
protected to not cause harm to the general public during a flood event, if possible. If the county
Engineer determines that placing the utilities underground is not possible, they shall be located,
elevated and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood..