Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) [53 P.S. § 66601(d)] of the Second Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Westtown, County of Chester, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by
General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 170,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Westtown, which shall be
known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of Westtown,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Westtown, and it is the intention
of said Board of Supervisors that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only
such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall
be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of Westtown and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by
repeal.)
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 2-8-2001.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the township or other instruments or evidence of
the township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 WESTTOWN CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the township.
S. Ordinance No. 95-6, adopted December 4, 1995
T. All ordinances and resolutions pertaining to traffic and parking,
particularly Ord. Nos. 1-70, 2-78, 82-2 and 87-4.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the township for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A1 attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Board of Supervisors, and it
is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had
previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes and
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the articles and sections which were amended,
added or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote
referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine supplementation,
footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced with the
following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5." Schedule A,
which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the township offices.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the
Code specified in § 1-15.
C. Fee and penalty amendments.
(1) The following sections containing fees were amended to replace
the fee amount with the phrase "as set from time to time by the
Board of Supervisors": §§ 45-14, 53-15A, 53-45I, 80-10, 113-1G,
113-3A, 119-3B, 122-3C(1), 132-11B and C, 140-11E, 154-13B and
167-4.
(2) The following sections were amended (or added) to provide
standard language for civil or criminal penalties as follows:
(a) Civil penalty language in §§ 113-4, 116-3, 119-8, 154-13C,
154-30B and 167-3 reading: Any person who violates or
permits a violation of this chapter (article) shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the township before a District Justice, pay a
fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the township in the
enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed
until the date of the determination of the violation by the
District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the township are hereby
authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to
enforce compliance herewith.
(b) Criminal penalty language in §§ 54-4, 57-2B, 57-4F and G,
61-6B, 63-9, 80-15, 84-3, 87-2C, 105-2C and D, 122-2D and E,
126-2B, 132-15, 132-24, 132-28, 140-17A and 146-6 reading as
follows: Any person who violates or permits a violation of this
chapter (article, code) shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding brought before a District Justice under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment
thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that
such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense, and each section of this code that
is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
D. Global changes.
(1) Justice of the Peace or District Magistrate is changed to District
Justice.
§ 1-6 WESTTOWN CODE § 1-6
1:6
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
ith the Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall
remain there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such
copies shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law,
and such certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township
Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same during all
times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
(2) Department of Environmental Resources is changed to Department
of Environmental Protection.
(3) Department of Community Affairs is changed to Department of
Community and Economic Development.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:7
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized
and directed by him/her or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Township Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code
and all legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the
effective date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction of the Code in a newspaper of
general circulation in the township. The enactment and application of this
ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction, the
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public and the filing
of an attested copy of this ordinance with the county, as required by law,
shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the township
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance, upon being found liable therefor
in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed
until the date of the determination of the violation by the District Justice
and/or Court. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
§ 1-11 WESTTOWN CODE § 1-14
1:8
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after ........................, 2001.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
Chapter 11
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 11-1. Fire companies recognized.
Fame Fire Company No. 3, organized as part of the West Chester Borough
Fire Department, and existing in the Township of West Goshen, Chester
County, Pennsylvania, and Goshen Fire Company Nos. 54 and 154,
organized and existing in the Township of East Goshen, are hereby
recognized as the official fire companies for the township, in order that
Fame Fire Company No. 3 and Goshen Fire Company Nos. 54 and 154 and
their members may derive the full benefit of governmental immunity and
workers' compensation statutes, rules and regulations.
§ 11-2. Authorized activities of fire companies.
Fame Fire Company No. 3 and Goshen Fire Company Nos. 54 and 154
are hereby authorized to provide such services to the township as may
be necessary for the protection of property and persons situate therein,
including, by way of example but not of limitation, the following:
§ 11-3. Authorized activities of members.
In addition to participating in the activities authorized in § 11-2 above,
or in going to or returning from any authorized activity, the members of
Fame Fire Company No. 3 and Goshen Fire Company Nos. 54 and 154 are
authorized to do the following when properly approved by an officer of the
companies:
A. Prevention of loss or injury to persons and property from fire,
automobile accidents, medical emergencies, hazardous materials and
like dangerous eventualities;
B. Removal of water from property after storms, assistance in the removal,
abatement and prevention of damage or injury to persons or property,
whether through natural or man-made causes, and performance of like
public service functions of an emergency or nonemergency nature;
C. Conducting and participating in such educational or training activities,
either within or outside of Westtown Township, as may be deemed
necessary by the officers of the companies to maintain proficiency in
providing service; and
D. Responding to calls and providing service to municipalities outside of
Westtown Township.
A. Participate in any type of drill, training, education, ceremony, practice,
test or parade.
B. Engage in fund-raising activities benefiting Fame Fire Company No. 3
or Goshen Fire Company Nos. 54 and 154.
§ 1-15 WESTTOWN CODE § 11-3
1:10
Chapter 14
FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 11. Fire prevention — See Ch. 87.
§ 14-1. Bureau of Fire Prevention established.
There is hereby established in and for the Township of Westtown a Bureau
of Fire Prevention, hereinafter called "Bureau," which shall operate under
the direct supervision and control of the Board of Supervisors of Westtown
Township, hereinafter called "the Board." Members of the Bureau shall
serve without pay, but may be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable
expenses.
§ 14-2. Duties of Bureau.
The Bureau shall be responsible for the implementation and enforcement of
the Fire Code2 and, in pursuance thereof, shall maintain active contact with
all volunteer fire companies active within the geographical limitations of
Westtown Township to assure the proper maintenance of fire prevention and
control within the township. The Bureau shall not expend township funds
without the expressed consent in writing of the Board.
§ 14-3. Appointment to Bureau.
Any person, or persons, appointed by the Board to membership on the
Bureau shall serve a term of two years, upon such terms and conditions as
the Board may from time to time decree.
§ 14-4. Annual report of Bureau.
The Bureau shall render a report to the Board no later than November 1 of
each year, said report to contain a record of all proceedings by the Bureau in
the enforcement and implementation of the Fire Code during the preceding
12 months. The report may also contain such statistics as the Bureau may
wish to include therein.
C. Engage in the performance of any other duty or activity intended for the
proper benefit of Fame Fire Company No. 3 or Goshen Fire Company
Nos. 54 and 154.
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Fire Prevention.
§ 11-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-5
1:11
§ 14-5. Failure to appoint.
If the Board shall fail to appoint members of the Bureau, the Board shall
itself serve as the Bureau and shall delegate such duties of the Bureau as it
may see fit to the Fire Marshal.
§ 14-6. Appointment of Fire Marshal and assistants.
The Fire Marshal of Westtown Township, hereinafter called "Fire Marshal,"
shall be appointed by the Board upon adoption of this chapter and shall
serve for such period and upon such terms and conditions as the Board
shall direct. The Board may, from time to time, appoint an assistant or
assistants to the Fire Marshal, upon recommendation of the Bureau, and
said assistants shall serve at the pleasure of the Board. The Fire Marshal
and his assistants shall be properly qualified to perform their duties and
shall receive such compensation as the Board may, from time to time, direct.
§ 14-7. Duties of Fire Marshal.
The Fire Marshal shall be the chief enforcement officer of the Township Fire
Code and have the power and responsibility of enforcing the Fire Code.
§ 14-8. Monthly report.
The Fire Marshal shall be responsible for the preparation and submission
of such fire reports as may be required from time to time by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any agency thereof, the County of
Chester, or other governmental bodies or agencies thereof. Additionally, the
Fire Marshal shall report in writing each month to the Board the conduct of
the affairs of his office and shall submit to the Board such information as it
may from time to time prescribe.
§ 14-9. Saving clause.
Nothing in this chapter or in the BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any
court, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 18
INTERMUNICIPAL AGREEMENTS
§ 14-5 WESTTOWN CODE § 14-9
1:12
ARTICLE I
Westtown-East Goshen Police Department
[Adopted 9-8-1981 by Ord. No. 81-7]
§ 18-1. Purpose and statutory authority.
§ 18-2. Authorization to enter into Articles of Agreement. [Amended
8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5]
The Board of Supervisors hereby ordains to enter into the Articles of
Agreement between the Townships of Westtown and East Goshen in the
form proposed by the Township Solicitor for the purpose of creating the
Westtown-East Goshen Police Department and regulating its operation.
§ 18-3. Amendments to Articles of Agreement.
The Board of Supervisors hereby ordains that it may execute such
amendments to the Articles of Agreement as may be necessary from time to
time to carry out the purposes of this article and the Articles of Agreement
adopted pursuant thereto.
A. Westtown Township and East Goshen Township desire collectively to
associate themselves together in and to create the Westtown-East
Goshen Police Department.
B. The power to create such joint police department is granted by the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Article IV, Section
5 et seq, and by 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq. [Amended 8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-5]
C. The Board of Supervisors of Westtown Township, pursuant to the
provisions of the aforesaid statute, is authorized to enter into an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement and to delegate certain
functions, powers and responsibilities to another governmental unit
upon the passage of this article.
§ 18-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-3
1:13

ARTICLE II
Drug Enforcement
[Adopted 10-4-1993 by Ord. No. 93-9]
§ 18-4. Purpose and statutory authority. [Amended 8-6-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-5]
Westtown Township, in accordance with the provisions of the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act (53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq., as
amended) and the provisions of the Municipal Police Jurisdiction Act (the
Act of June 15, 1982, P.L. 512, No. 141, § 4 et seq., 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8951
et seq., as amended), desires to facilitate enforcement of controlled
substances laws, and it hereby enacts an ordinance allowing for the
formation and implementation of an agreement to be signed by Westtown
Township and other municipalities in Chester County, Pennsylvania,
providing for intermunicipal police cooperation in the enforcement of the
Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act3 and related criminal
statutes, as well as an agreement to be signed by Westtown Township, the
office of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
Chester County District Attorney's office and other municipalities by which
these entities shall cooperate and prevent regional illegal activities related
to controlled substances.
§ 18-5. Enabling provisions for and conditions of Municipal Police
Cooperative Agreement.
A. In accordance with the provisions of the Intergovernmental
Cooperation Act (53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.), Westtown Township is
hereby authorized to enter into a Municipal Police Cooperative
Agreement ("MPCA") with other municipalities in Chester County,
Pennsylvania, which will allow, inter alia, part-time and full-time police
officers of each signatory municipality to pursue their official police
duties within the territorial boundaries of all participating
municipalities, subject to the terms and procedures of the MPCA.
[Amended 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5]
B. Conditions of the MPCA shall conform substantially to those contained
within the draft of the MPCA currently on file in the township office.
C. After execution of the MPCA by the township, either the original or a
duplicate copy of the executed MPCA shall be kept on file in the
township office. As additional municipalities enter into or withdraw
from the MPCA, the documents pertaining to these revisions shall be
kept together on file in the township office.
3. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq.
§ 18-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-6
1:15
§ 18-6. Duration of MPCA.
The duration of the MPCA, and the township's participation therein, shall
be without specific term, but shall continue indefinitely, subject to the
township's unqualified right to withdrawal from the MPCA at any time
following seven days' written notice to all participating municipalities of the
township's intention to withdraw.
§ 18-7. Purpose and objectives of MPCA.
The purposes and objectives of the MPCA include, but are not limited to:
§ 18-8. Manner and extent of financing of MPCA.
Each signatory municipality shall be responsible for all expenses incurred
by reason of actions taken by its police pursuant to the MPCA, no other
financing being necessary or required to effectuate its purpose.
§ 18-9. Organizational structure and use of property.
No additional formal organizational structure or entity is necessary to
implement the provisions of the MPCA, nor will any property, real or
personal be acquired, managed or disposed of in order to effectuate the
purposes contained in the MPCA. Each participating municipality shall be
represented on a Joint Police Advisory Board, but this Board will not be
an entity empowered to enter into group insurance or employee benefit
contracts.
§ 18-10. Enabling provisions for and conditions of Municipal Drug
Task Force Agreement.
A. Improving law enforcement in Chester County, Pennsylvania, especially
in Westtown Township and other signatory municipalities to the MPCA,
by granting police officers of participating municipalities authority to
exercise their official duties outside their primary territorial boundaries
and within those of the signatory municipalities;
B. Enhancing the coordination of controlled substance investigations in
Chester County, Pennsylvania, and reducing legal issues associated
with jurisdictional or municipal boundaries;
C. Providing mutual police aid across jurisdictional lines to enable police
to more effectively enforce the provisions of the controlled substance
statutes, thereby enhancing the safety and welfare of persons in
Westtown Township and in the other signatory municipalities; and
D. Specifying the powers and scope of authority delegated by each
participating municipality, and describing that Westtown Township
shall delegate no greater power and authority than it receives or
permanently delegate any power or authority.
§ 18-6 WESTTOWN CODE § 18-10
1:16
§ 18-11. Duration of MDTFA.
A. In accordance with the provisions of the Intergovernmental
Cooperation Act (53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.) and the provisions of the
Municipal Police Jurisdiction Act (the Act of June 15, 1982, P.L. 512, No.
141, § 4 et seq., 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8951 et seq., as amended), Westtown
Township is hereby authorized to enter into a Municipal Drug Task
Force Agreement ("MDTFA") with the office of the Attorney General of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania ("OAG"), the Chester County
District Attorney's office, and the signatory municipalities to the MPCA,
by and through which these entities shall coordinate investigations,
prosecutions, arrests, searches and other activities necessary to
enforce the controlled substance and related criminal statutes within
Chester County, Pennsylvania. [Amended 8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-5]
B. This aid and assistance offered by Westtown Township to the OAG is in
response to the request for aid and assistance made by the OAG to all
municipal police departments as described in the MDTFA and as
provided in the Municipal Police Jurisdiction Act, 42 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 8953(a)(3). As such, Westtown Township and its police officers shall
be afforded all rights, benefits and immunities described in the
Municipal Police Jurisdiction Act, 42 Pa.C.S.A § 8953(d), when any
township police officer acts within the scope of the MDTFA.
C. Westtown Township shall utilize the services of both full-time and parttime
officers of its Police Department under the conditions contained in
the MDTFA which shall conform substantially to the draft MDTFA
currently on file in the township office.
D. After execution of the MDTFA by the township, either the original or a
duplicate copy of the executed MDTFA shall be kept on file at all times
in the township office. As additional municipalities enter into or
withdraw from the MDTFA, the documents pertaining to these revisions
shall be kept together on file at all times in the township office.
E. Pursuant to the MDTFA, Westtown Township shall establish appropriate
procedures to comply with the MDTFA and relevant regulations as may
be issued from time to time by the OAG and the Chester County District
Attorney's office.
A. The duration of the MDTFA and the township's participation therein
shall be without specific term, but shall continue indefinitely, subject to
the township's unqualified right to withdrawal from the MDTFA at any
time following 30 days' written notice to all participating entities of the
township's intention to withdrawal.
B. If the OAG terminates the existence of the Drug Task Force created
pursuant to the provisions of the MDTFA, the township's participation
in the MDTFA shall automatically terminate without further action of
§ 18-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-11
1:17
§ 18-12. Purpose and objectives of MDTFA.
§ 18-13. Financing of MDTFA.
The MDTFA shall be financed solely by funds supplied by the office of the
Attorney General of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The OAG shall
agree to reimburse Westtown Township for any overtime incurred by its
police in the performance of Task Force duties.
§ 18-14. Organizational structure.
Any organizational structure required to implement the provisions of the
MDTFA shall be jointly agreed to and established by the participating
entities, but any such structure shall not be an entity empowered to enter
into group insurance or employee benefit contracts.
§ 18-15. Acquisition, management and disposal of property.
The acquisition, management or disposal of any and all property, whether
real or personal, acquired or to be acquired pursuant to the provisions
of the MDTFA shall be in accordance with the terms of the MDTFA, the
Controlled Substance Forfeitures Act,4 and any relevant directives and
procedures issued by the OAG and the Chester County District Attorney's
office.
§ 18-16. Amendments.
The Board of Supervisors hereby ordains that it may execute such
amendments to the MPCA and MDTFA as may be necessary from time to
time to carry out the purposes of this article and the agreements adopted
pursuant hereto.
the Township Board of Supervisors, effective the date of such
termination by the OAG.
A. The purpose and objectives of the MDTFA include, but are not limited
to, regional coordination of police activities in order to facilitate the
enforcement of criminal statutes pertaining to illegal possession, use,
manufacture, sale and distribution of controlled substances.
B. The MDTFA shall specify the powers and scope of authority delegated
by each participating entity, but in no event shall Westtown Township
delegate greater power and authority than it receives or permanently
delegate any power or authority.
4. Editor's Note: See 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 6801 et seq.
§ 18-11 WESTTOWN CODE § 18-16
1:18
ARTICLE III
PSATS Unemployment Compensation Group Trust
[Adopted 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-4]
§ 18-17. Agreement adopted.
The Board of Supervisors hereby adopts the Restated Trust Agreement and
agrees to participate in the Trust in accordance with the amended and
updated terms of the Restated Trust Agreement and the Chairman of the
Board of the Board of Supervisors and Secretary of the Township are hereby
authorized to sign the Restated Trust Agreement and any other agreements
necessary for the Township's participation in the Trust. The Restated Trust
Agreement shall remain on file for inspection and review at the Township's
offices at 1039 Wilmington Pike, West Chester, PA 19382, during normal
business hours. The Restated Trust Agreement may be subsequently
modified or amended in accordance with its terms, but in no event shall
such modifications or amendments divert any of the trust funds from the
purposes of the Trust. The Township may withdraw from the Trust in
accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement, including if the Board of
Supervisors determines the modifications or amendments are not in the
best interests of the Township.
§ 18-18. Purpose.
The participation of the Township in the Trust is authorized for the purpose
of pooling resources for the purpose of providing unemployment
compensation insurance for participating employers, as that term is defined
in the Restated Trust Agreement, at reasonable cost.
§ 18-19. Conditions of participation.
As set forth in greater detail in the Restated Trust Agreement and as
otherwise stated herein, the following conditions apply to the participation
of the Township in the Trust:
§ 18-20. Withdrawal.
The Township agrees to participate in the Trust and may withdraw for any
reason and in accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement provided that
it has fulfilled all its financial obligations to the Trust upon withdrawal.
A. That each participating employer must meet the admission and
eligibility requirements set forth therein;
B. That each participating employer agrees to pay all contributions when
due as provided in the Restated Trust Agreement or as otherwise
established by the Board of Trustees; and
C. That each participating employer complies with all other conditions of
the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 18-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-21
1:19
§ 18-21. Effective date.
The effective date of the Township's agreement to and joinder in the
Restated Trust Agreement and the participation of the Township in the
Trust pursuant to the terms of the Restated Trust Agreement will be
February 22, 2015.
§ 18-22. Delegation of powers.
Each participating employer delegates to the Board of Trustees the powers
enumerated in the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 18-23. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure of the Trust shall consist of a Board of
Trustees. Under the Restated Trust Agreement, the Board of Trustees is
authorized to, among other things, enter into contracts with third parties to
perform various services necessary for the administration of the Trust.
§ 18-24. Funds.
The funds required for the operation of the Trust shall be provided by the
participating employers through scheduled appropriations as determined
by the Board of Trustees.
§ 18-25. Insurance and benefits.
The Trust is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for employees of
the Trust, if any.
§ 18-26. Compliance with terms.
As a condition of participating in the Trust, the Township agrees to comply
with all of the terms and conditions in the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 18-27. Certified copy.
The Secretary of the Township shall provide a certified copy of this article
upon its enactment to the Board of Trustees of the Trust.
§ 18-28. Authorization to take necessary action.
The Township Manager is hereby authorized to take any and all such other
actions as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this
article and comply with the requirements of the attached Restated Trust
Agreement and any duly adopted amendments thereto.5
5. Editor's Note: A copy of the Restated Trust Agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 18-21 WESTTOWN CODE § 18-29
1:20
§ 18-29. Duration of agreement.
The duration of the term of the Township's participation in the Trust and
obligations under the Restated Trust Agreement shall continue until
withdrawal from the Trust by the Township in accordance with the terms of
the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 18-30. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors hereby specifically finds and determines as
follows:
§ 18-31. Statutory authority.
This article is being enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180, as
amended, 53 Pa.C.S. §§ 2301, et seq.
A. The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperative agreement are set
forth in the Restated Trust Agreement incorporated by reference
herein.
B. The Township shall participate in the Trust in accordance with the
Restated Trust Agreement until it withdraws by giving notice to the
Board of Trustees in accordance with the terms of the Restated Trust
Agreement.
C. The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperative
arrangement, including powers and scope of authority delegated to the
Board of Trustees, are set forth in the incorporated Restated Trust
Agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing of the agreement are that:
(1) Funds to implement the Township's obligations under the
agreement shall come from the normal and usual budgeted
amounts for Township employee compensation and employee
benefits; and
(2) No borrowing is anticipated to be required.
E. The Trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the Restated Trust Agreement.
F. All assets and property, real or personal, of the Trust shall be titled to,
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the Trust, and its Board
of Trustees, in accordance with the terms of the Restated Trust
Agreement.
G. The Trust in accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee welfare benefits to be offered to participating employers for
their eligible employee and dependents.
§ 18-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-31
1:21

ARTICLE IV
Pennsylvania Townships Health Insurance Cooperative Trust
[Adopted 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
§ 18-32. Agreement adopted.
The Board of Supervisors hereby adopts the Restated Trust Agreement and
agrees to participate in the Trust in accordance with the amended and
updated terms of the Restated Trust Agreement and the Chairman of the
Board of Supervisors and Secretary of the Township are hereby authorized
to sign the Restated Trust Agreement and any other agreements necessary
for the Township's participation in the Trust. The Restated Trust Agreement
shall remain on file for inspection and review at the Township's offices at
1039 Wilmington Pike, West Chester, PA 19382, during normal business
hours. The Restated Trust Agreement may be subsequently modified or
amended in accordance with its terms, but in no event shall such
modifications or amendments divert any of the trust funds from the
purposes of the Trust. The Township may withdraw from the Trust in
accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement, including if the Board of
Supervisors determines the modifications or amendments are not in the
best interests of the Township.
§ 18-33. Purpose.
The participation of the Township in the Trust is authorized for the purpose
of obtaining high-quality, cost-effective medical, prescription, dental, life,
disability, vision and/or other employee welfare benefit insurance at a
reasonable cost to the Township and its employees.
§ 18-34. Conditions of participation.
As set forth in greater detail in the Restated Trust Agreement and as
otherwise stated herein, the following conditions apply to the participation
of the Township in the Trust:
§ 18-35. Withdrawal.
The Township agrees to participate in the Trust and may withdraw for any
reason and in accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement provided that
it has fulfilled all its financial obligations to the Trust upon withdrawal.
A. That each participating employer, as that term is defined in the
Restated Trust Agreement, must meet the admission and eligibility
requirements set forth therein;
B. That each participating employer agrees to pay all contributions when
due as provided in the Restated Trust Agreement or as otherwise
established by the Board of Trustees; and
C. That each participating employer complies with all other conditions of
the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 18-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-36
1:23
§ 18-36. Effective date.
The effective date of the Township's agreement to and joinder in the
Restated Trust Agreement and the participation of the Township in the
Trust pursuant to the terms of the Restated Trust Agreement will be
February 22, 2015.
§ 18-37. Delegation of powers.
Each participating employer delegates to the Board of Trustees the powers
enumerated in the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 18-38. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure of the Trust shall consist of a Board of
Trustees. Under the Restated Trust Agreement, the Board of Trustees is
authorized to, among other things, enter into contracts with third parties to
perform various services necessary for the administration of the Trust.
§ 18-39. Funds.
The funds required for the operation of the Trust shall be provided by the
participating employers through scheduled appropriations as determined
by the Board of Trustees.
§ 18-40. Insurance and benefits.
The Trust is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for employees of
the Trust, if any.
§ 18-41. Compliance with terms.
As a condition of participating in the Trust, the Township agrees to comply
with all of the terms and conditions in the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 18-42. Certified copy.
The Secretary of the Township shall provide a certified copy of this article
upon its enactment to the Board of Trustees of the Trust.
§ 18-43. Authorization to take necessary action.
The Township Manager is hereby authorized to take any and all such other
actions as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this
article and comply with the requirements of the Restated Trust Agreement
and any duly adopted amendments thereto.6
6. Editor's Note: A copy of the Restated Trust Agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 18-36 WESTTOWN CODE § 18-44
1:24
§ 18-44. Duration of agreement.
The duration of the term of the Township's participation in the Trust and
obligations under the Restated Trust Agreement shall continue until
withdrawal from the Trust by the Township in accordance with the terms of
the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 18-45. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors hereby specifically finds and determines as
follows:
A. The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperative agreement are set
forth in the Restated Trust Agreement incorporated by reference
herein.
B. The Township shall participate in the Trust in accordance with the
Restated Trust Agreement until it withdraws by giving notice to the
Board of Trustees at least 90 days in advance to become effective on
either June 30 or December 31 of a given plan year; or in the case of an
initial year of participation in the Trust shall participate for a minimum
of one year.
C. The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperative
arrangement, including powers and scope of authority delegated to the
Board of Trustees, are set forth in the incorporated Restated Trust
Agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing of the Restated Trust Agreement
are that:
(1) Funds to implement the Township's obligations under the Restated
Trust Agreement shall come from the normal and usual budgeted
amounts for Township employee compensation and employee
benefits; and
(2) No borrowing is anticipated to be required.
E. The Trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the Restated Trust Agreement.
F. All assets and property, real or personal, of the Trust shall be titled to,
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the Trust, and its Board
of Trustees, in accordance with the terms of the Restated Trust
Agreement.
G. The Trust, in accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement, shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee welfare benefits to be offered to participating employers for
their eligible employee and dependents.
§ 18-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-46
1:25
§ 18-46. Statutory authority.
This article is being enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180, as
amended, 53 Pa.C.S. §§ 2301, et seq.
§ 18-46 WESTTOWN CODE § 18-46
1:26
ARTICLE V
Fire Protection Services
[Adopted 10-15-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
§ 18-47. Authorization.
The Board of Supervisors of Westtown Township is hereby authorized to
enter into an Intermunicipal Fire Services Agreement (the "Agreement")
with Birmingham Township; East Bradford Township; Thornbury Township,
Chester County; West Goshen Township; and West Chester Borough in
accordance with the terms and conditions authorized by this article and
set forth in the Agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit
"A" and is incorporated herein by reference.7 Furthermore, the appropriate
officers of Westtown Township are hereby authorized to do whatever is
necessary and appropriate to carry out the provisions of the Agreement and
this article, and to comply with the purposes and intent of the Agreement
and this article.
§ 18-48. Conditions.
The Agreement is conditioned upon each Township's and Borough's
governing body enacting an ordinance which authorizes such municipalities
to execute the Agreement.
§ 18-49. Duration; term.
The term of the Agreement shall commence at 12:00 midnight on January 1,
2019, and, unless earlier terminated by the Borough as to a given Township
pursuant to Section 2.C. of the Agreement, shall terminate at 11:59 p.m. on
December 31, 2023.
§ 18-50. Purpose and objectives.
The purposes and objectives of the Agreement are to authorize the West
Chester Borough Fire Department to provide fire protection services to
certain portions of each of the Townships and to establish the respective
municipality's share of the cost of such fire services.
§ 18-51. Manner, extent of financing.
The fire protection services which will be provided by the West Chester
Borough Fire Department pursuant to the Agreement shall be shared and
paid for by the respective municipalities in accordance with the payment
terms specified in Section 2 of the Agreement.
§ 18-52. Organizational structure necessary for implementation.
Each municipality that enters the Agreement is governed by an elected
governing body who shall oversee the implementation and enforcement of
7. Editor's Note: Exhibit "A" is on file in the Township offices.
§ 18-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-52
1:27
the Agreement. Moreover, West Chester Borough has established a Police
and Fire Committee which oversees the Fire Department's operation. The
Agreement contemplates that each Township shall appoint not more than
two delegates to serve on the Police and Fire Committee.
§ 18-53. Manner in which real or personal property shall be
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of.
The West Chester Borough Fire Department or the constituent fire
companies that comprise the West Chester Borough Fire Department shall
own all real property and personal property used for the provision of fire
services pursuant to the Agreement.
§ 18-54. Authority to enter into contracts or policies of group
insurance and employee benefits.
The Borough and West Chester Fire Department are empowered to enter
into contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits for any
employees of the Fire Department.
§ 18-52 WESTTOWN CODE § 18-54
1:28
Chapter 22
MANAGER
§ 22-1. Establishment of office.
The office of Township Manager (hereinafter "Manager") is hereby created
for Westtown Township (hereinafter "Township").
§ 22-2. Appointment; notice and removal. [Amended 12-17-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-6]
The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority of all
the members of the Board shall serve at the pleasure of the Board and
shall be subject to removal by the Board by majority vote. At least 15 days
before such removal, the Board shall furnish the Manager with a written
statement setting forth its intention to remove the Manager. The Manager
shall be entitled to a severance package containing the Manager's salary
and the then in force health insurance benefit coverage. Such severance
package shall accrue to the Manager at the rate of 15 days' salary and
health insurance coverage for each year the Manager is employed by the
Township, commencing at the end of the first full year's employment. The
Manager shall be entitled to a maximum severance payment of 90 days'
salary and health insurance benefit coverage, or until the Manager accepts
an offer of full-time employment, whichever comes first. The Manager will
not be entitled to the aforementioned severance package if the Manager is
discharged for just cause.
§ 22-3. Qualifications.
A. The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of the person's
executive and administrative abilities, with special reference of the
duties of the office as contained herein. More particularly, the Manager
shall have:
(1) Extensive knowledge of the theories, concepts and practices of
public administration;
(2) Extensive knowledge of policies and proceedings as they apply to
municipal finance and administration;
(3) Extensive knowledge of managerial practices, supervisory methods
and techniques;
(4) The ability to communicate effectively in both oral and written
form;
(5) The ability to develop and maintain close working relationships
with associates and the general public;
(6) The ability to control and direct the activities of a
multidepartmental organization; and
§ 18-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-3
1:29
§ 22-4. Powers and duties.
(7) The ability to recognize, analyze and investigate problems in a
logical manner and to develop alternate solutions.
B. With respect to required education, training and experience, the
Manager shall have:
(1) A bachelor's or master's degree in public or business
administration, or related fields, and experience in municipal
government in the area of financial administration, planning,
organizing and directing administrative services; or
(2) Any equivalent combination of acceptable training experience in
public or business administration.
C. The Manager need not be a resident of Westtown Township.
A. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Township
and shall be responsible to the Board as a whole for the proper and
efficient administration of the affairs of the Township. The powers and
duties of administration of all Township business shall be vested in the
Manager, and all duties hereby delegated shall be subject to recall at
any time by ordinance of the Board. This delegation shall not include
any legislative powers and duties or those expressly imposed or
conferred by statute upon other Township officers.
B. Subject to recall by ordinance adopted by the Board at any time, the
Manager shall:
(1) Supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal
departments;
(2) Hold such other municipal offices or head one or more of the
municipal departments as the Board may from time to time direct;
(3) Attend all meetings of the Board and of Township commissions and
committees, and receive notice of all special meetings of the Board,
its commissions and committees;
(4) Prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Board and supply facts
pertinent thereto;
(5) Keep the Board informed as to the conduct of Township affairs and
make such other reports as the Board requests;
(6) See that all money owed the Township is promptly paid and that
proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all
the Township's claims;
(7) Submit to the Board, as soon as possible after the close of the fiscal
year, a complete report on the administrative activities of the
Township for the preceding year;
§ 22-3 WESTTOWN CODE § 22-4
1:30
§ 22-5. Compensation.
The annual compensation of the Manager shall be set by resolution of the
Board. At the beginning of each year, the amount of the compensation shall
be set forth in the budget, or by a subsequent resolution of the Board in the
event the Manager is hired after the adoption of the budget.
§ 22-6. Bond.
The Manager shall give a bond in the amount of $250,000, the premium
for which shall be paid by the Township, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the Manager's duties.
§ 22-7. Effect on other Township offices.
The Manager's office shall not be incompatible with the office of the
Township Secretary, the Township Treasurer, or any other Township office
or employment except those of Supervisor and Solicitor.
§ 22-8. Rules and regulations.
The Board is empowered from time to time to establish reasonable rules and
regulations with respect to the Manager.
(8) See that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and
privileges granted by the Township are observed;
(9) Employ, by and with the approval of the Board, experts and
consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with any of
the functions of the Township;
(10) Attend to the letting of contracts in the due form of law, supervise
the performance and faithful execution of the same, except such
duties that are expressly imposed upon some other Township
officer;
(11) Maintain control of all Township expenditures;
(12) Prepare and submit to the Board, not less than 45 days before the
close of each fiscal year, a budget for the next fiscal year and an
explanatory budget message;
(13) Administer the budget after its adoption by the Board;
(14) Investigate and dispense with all complaints regarding service or
personnel of the Township;
(15) Recruit, hire, supervise, discipline and fire employees under his/
her jurisdiction, all with the prior approval of the Board; and
(16) Perform such other related duties as required or as may be
designated by the Board.
§ 22-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-8
1:31
Chapter 24
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 113.
§ 24-1. Composition; terms.
The Parks and Recreation Commission shall be composed of seven members
and shall be appointed by the Township Board of Supervisors. The terms of
the members shall be for a period of five years.
§ 24-2. Election of officers.
The members of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be responsible
for the election of their chair and any other officers.
§ 24-3. Duties.
The duties of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be as follows:
§ 24-4. Repeal of other provisions.
All Township resolutions or other documents relating to the functioning of
the Parks and Recreation Commission or Parks Advisory Group are hereby
repealed.
Chapter 25
PENSIONS
A. Plan and operate low-cost events with a wide appeal for children and
young families to take place on the grounds of the Township parks.
B. Present an annual budget to the Township Board of Supervisors by
August 15 of each year along with scheduled specific activities in the
calendar year.
C. Make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors for improving the
use and operation of all Township parks.
D. Issue an annual report, no later than January 15 of the subsequent year,
detailing the activities of the Parks and Recreation Commission.
§ 22-8 WESTTOWN CODE § 25-1
1:32
§ 25-1. Enrollment.8
Westtown Township hereby elects to enroll its municipal employees in
the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System, established by the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, Act 15 of 1974, as amended,9
with the express purpose of having the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
System administer the pension plan established for the municipal
employees of the township. Westtown Township does hereby agree to be
bound by all the requirements and provisions of said Law, as the case may
be, and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise, placed upon
member municipalities by said amendment, as the case may be.
§ 25-2. Membership requirements.
Membership in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be
mandatory for all permanent municipal employees of the township.
Membership for elected officials and employees hired on a temporary or
seasonal basis is prohibited, as is membership for individuals paid only on a
fee basis.
§ 25-3. Accrual of benefits.
Credit for service toward the annuity of each original member shall begin
to accrue upon the effective date of the agreement between the township
and the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System. However, for purposes
of determining eligibility for early retirement and vesting, credited service
shall accrue from each original member's date of hire. Benefits provided to
members in the agreement dated December 15, 1997, shall accrue based on
all credited service granted and earned in accordance with this section.
§ 25-4. Payment by township.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this chapter and
the agreement between the System and Westtown Township shall be made
by the township in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Law and Act 205 of 1984, the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act.10
§ 25-5. Administration of benefits.
As part of this chapter, the township agrees that the System shall provide
the benefits set forth in the agreement between the Board and Westtown
Township, dated December 15, 1997. The passage and adoption of this
chapter by the township is an official acceptance of said agreement and
the financial obligations resulting from the administration of said benefit
package.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
9. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq.
10.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 25-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6
1:33
§ 25-6. Authorization of plan.
Westtown Township intends this chapter to be the complete authorization of
the township's municipal pension plan.
§ 25-7. Filing of chapter; effective date.
A duly certified copy of this chapter and the referenced agreement shall
be filed with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Membership for the municipal employees
of Westtown Township in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System
shall be effective the first day of November 1997.
Chapter 31
RISK MANAGEMENT
§ 31-1. Membership in Intergovernmental Risk Management
Association.
This municipality shall join with other municipalities in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act11 by becoming a member
of the Intergovernmental Risk Management Association and entering into
the intergovernmental contract which was adopted by reference with the
same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a copy of
which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this chapter
was adopted.
§ 31-2. Authority to enter into contract.
This municipality is authorized to enter into the intergovernmental contract
for the purposes contained therein. These actions are to be taken by the
member(s) or employee(s) of this municipality designated for this purpose,
pursuant to general or specific instructions by the governing body adopting
this chapter.
§ 31-3. Custody of funds.
The Association is designated as having official custody of this
municipality's funds which are invested by the Association pursuant to the
terms of the intergovernmental contract.
§ 31-4. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,12 the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
11.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
12.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 25-6 WESTTOWN CODE § 31-4
1:34
Chapter 34
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the intergovernmental
contract referred to in § 31-1.
B. This municipality's participation in the Association shall be terminable
at any time by ordinance.
C. The purposes and objectives of the agreement are set forth hereinabove
and the intergovernmental contract and actions contemplated thereby
and purposes and objectives contained therein are otherwise legal as
part of a pooled arrangement with governmental units, thereby
achieving economic and other advantages of intergovernmental
cooperation.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
municipal funds except through the contribution of this municipality's
basis rate (as such term is defined in the intergovernmental contract) to
the Association.
E. The Association shall be managed by a Board of Commissioners or
Executive Committee as set forth in the bylaws of said Association.13
F. All property, real or personal, shall be acquired, managed or disposed of
by the Association in accordance with the terms of the
intergovernmental contract.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 31-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-4
1:35

ARTICLE I
Salary of Supervisors
[Adopted 11-1-1986 by Ord. No. 86-1]
§ 34-1. Compensation per meeting.
Each Supervisor of Westtown Township elected or appointed to office on
or after November 5, 1985, shall receive compensation for attending duly
advertised general or special public meetings of the Board of Supervisors at
the rate of $80 for each meeting attended by such Supervisor.
§ 34-2. Annual statutory limit.
No Supervisor shall receive annual compensation under this article in
excess of the annual statutory limit set by the General Assembly in Act 6814
for Supervisors of townships within the appropriate population category.
§ 34-3. Limit on meeting compensation.
No Supervisor shall be compensated for attending any meetings of the
Board of Supervisors in excess of 25 meetings per year; such absences of
compensation shall not negate or in any way affect such Supervisor's duty
or obligation to attend such uncompensated meetings.
§ 34-4. Payments.
Such compensation shall be paid in quarterly installments.
14.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65606.
§ 34-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-4
1:37
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 45
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 11.
§ 45-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Westtown Township Alarm Ordinance."
§ 45-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
ALARM MONITORING COMPANY — Any person, firm or corporation that
monitors one or more alarm system(s), and upon the receipt of a signal from
an alarm system notifies the Chester County 911 of the emergency.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any assembly of equipment composed of sensory
apparatus and related hardware which transmits a signal from the premises
to an alarm monitoring company advising them of an emergency. Smoke
alarms, carbon monoxide detectors, etc., that are not connected to an alarm
monitoring company and whose sole purpose is to notify the occupants of
the property of an emergency shall not be considered an "alarm system" for
the purpose of this chapter.
ALARM SYSTEM SUPPLIER — Any person, firm or corporation who sells or
leases and/or installs alarm systems.
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, bell, horn or siren which is attached to
the exterior of a building and emits a warning signal audible outside the
building and that is designed to attract attention when activated.
CHESTER COUNTY 911 — The 911 Emergency Call Center operated by the
Chester County Department of Emergency Services.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm received by Chester County 911 activated by
inadvertence, negligence, or an unintentional act, including the malfunction
of the alarm system; the intentional activation of a hold-up alarm for other
than a hold-up in progress; the intentional activation of a burglary alarm
for other than a burglary in progress; or the intentional activation of a
medical alarm for other than a medical emergency. A false alarm shall
not include alarms which are activated as a result of acts of God, such as
earthquakes, floods, windstorms, thunder or lightning, or as a result of the
testing or repairing of telephone or electrical lines or equipment outside of
the premises.[Amended 2-18-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-02]
§ 34-4 WESTTOWN CODE § 45-2
1:38
FALSE FIRE ALARM — An alarm received by Chester County 911 activated
by inadvertence, negligence, or an unintentional act, including the
malfunction of the fire alarm system; the activation of a fire alarm for
other than an actual fire. A false fire alarm shall not include alarms which
are activated as a result of acts of God, such as earthquakes, floods,
windstorms, thunder or lightning, or as a result of the testing or repairing of
telephone or electrical lines or equipment outside of the premises.[Added
2-18-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-02]
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Goshen Fire Company or West Chester Fire
Company, or their respective successor fire companies who provide fire
protection services to the Township.
KEY BOX — A secure, tamperproof device with a lock operable only by a
Fire Department master key which contains building entry keys and other
keys that may be required for access in an emergency. Also known as a
"Knox-Box."
KEYED — To use a telephone, radio or any other equipment to transmit
(send) a message from an alarm system to the alarm monitoring company.
PERSON — The term "person" appearing herein shall include and be
construed to mean any person, firm, corporation or other entity.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department operating under the
direction of the Westtown-East Goshen Police Commission.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Westtown, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
§ 45-3. Audible alarm restrictions.
§ 45-4. Alarm systems to be keyed.
All alarm systems must be keyed to an alarm monitoring company.
§ 45-5. Operational requirements.
A. All alarm systems which are connected to an exterior audible alarm
shall be equipped with a timing device which will shut off the audible
alarm after a maximum period of 15 minutes.
B. audible alarms without such a timing device will be unlawful in the
Township and must be disconnected by the owner, lessee or user within
60 days from the effective date of this chapter.
A. The sensory apparatus used in connection with an alarm system must
be adjusted to suppress false indications of intrusion, so that the device
will not be actuated by changing pressure in the water pipes, short
flashes of light, the rattling or vibrations to the premises caused by the
passing of vehicles or any other force not related to a genuine alarm.
B. All components comprising an alarm system must be maintained in
good repair to assure maximum reliability of operation.
§ 45-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-6
1:39
§ 45-6. Disconnection due to malfunctioning.
§ 45-7. Conformance with National Electrical Code.
Alarm systems must conform to the requirements contained in the National
Electrical Code.
§ 45-8. Inspections.
For the purpose of enforcing this chapter, the Police Chief, Fire Marshal
and/or the Township Manager or their duly authorized designees are hereby
authorized to enter upon an owner's, lessee's or user's premises at a
reasonable time upon written notice, or in the event of an emergency, at
any time, to make inspections of installation and/or operation of an alarm
system.
§ 45-9. Testing and maintenance.
A. When alarm messages are received by Chester County 911 evidencing
failure to comply with the aforementioned operational requirements,
and the Township concludes that the alarm system is malfunctioning,
the Township is authorized to demand that the owner, lessee or user of
the alarm system disconnect the alarm system until it is brought into
compliance with the operational requirements.
B. If disconnection of the defective alarm system is not accomplished
within 48 hours of notification by the Township, this shall be considered
a violation of this chapter. The Township shall notify the Chester County
911 that the alarm system is malfunctioning. In addition the Township
may then take appropriate action to disconnect the defective alarm
system. This remedy shall be in addition to and shall not affect the
penalty provisions prescribed in § 45-12.
C. For purposes of this provision, two or more false alarms or false fire
alarms within any thirty-day period shall be sufficient evidence for the
Township to determine that the alarm system is malfunctioning.
[Amended 2-18-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-02]
A. No person shall conduct any test or demonstration or perform any
maintenance of an alarm system installed pursuant to this chapter
without first notifying the alarm monitoring company.
B. Prior to conducting any testing, demonstration or maintenance of an
alarm system, the contractor or technician who performs the testing,
demonstration or maintenance shall notify the alarm monitoring
company and request that the alarm system be placed in test condition
and that no response is necessary to an alarm.
C. Upon completion of the testing, demonstration or maintenance, the
contractor or technician who performs the testing, demonstration or
maintenance shall notify the alarm monitoring company that the alarm
§ 45-6 WESTTOWN CODE § 45-9
1:40
§ 45-10. Notification of chapter.
The Township will, upon request, provide a copy of this chapter to the
owners, lessees, and users of properties which are protected by alarm
systems.
§ 45-11. False alarm and false fire alarm fee schedule. [Amended
2-18-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-02]
§ 45-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-18-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-02]
system is back in service and that a response is necessary in the event
of an alarm.
D. Any owner, lessee or user, or their designated contractor or technician,
who performs maintenance or testing on an alarm system without first
notifying the alarm monitoring company prior to performing
maintenance or testing, which then results in a false alarm, may be
subject to the false alarm fee established in this chapter.
A. For the purpose of defraying the costs to the Police Department and/or
Fire Department for responding to false alarms and false fire alarms, a
false alarm and false fire alarm fee schedule shall be established by the
Board of Supervisors by resolution from time to time. The owner, lessee
or user of any alarm system shall be bound by the terms of this chapter,
including the payment of false alarm and false fire alarm fees.
B. False alarm and false fire alarm fees shall be charged based upon the
number of false alarms or false fire alarms, respectively, occurring per
rolling twelve-month period (i.e., with respect to any date of
determination, the month most recently ended and the 11 immediately
preceding months for which, in each case, false alarm and/or false fire
alarm records are available, considered as a single period).
C. Each such payment provided for in this section shall be a civil claim by
the Township and is in addition to and shall not affect the penalty
provisions prescribed in § 45-12.
D. If the owner, lessee or user of any alarm system fails to pay the false
alarm fee within 30 days after receiving an invoice from the Township,
the Township shall enforce such fee, together with interest at the legal
rate and court costs, in a civil enforcement proceeding brought before a
District Justice. Proceedings for collection thereof shall not affect or
impair the Township's enforcement of this chapter pursuant to the
penalty provisions of § 45-12 hereof.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought before the District
Justice, be guilty of a summary criminal offense and shall be subject to
the payment of a fine in an amount not more than $1,000, plus the costs
§ 45-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-12
1:41
Chapter 47
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
of prosecution. Upon default payment hereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a period of not more
than 30 days. Each section or provision of this chapter that is violated
shall constitute a separate offense and each day or portion thereof
in which a violation of this chapter is found to exist shall constitute
a separate offense, each of which violations shall be punishable by a
separate fine imposed by the District Justice of not more than $1,000
plus the costs of prosecution, and upon default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a
term of not more than 30 days.
B. Any person found guilty of misuse, false activation or continual
accidental activation of an automatic protection device shall be liable
for a fine of not more than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution, for
each and every such activation. Such fine and costs shall be collectible
before any District Justice as like fines and penalties are now by law
collectible.
§ 45-12 WESTTOWN CODE § 45-12
1:42
ARTICLE I
Intermunicipal Liquor License Transfers
§ 47-1. Intent.
In accordance with Act 141 of 2000, which is codified in 47 P.S. § 4-461
of the Pennsylvania Liquor Code, the intermunicipal transfer of a liquor
license into Westtown Township and issuance of a license for economic
development pursuant to the Liquor Code must first be approved by the
Board of Supervisors when the total number of existing restaurant liquor
licenses and eating place retail dispenser licenses exceeds one license
per 3,000 inhabitants. With the passage of the voter referendum in 2018
permitting the sale of liquor in the Township, the Board of Supervisors
now desires to establish a procedure for the administration of applications
for the intermunicipal transfer of a liquor license into the Township and
issuance of a license for economic development. All requests or applications
for intermunicipal transfer of a liquor license and issuance of a license for
economic development pursuant to the Liquor Code shall comply with the
provisions in this chapter.
§ 47-2. Application for approval of license transfer.
Any person or entity seeking approval for the intermunicipal transfer of a
liquor license or issuance of a license for economic development under the
Liquor Code must first submit a written application to the Township. The
application must provide the following information:
A. The applicant's full name, address, telephone number, facsimile number
and e-mail address;
B. The name of the applicant's counsel and his or her address, telephone
number, facsimile number and e-mail address;
C. The business name and address of the establishment where the liquor
license is proposed to be located within Westtown Township;
D. The type of operation proposed: a restaurant (R license) serving malt
and brewed beverages and other forms of alcohol, or an eating
establishment (E license) serving only malt and brewed beverages;
E. The name and address of the transferor licensee;
F. The license number and LID number of the license which is proposed to
be transferred into Westtown Township;
G. Information about the following operating details:
(1) Amusement permit: yes or no; if yes, type of entertainment.
(2) Extended hours food permit: yes or no.
(3) Sunday sales permit: yes or no.
§ 47-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-2
1:43
(4) Days of operation.
(5) Hours of operation.
(6) Number of employees: total and on the greatest shift.
(7) Projected seating capacity:
(a) At bar.
(b) At tables/chairs.
(8) Characteristic of neighborhood (within 500 feet):
(a) Percent residential.
(b) Percent commercial.
(c) Percent rural.
(9) Restrictive institutions including churches, schools, hospitals,
public parks with playground equipment for children, and
charitable institutions (within 300 feet): yes or no.
(10) Other Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board licenses (existing within
200 feet): yes or no.
(11) Type of menu:
(a) Breakfast, lunch and/or dinner.
(b) Meal price range.
H. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all parties who have or
propose to have a financial interest or ownership in the business where
the proposed liquor license will be located;
I. A detailed description of the proposed establishment where the liquor
license will be used;
J. The owner of the property where the liquor license is proposed to be
located;
K. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all property owners
within 500 feet of the proposed license location;
L. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all schools, churches
and establishments that have a liquor license which are within 500 feet
of the proposed license location;
M. A copy of the completed application submitted to the Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board for the transfer of a liquor license, including the
applicant's criminal history and list of past Liquor Code violations; and
N. The names and location of other businesses with liquor licenses in
which the applicant has an ownership interest.
§ 47-2 WESTTOWN CODE § 47-3
1:44
§ 47-3. Application fees.
In order to reimburse the Township for the expenses incurred in the
administration of the application and conduct of the hearing for the transfer
of liquor licenses into the Township, the applicant must submit with the
application a fee in the amount specified by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, which fee may be amended from time to time. All fees must
accompany the application and are nonrefundable. In addition to the
application fee, if the applicant requests a stenographic record of the
hearing, all costs for providing a stenographic record, including appearance
fees, will be the responsibility of the applicant.
§ 47-4. Advertisement and posting.
Upon receipt of a complete application and the filing fee, the Township
will post the property identified as the location of the proposed liquor
license in a conspicuous location to notify potentially interested citizens.
The Township shall also publish a notice one time in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township at least seven days prior to the hearing. The
notice that is posted and published in the newspaper shall include a
summary description of the application and the date, time and place of the
public hearing to be conducted by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 47-5. Public hearing.
The Board of Supervisors will conduct a public hearing to consider the
application. At the hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall receive
comments and recommendations of interested individuals within the
Township concerning the application for transfer of the liquor license. The
hearing shall be transcribed.
§ 47-6. Board of Supervisors action.
A. In deciding whether the proposed transfer application would adversely
affect the welfare, health, peace and morals of Westtown Township or
its inhabitants, the Board of Supervisors may consider, in addition to
the information in § 47-2 above, any or all of the following:
(1) A report and recommendation from the Township Manager and the
Westtown-East Goshen Chief of Police;
(2) The population of Westtown Township, the number of students and
the number of residents under the age of 21;
(3) The total number of existing liquor licenses in the Township and
whether the total number of existing liquor licenses exceeds one
license per 3,000 inhabitants of the Township (the quota
established by the Liquor Control Board);
(4) The location of the closest existing licensed establishment (all types
of licenses), school, church, or adult-oriented establishment (as
§ 47-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-6
1:45
defined in Title 68, Chapter 55 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated
Statutes, as amended.);
(5) Concerns expressed by area residents, institutions, businesses and
public interest organizations;
(6) Information about other businesses in which the applicant has
some interest or ownership; and
(7) Any other issue or fact that may adversely affect the welfare,
health, peace and morals of Westtown Township or its inhabitants.
B. Within the time limits set forth in the Liquor Code, the Board of
Supervisors shall vote to deny, approve, or approve with conditions the
request for an intermunicipal transfer of liquor license into the
Township. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be set forth in
a written resolution. Any approval will be limited to the individual
applicant, the proposed transfer location and the type of establishment
proposed. Any proposed change in ownership, location or type of
establishment will require a new application and approval of the Board
of Supervisors.
§ 47-6 WESTTOWN CODE § 47-6
1:46
Chapter 49
ANIMALS
Chapter 53
BROADBAND AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 146. Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 47-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-6
1:47

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 53-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Westtown Broadband
and Telecommunications Ordinance of 2001."
§ 53-2. Purpose.
The Township of Westtown finds that the development of broadband
systems has the potential of having a great benefit to and positive impact
on the people of Westtown. Because of the complex and rapidly changing
technologies associated with cable television and telecommunications
systems, the township also finds that public convenience, safety, and
general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers
vested in the township or such persons as the township so designates.
Further, the township recognizes that broadband systems have the capacity
to provide not only entertainment and information services to township
residents but also a variety of broadband, interactive services to township
agencies and other institutions. For these purposes, the following goals,
among others, underlie the provisions set forth in this chapter:
A. Cable services and telecommunications services should be available to
as many township residents as possible.
B. A broadband system authorized to provide cable and
telecommunications service should be capable of accommodating both
the present and reasonably foreseeable future cable- and
telecommunications-related needs of the community.
C. A broadband system should be constructed and maintained during the
franchise term so that new components may be integrated to the
maximum extent possible into existing system facilities.
D. A broadband system should be responsive to the needs and interests of
the local community. The township intends that all provisions set forth
in this chapter be construed to serve the public interest and the
foregoing public purposes, and that any franchise issued pursuant to
this chapter be construed to include the foregoing findings and public
purposes as integral parts thereof.
§ 53-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-2
1:49

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 53-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein, unless otherwise
expressly stated. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future tense; words in the plural number include
the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number; and the masculine gender includes the feminine gender. The words
"shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Unless otherwise
expressly stated, words not defined herein shall be given the meaning set
forth in Title 47 of the United States Code, Chapter 5, Sub-Chapter V-A, 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as amended, and, if not defined therein, their common
and ordinary meaning.
ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel on a broadband system set aside by the
franchisee for public, educational and/or governmental use.
AFFILIATE — Any person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by,
or is under common ownership or control with the franchisee and who is
involved in the operation of the franchisee's broadband system.
BASIC SERVICE — Any cable or telecommunications service tier that
includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Westtown Township or its designated
representative.
BROADBAND SYSTEM OR SYSTEMS — A facility consisting of a set of
closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and
control equipment that is designed to provide cable service and/or
telecommunications service to multiple subscribers within the township,
but such term does not include:
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations;
A.
A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit
dwellings under common ownership, control or management, unless
such facility or facilities use any public right-of-way, including streets
or easements;
B.
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part,
to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as
amended, except that such facility shall be considered a broadband
system to the extent such facilities engage in the transmission of video
programming, whether on a common-carrier or non-common-carrier
basis, directly to subscribers; or
C.
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems.
D.
§ 53-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-3
1:51
CABLE ACT — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C.
§ 521 et seq., and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992, as amended from time to time.
CABLE SERVICE —
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel on a broadband system
set aside by the franchisee for noncommercial educational use.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission, its designee or any
successor governmental entity thereto.
FRANCHISE — The nonexclusive rights granted in accordance with this
chapter to construct, operate and maintain a broadband system along the
public rights-of-way within all or a specified area of the township. A
franchise shall authorize the franchisee to provide cable service,
telecommunications service or both as may be specified in any franchise.
Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include
any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying
on a business within the township as required by the ordinances and laws of
the township, or for attaching devices to poles or other structures, whether
owned by the township or a private entity, or for excavating or performing
other work in or along public rights-of-way.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — A contract entered into in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter between the township and a franchisee that
sets forth, subject to this chapter, the terms and conditions under which the
franchise will be exercised.
FRANCHISE AREA — The area of the township that the franchisee is
authorized to serve by its franchise agreement.
FRANCHISEE — The natural person(s), partnership(s), domestic or foreign
corporation(s), association(s), joint venture(s) or organization(s) of any kind
which have been granted a franchise by the township.
GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel on a broadband
system set aside by the franchisee for government access use.
GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES — Any and all compensation actually received
annually directly or indirectly by the franchisee, its affiliates or any person
in which the franchisee has a financial interest, or by any other entity that
is an operator of the broadband system arising from, attributable to or in
any way derived from the operation of the franchisee's broadband system
within the township, including the studios and other facilities associated
therewith. Gross annual revenues include, but are not limited to, monthly
fees charged subscribers for any basic, optional, premium, per-channel,
per-program, cable, telecommunications or satellite service; installation,
disconnection, reconnection and change-in-service fees; leased channel
The one-way transmission to and/or the two-way transmission from
subscribers of video programming or other programming services; and
A.
Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such
video programming or other programming service.
B.
§ 53-3 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-3
1:52
fees; late fees and administrative fees; maintenance and repair fees; fees,
payments or other compensation actually received from programmers for
carriage of programming on the system; revenues from converter rentals
or sales; studio rental and production equipment rental fees; advertising
revenues (prorated on the basis of the proportion of the number of
subscribers within the township to the total number of subscribers of the
broadband system which includes the franchise area); revenues from
program guides; and revenues from home shopping channels; and all cash,
credits, property or other consideration of any kind or nature received
annually from subscribers which is allocated by the franchisee to pay
franchise fees. Gross annual revenues shall be the basis for computing the
franchise fee under this chapter.
PAY TELEVISION/PAY CHANNEL — A cable or telecommunications service
that is sold on a per-channel or per-program basis.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company,
organization, corporation or any lawful successor thereto or transferee
thereof.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel, bandwidth or other type of
space or access on a broadband system set aside by the franchisee for
noncommercial use by the general public or noncommercial organizations,
and which is available for such use on a nondiscriminatory basis.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface, the air space above the surface
and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path,
alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, waterway, easement or
similar property in which the township now or hereafter holds any property
interest, which, consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated,
with the exception of any public park, recreation, playground and open
space area, may be used for the purpose of installing and maintaining a
broadband system. No reference herein, or in any franchise agreement, to
a public right-of-way shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee
by the township that its interest or other right to control the use of such
property is sufficient to permit its use for such purposes, and a franchisee
shall be deemed to gain only those rights to use as are properly in the
township and as the township may have the undisputed right and power to
give, including such rights available pursuant to Section 621(a)(2) of the
Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 541(a)(2).
SALE — Any sale or exchange transaction.
SERVICE TIER — A category of cable service or telecommunications service
provided by the franchisee and for which a separate charge is made by the
franchisee.
STREET — The surface of and the space above or below any public street,
public roadway, public highway, public freeway, public lane, public way,
public alley, public court, public sidewalk, public boulevard, public drive,
or any public easement or public right-of-way now or hereafter held by
the township which shall entitle the franchisee to the use thereof for the
purposes of installing over poles such wires, cables, conductors, ducts,
§ 53-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-3
1:53
conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other
property as may be ordinarily necessary and appurtenant to the operation
of the broadband system.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person who legally receives cable service or
telecommunications service pursuant to a franchise, whether or not a fee is
paid for such service.
SYSTEM FACILITIES or FACILITIES — Broadband system equipment used
by the franchisee to provide cable service or telecommunications service in
the franchise area.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The transmission of electronic
impulses, other than cable service, over facilities which occupy any public
right-of-way within the township. Telecommunications service includes, but
is not limited to, voice or data transmissions, internet services of any type
or form, as well as any video transmissions which do not constitute "video
programming" as defined by the Cable Act.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Westtown, Pennsylvania, as represented by
the Board.
TRANSFER — Any transaction in which an ownership or other interest in
a franchisee, its broadband system or any person that is an operator of
the broadband system is transferred from one person or group of persons
to another person or group of persons so that control of the franchisee is
transferred; or the rights and/or obligations held by the franchisee under
a franchise agreement are transferred or assigned to another person or
group of persons. "Control" for these purposes means working control, in
whatever manner exercised. The addition, deletion or other change of any
general partner of the franchisee, any person who owns or controls the
franchisee or an operator of the broadband system is such a change of
control.
USER — A person or organization utilizing a channel or equipment and
facilities for purposes of producing and/or transmitting material, as
contrasted with the receipt thereof in the capacity of a subscriber.
§ 53-3 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-3
1:54
ARTICLE III
Grant of Franchise
§ 53-4. Grant of franchise.
The township may grant one or more franchises, and each such franchise
shall be awarded in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this
chapter. This chapter may be amended from time to time, and in no event
shall this chapter be considered a contract between the township and a
franchisee such that the township would be prohibited from amending
any provision hereof. No such amendment shall be applied retroactively to
materially impair preexisting contractual agreements entered into between
the township and a franchisee.
§ 53-5. Franchise required.
No person may construct or operate a broadband system over, on or under
public streets in the township without a franchise granted by the township
unless otherwise authorized by law, and no person may be granted a
franchise without having entered into a franchise agreement with the
township pursuant to this chapter.
§ 53-6. Franchise characteristics.
A. A franchise authorizes use of township streets for installing cables,
wires, lines, optical fiber, underground conduit and other facilities to
provide cable service or telecommunications service within a franchise
area, but does not expressly or implicitly authorize the franchisee to
provide service to, or install cables, wires, lines, underground conduit
or any other equipment or facilities on private property without owner
consent [except for use of compatible easements pursuant to Section
621 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 541(a)(2)], or to use publicly or
privately owned conduits without a separate agreement with the
owners.
B. The term of a franchise shall not exceed 15 years and may not exceed
five years unless the franchise agreement contains clear and
enforceable provisions for regulating upgrades, improving any
customer service requirements, reevaluating the provision of additional
access channels, reevaluating interconnection of the system with other
broadband systems and making such other requirements as may be
necessary in light of advancements in technology, at minimum intervals
of not greater than every five years.
C. A franchise is nonexclusive and will not explicitly or implicitly preclude
the issuance of other franchises to operate broadband systems within
the township, or affect the township's right to authorize use of township
streets by other persons to operate broadband systems or for other
purposes as it determines appropriate.
§ 53-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-6
1:55
§ 53-7. Franchisee subject to other laws and police power.
§ 53-8. Interpretation of franchise terms.
D. Once a franchise agreement has been accepted and executed by the
township and a franchisee, such franchise agreement shall constitute a
contract between the franchisee and the township, and the terms,
conditions, and provisions of such franchise agreement, subject to this
chapter and all other duly enacted and applicable laws, shall define the
rights and obligations of the franchisee and the township relating to the
franchise.
E. All privileges prescribed by a franchise shall be subordinate to any prior
lawful occupancy of the streets, and the township reserves the right to
reasonably designate where a franchisee's facilities are to be placed
within the streets.
F. A franchise shall be a privilege that is in the public trust and personal to
the original franchisee. No transfer of a franchise shall occur without
the prior consent of the township and unless application is made by the
franchisee and township approval obtained, pursuant to this chapter
and the franchise agreement.
G. A franchise holder may not enter into or enforce any exclusive contract
with a subscriber (including a building owner) as a condition of
providing or continuing service.
A. A franchisee shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with all
applicable federal, state and township laws. A franchisee shall at all
times be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of the
township, including all rights the township may have under 47 U.S.C.
§ 552.
B. No course of dealing between a franchisee and the township, nor any
delay on the part of the township in exercising any rights hereunder,
shall operate as a waiver of any such rights of the township or
acquiescence in the actions of the franchisee in contravention of rights
except to the extent expressly waived by the township or expressly
provided for in a franchise agreement, or except as provided in 47
U.S.C. § 546(d).
C. The township shall have the maximum plenary authority to regulate
broadband systems, franchisees and franchises as may now or
hereafter be lawfully permissible; except where rights are expressly
waived by a franchise agreement they are reserved, whether expressly
enumerated or not.
A. The express terms of this chapter will prevail over conflicting or
inconsistent provisions in a franchise agreement unless such franchise
agreement expresses an explicit intent to waive a requirement of this
chapter.
§ 53-6 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-8
1:56
§ 53-9. Operation of broadband system without franchise.
After the effective date of this chapter, any person who occupies township
streets or public rights-of-way for the purpose of operating or constructing
a broadband system and who does not hold a valid franchise from the
township shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter, including but
not limited to its provisions regarding construction and technical standards
and franchise fees. In its discretion, the township at any time may require
such person to enter into a franchise agreement within 30 days of receipt
of a written notice by the township that a franchise agreement is required;
and/or require such person to remove its property and restore the area
to a condition satisfactory to the township within such time period; and/or
remove the property itself and restore the area to a satisfactory condition
and charge the person the costs therefor. In no event shall a franchise
be created unless it is issued by action of the township and subject to a
franchise agreement.
§ 53-10. Right of condemnation reserved.
Nothing in this chapter or the franchise shall limit any right the township
may have to acquire by eminent domain or otherwise any property of the
franchisee.
B. The provisions of a franchise agreement will be liberally construed in
favor of the township in order to effectuate the purposes and objectives
of this chapter and the franchise agreement and to promote the public
interest.
C. Except as to matters that are governed solely by federal law or
regulation, a franchise agreement will be governed by and construed in
accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 53-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-10
1:57

ARTICLE IV
Application for Grant, Renewal or Modification
§ 53-11. Written application.
§ 53-12. Application for grant of initial franchise.
A. A written application shall be filed with the township for grant of an
initial franchise; renewal of a franchise under either the formal or
informal procedures in accordance with Section 626 of the Cable Act,
47 U.S.C. § 546; or modification of a franchise agreement pursuant to
this chapter or a franchise agreement. An applicant has the burden to
demonstrate in its application compliance with all requirements of this
chapter and all applicable laws.
B. To be acceptable for filing, a signed original of the application shall be
submitted together with five copies. The application must be
accompanied by the required application filing fee as set forth in
§ 53-15, conform to any applicable request for proposals and contain all
required information. All applications shall include the names and
addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with
respect to the application.
C. All applications accepted for filing shall be made available by the
township for public inspection.
A. A person may apply for an initial franchise by submitting a request for
issuance of a request for proposals ("RFP") and requesting an
evaluation of that proposal pursuant to Subsection D. Upon receipt of a
request for an RFP from an applicant seeking a franchise to provide
cable service and/or telecommunications service, the township shall
commence a proceeding to identify the relevant future needs and
interests of the community and, upon completion of that proceeding,
shall promptly issue an RFP and proposed franchise agreement, which
shall be mailed to the person requesting its issuance and made
available to any other interested party. The applicant shall respond
within the time directed by the township, providing the information and
material set forth in Subsection C. The procedures, instructions and
requirements set forth in the RFP shall be followed by each applicant as
if set forth and required herein. The Township Manager, or his/her
designee, shall be authorized to seek additional information from any
applicant and to establish deadlines for the submission of that
information.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A, a person may apply for
an initial franchise by submitting an unsolicited proposal and
requesting an evaluation of that proposal pursuant to Subsection D.
C. An RFP for the grant of an initial franchise shall require, and an
unsolicited proposal shall contain, at minimum, the following
information:
§ 53-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-12
1:59
(1) Name and address of the applicant and identification of the
ownership and control of the applicant, including: the names and
addresses of the 10 largest holders of an ownership interest in the
applicant and affiliates of the applicant, and all persons with 5% or
more ownership interest in the applicant and its affiliates; the
persons who control the applicant and its affiliates; all officers and
directors of the applicant and its affiliates; and any other business
affiliation and broadband system ownership interest of each named
person.
(2) A demonstration of the applicant's technical ability to construct
and/or operate and maintain the proposed broadband system,
including identification of key personnel.
(3) Legal qualifications.
(a) A demonstration of the applicant's legal qualifications to
construct and/or operate the proposed broadband system,
including but not limited to a demonstration that the applicant
meets the following criteria:
[1] The applicant must not have submitted an application for
an initial or renewal franchise to the township, which was
denied on the ground that the applicant failed to propose a
broadband system meeting the cable and
telecommunications related needs and interests of the
community, or as to which any challenges to such
franchising decision were finally resolved adversely to the
applicant, within three years preceding the submission of
the application.
[2] The applicant must not have had any franchise validly
revoked by any franchising authority within three years
preceding the submission of the application.
[3] The applicant must have the necessary authority under
Pennsylvania law to provide cable service and/or
telecommunications service, as appropriate.
[4] A franchise will not be issued to an applicant that may not
hold the franchise as a matter of law. An applicant must
have, or show that it is qualified to obtain, the necessary
federal licenses or waivers required to operate the
broadband system proposed.
[5] The township may, in its sole discretion, refuse to issue a
franchise if, at any time during the 10 years preceding the
submission of the application, the applicant was convicted
of any act or omission of such character that the applicant
cannot be relied upon to deal truthfully with the township
and the subscribers of the broadband system, or to
substantially comply with its lawful obligations under
§ 53-12 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-12
1:60
applicable law, including obligations under consumer
protection laws and laws prohibiting anticompetitive acts,
fraud, racketeering or other similar conduct.
[6] An applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files
materially misleading information in response to an RFP
issued by the township, or intentionally withholds
information that the applicant lawfully is required to
provide.
[7] An applicant shall not be issued a franchise if an elected
official of the township holds a controlling interest in the
applicant or an affiliate of the applicant.
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the township shall provide an
opportunity to an applicant to show that it would be
inappropriate to deny it a franchise under Subsection
C(3)(a)[2] or [5], by virtue of the particular circumstances
surrounding the matter and the steps taken by the applicant to
cure all harms flowing therefrom, the lack of involvement of
the applicant's principals, or the remoteness of the matter from
the operation of broadband systems.
(4) A statement prepared by a certified public accountant regarding
the applicant's financial ability to complete the construction and
operation of the broadband system proposed.
(5) A description of the applicant's prior experience in broadband
system ownership, construction and operation, and identification of
communities in which the applicant or any of its principals have, or
have had, a cable television and/or telecommunications franchise
or license or any interest therein.
(6) Identification of the area of the township to be served by the
proposed broadband system, including a description of the
proposed franchise area's boundaries.
(7) A detailed description of the physical facilities proposed, including
channel capacity, technical design, performance characteristics,
headend and access facilities.
(8) Where applicable, a description of the construction of the proposed
broadband system, including an estimate of plant mileage and its
location, the proposed construction schedule, a description, where
appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing
facilities to new facilities, and information on the availability of
space in conduits including, where appropriate, an estimate of the
cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities.
(9) The proposed rate structure, including projected charges for each
service tier, installation, converters and other equipment or
services, as applicable.
§ 53-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-12
1:61
(10) Demonstration of how the applicant's proposal to provide cable or
telecommunications service will reasonably meet the future cableand
telecommunications-related needs and interests of the
community, including descriptions of how the proposal will meet
the needs described in any recent community needs assessment
conducted by or for the township, and, if applicable, how the
proposal will provide adequate public, educational and
governmental access channel capacity, facilities or financial
support to meet the community's needs and interests.
(11) Pro forma financial projections for the proposed franchise term,
including a statement of projected income, and a schedule of
planned capital additions, with all significant assumptions
explained in notes or supporting schedules.
(12) If an applicant proposes to provide broadband service to an area
already served by an existing franchisee, the identification of the
area where the overbuild would occur, the potential subscriber
density in the area that would encompass the overbuild, and the
ability of the streets to accommodate an additional broadband
system.
(13) Any other information as may be reasonably necessary to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(14) Information that the township may request of the applicant that is
relevant to the township's consideration of the application.
(15) An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer
certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the
application, acknowledging the enforceability of application
commitments, and certifying that the proposal meets all federal
and state law requirements.
D. In evaluating an application for an initial franchise seeking authority to
provide cable service and/or telecommunications service, the township
shall consider, among other things, the following factors:
(1) The extent to which the applicant has substantially complied with
the applicable law and the material terms of any existing franchise
for the township.
(2) Whether the quality of the applicant's service under an existing
franchise in Westtown, including signal quality, response to
customer complaints, billing practices, and the like, has been
reasonable in light of the needs and interests of the communities
served.
(3) Whether the applicant has the financial, technical and legal
qualifications to provide broadband service.
§ 53-12 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-12
1:62
(4) Whether the applicant's proposal is reasonable to meet the future
cable- and telecommunications-related needs and interests of the
community, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and
interests.
(5) Whether, to the extent not considered as part of Subsection D(4),
the applicant will provide adequate public, educational and
governmental access channel capacity, facilities or financial
support.
(6) Whether issuance of a franchise is warranted in the public interest
considering the immediate and future effect on the public rights-ofway
and private property which would be used by the broadband
system, including the extent to which installation or maintenance
as planned would require replacement of property or involve
disruption of property, public services and/or the public rights-ofway;
the effect of granting a franchise on the ability of the
broadband system to meet the cable- and telecommunicationsrelated
needs and interests of the community; and the comparative
superiority or inferiority of competing proposals.
(7) Whether the applicant or an affiliate of the applicant owns or
controls any other broadband system in the township, or whether
grant of the application may eliminate or reduce competition in the
delivery of cable service or telecommunications service in the
township.
E. If the township finds that it is in the public interest to issue a franchise
considering the factors set forth above, it shall issue a franchise,
subject to the applicant's entry into an appropriate franchise
agreement. If the township denies a franchise, it shall issue a written
decision explaining why the franchise was denied. Prior to deciding
whether to issue or not to issue a franchise, the township may hold one
or more public hearings or implement other procedures under which
comments from the public on an applicant's proposal may be received.
The township also may grant or deny a request for a franchise based on
its review of an application without further proceedings and may reject
any application which is incomplete or fails to respond to an RFP.
F. If the township grants a franchise subject to the applicant's entry into a
franchise agreement, the township and the franchisee shall agree on
the terms of a franchise agreement within 30 calendar days from the
date of the township resolution granting the franchise. This period may
be extended for good cause by the township. If agreement is not
reached with the township within 30 calendar days from the date of the
township resolution granting the franchise, or if the period is not
extended by the township, the franchise will be null and void without
further action by the township. The township shall approve or
disapprove the proposed agreement by resolution, or may direct that it
be subject to further negotiation.
§ 53-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-13
1:63
§ 53-13. Application for grant of renewal franchise.
Renewal franchise authorizing the provision of broadband service shall
be conducted, if applicable, in a manner consistent with Section 626 of
the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546. If neither the franchisee nor the township
activates or can activate the renewal process set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 546(a)
to (c) (including, for example, if the provisions are repealed or do not
otherwise apply), the provisions of § 53-12 shall apply and a renewal
request shall be treated the same as a request for an initial franchise.
The following additional requirements shall apply to all applicants seeking
renewal after the effective date of this chapter where the procedures set
forth in 47 U.S.C. § 546(a) to (c) are activated:
A. Within six months after receipt of notice from a franchisee that has
invoked the renewal procedures of Section 626 of the Cable Act, the
township shall undertake a proceeding, including notice to and
opportunity for participation by the public, for the purpose of
identifying future cable- and telecommunications-related community
needs and interests, including the costs of meeting such needs and
interests; and reviewing compliance by the franchisee with the thencurrent
franchise. Such proceeding shall be completed within 12
months from the date begun. The township shall submit a copy of its
findings, if any, in writing to the franchisee within said twelve-month
period.
B. Upon the expiration of the twelve-month period set forth in Subsection
A above, the franchisee may submit to the township a proposal for
renewal.
C. Upon receipt of the renewal application, the township shall publish a
notice of its receipt once in a newspaper of general circulation within
the township and make copies available for review by the public.
D. Within four months of the date it receives the proposal for renewal, and
based on the standards set forth in § 53-12D of this chapter, the
township will either pass a resolution agreeing to renew the franchise,
subject to the negotiation of a franchise agreement satisfactory to the
township and the franchisee; or pass a resolution that makes a
preliminary assessment that the franchise should not be renewed;
provided that, if the township and a franchisee cannot reach a franchise
agreement within four months after the proposal is received, then the
resolution agreeing to renewal shall be deemed a resolution
preliminarily assessing that the franchise should not be renewed.
E. If a preliminary assessment is made that a franchise should not be
renewed, at the request of the franchisee, the township will commence
a proceeding in accordance with Section 626(c) of the Cable Act, 47
U.S.C. § 546(c), to address the issues set forth in Section 626(c)(1)(A) to
(D) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546(c)(1)(A) to (D).
F. If renewal of a franchise is denied, the township may acquire ownership
of the broadband system or effect a transfer of ownership of the system
§ 53-13 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-13
1:64
§ 53-14. Application for modification of franchise.
An application for modification of a franchise agreement shall include, at
minimum, the following information:
§ 53-15. Filing fees.
to another person upon approval of the Board. Any such acquisition
or transfer shall be at fair market value, determined on the basis of
the broadband system valued as a going concern but with no value
allocated to the franchise itself.
G. If renewal of a franchise is denied and the township does not purchase
the broadband system or approve or effect a transfer of the broadband
system to another person, the township may require the former
franchisee to remove its facilities and equipment at the former
franchisee's expense. If the former franchisee fails to do so within a
reasonable period of time, the township may have the removal done at
the former franchisee's and/or surety's expense.
H. To the extent that any of the substantive provisions of this section are
inconsistent with Section 626 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546, they
shall not apply.
A. The specific modification requested;
B. The justification for the requested modification, including the impact of
the requested modification on subscribers and others, and the financial
impact on the applicant if the modification is approved or disapproved,
demonstrated through, inter alia, submission of financial pro formas;
C. A statement whether the modification is sought pursuant to Section 625
of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 545, and, if so, a demonstration that the
requested modification meets the standards set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 545;
D. Any other information that the applicant believes is necessary for the
township to make an informed determination on the application for
modification; and
E. An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer
certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application,
and certifying that the application is consistent with all federal and
state law requirements.
A. To be acceptable for filing, an application for the grant or modification
of a franchise submitted after the effective date of this chapter shall be
accompanied by a filing fee as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
B. Reasonable increases to the foregoing amounts may be imposed from
time to time as the Board may establish by resolution.
§ 53-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-16
1:65
§ 53-16. Public hearings.
An applicant shall be notified of any public hearing held in connection with
the evaluation of its proposal and shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
§ 53-16 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-16
1:66
ARTICLE V
Broadband System Design
§ 53-17. General requirements.
Unless a review of future cable- and telecommunications-related needs and
interests (whether conducted prior to issuance of an RFP or in evaluating
an unsolicited proposal) shows that different standards should apply, every
broadband system must at least satisfy the following requirements.
§ 53-18. Minimum capacity.
Any broadband system constructed, upgraded or reconstructed after the
effective date of this chapter at a minimum shall be designed to meet or
exceed the capacity standards of the broadband system with the greatest
capacity then in operation within the County of Chester. The franchisee
shall comply with all FCC standards and requirements pertaining to
converters and cable-ready televisions, as may be amended from time to
time.
§ 53-19. Description of system.
The franchisee shall provide the township a full description of the system
proposed for construction and shall, upon completion of any system
modification or upgrade, submit to the township "as built" maps, in paper
and electronic formats compatible with township requirements, for the
entire system, as modified or upgraded, to the extent such maps have not
previously been provided to the township.
§ 53-20. Interconnection.
§ 53-21. Provision of service.
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, after broadband
service has been established by activating trunk distribution cable for an
A. The franchisee and the township shall evaluate, at intervals no greater
than once every five years from the date of the franchise agreement, the
feasibility of interconnecting the broadband system with other
broadband systems.
B. When feasible, the franchisee shall, at the request of the township,
interconnect with other broadband systems.
C. Nothing herein shall require the franchisee to interconnect with
another broadband system without the permission of such system. All
costs of any interconnection required by this section are external costs
which may be passed through directly to basic subscribers. To the
extent township approval is required for any such basic rate
adjustment, the franchisee shall be under no obligation to perform such
interconnection until such approval is granted.
§ 53-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-21
1:67
area specified in a franchise agreement, the franchisee shall provide
broadband service to any household requesting such broadband service
within that area, including each multiple dwelling unit in that area, except
for multiple dwelling units to which it cannot obtain access. At a minimum,
the franchisee shall provide such broadband service within the township
whenever there is a minimum of 35 homes per linear mile into which the
system can be extended. This construction will be completed as soon as
possible, but, in any case, within six months of attainment of said density
for aboveground facilities and within 12 months for underground facilities.
The franchisee may apply to the township for an extension of the time limit
not to exceed an additional six-month period, provided that the franchisee
used due diligence in attempting timely completion and any delay was
caused by circumstances beyond the franchisee's control; in which case the
township's agreement to said extension shall not be unreasonably withheld.
For new residential subdivisions, the franchisee shall install broadband
system facilities in the public right-of-way to be dedicated to the township
concurrent with the installation of other utilities in the public right-of-way.
§ 53-22. Technical standards.
A. Any broadband system within the township shall meet or exceed the
technical standards set forth in 47 CFR 76.601 and any other applicable
technical standards, including any such standards as hereafter may be
amended or adopted by the township.
B. A franchisee shall not design, install, or operate its facilities in a
manner that will interfere with the signals of any broadcast station, the
facilities of any public utility, the broadband system of another
franchisee, or individual or master antennas used for receiving
television or other broadcast signals.
C. At the times specified in the franchise agreement or as required by FCC
rules, the franchise shall perform at its expense proof of performance
tests, and such other tests as may be specified in the franchise
agreement, designed to demonstrate compliance with this section, the
franchise agreement and FCC requirements. The franchisee shall, upon
the request of the township, make such test results available to the
township for inspection and copying at the franchisee's offices. The
township shall have the right to inspect the broadband system facilities
during and after their construction to ensure compliance with this
section, the franchise agreement and applicable provisions of local,
state and federal law, and may require the franchisee to perform
additional tests based upon its prior investigation of system
performance or upon subscriber complaints.
§ 53-21 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-22
1:68
ARTICLE VI
Minimum Facilities and Services
§ 53-23. Emergency alert system.
The franchisee shall install and thereafter maintain an emergency alert
system (EAS). This EAS shall be designed and operated to meet or exceed
all FCC standards and requirements as may be amended from time to time.
§ 53-24. Access channels.
§ 53-25. Studio and equipment.
The franchisee and the township shall evaluate at minimum intervals of no
greater than once every five years the need for the provision of one public
access facility located within the township or at such location designated by
the township, which facility shall include an adequate studio, editing suites,
control room, playback area, administrative and training space, tape, set
and equipment storage space, and all property shall be secured, ventilated,
air conditioned, heated, lighted, wired and accessible to the handicapped.
It shall also provide equipment to fully equip the facility, including the
studio, separate portable equipment suitable for community use, automated
playback equipment, and control facilities, so that signals can be received
on the upstream channels or originated from the facility, and then routed
A. The franchisee shall reserve for the nonexclusive use by the township
and the West Chester Area School District, without charge, a minimum
of one downstream public access channel for public, educational and
governmental use, to subscribers delivering a signal the technical
quality of which is equivalent to the technical quality of other channels
on the broadband system. The franchisee shall provide all modulators,
demodulators, laser transmitters/receivers and other devices as may be
required to permit use of the downstream capacity.
B. The franchisee and the township shall evaluate at minimum intervals of
no greater than once every five years the need for the provision of
additional public access channels for use by the township and the West
Chester Area School District without charge. Each reevaluation shall
consider, but shall not be limited to, the reservation by the franchisee of
the amount of capacity required to transmit one public access channel
upstream, for public, educational and governmental use, the provision
by the franchisee of all modulators, demodulators, laser transmitters/
receivers and other devices as may be required to permit use of the
upstream capacity, and such modifications as may be required to use
video compression technology and add such equipment in connection
with all or part of the upstream and downstream channel capacity for
public, educational and governmental use. When additional public
access channels are deemed necessary by the township and franchisee
after an evaluation, the franchisee shall reserve the same for public,
educational and/or governmental use.
§ 53-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-25
1:69
from the facility to the broadband system headend and onto appropriate
public access channels, on the broadband system. When the provision of
the public access facility is deemed necessary by the township after an
evaluation, the franchisee shall provide the same in accordance with this
section.
§ 53-26. Remote line telecasting.
§ 53-27. Recovery of external costs.
The township acknowledges that a franchisee is entitled to pass through
to basic subscribers the increased costs incurred in providing any of the
foregoing facilities and services which may be required by the township in
the future. To the extent township approval is required for any such basic
rate adjustment, franchisee shall be under no obligation to provide such
facilities or services until such approval is granted.
A. The franchisee and the township shall evaluate at minimum intervals of
no greater than once every five years the need for the provision of
upstream capacity for live telecasts from such public buildings as may
be specified in the franchise agreement. When the provision of
upstream capacity is deemed necessary by the township and franchisee
after evaluation, the franchisee shall provide such capacity.
B. Upon the provision of remote live telecasting, the franchisee shall make
available all devices necessary to accomplish upstream telecasts
through such public facilities.
§ 53-25 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-27
1:70
ARTICLE VII
Construction Provisions
§ 53-28. System construction schedule.
The franchisee shall specify the construction schedule.
§ 53-29. Construction standards.
A. The construction, operation, maintenance and repair of the broadband
system shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of the
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, as amended, the National
Electrical Safety Code, the National Electric Code, FCC, the Standards
of Good Engineering Practices for Measurement of Cable Television
Systems of the National Cable Television Association, other applicable
federal, state or local laws and regulations that may apply to the
operation, construction, maintenance or repair of a broadband system,
including, without limitation, local zoning and construction codes, and
laws and accepted industry practices, all as hereafter may be amended
or adopted.
B. All installation of electronic equipment shall be of a permanent nature,
using durable components.
C. Without limiting the foregoing, antennas and their supporting
structures (towers) shall be painted, lighted, erected and maintained in
accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal
Aviation Administration, Westtown Township ordinances and all other
applicable state or local laws, codes and regulations, all as hereafter
may be amended or adopted.
D. Without limiting the foregoing, all the franchisee's plant and
equipment, including, but not limited to, the antennae site, headend
and distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles,
wires, cable, coaxial cable, fiber optic cable, fixtures and apparatuses,
shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed,
replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance
with good engineering practices, performed by experienced
maintenance and construction personnel so as not to endanger or
interfere with improvements the township shall deem appropriate to
make or to interfere in any manner with the rights-of-way or legal rights
of any property owner or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian
or vehicular traffic.
E. The franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install
and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage,
injury or nuisance to the public.
F. Any and all streets, public property or private property which are
disturbed or damaged during the construction, repair, replacement,
§ 53-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-29
1:71
relocation, operation, maintenance or construction of the broadband
system shall be promptly repaired by the franchisee at its expense, and
in strict compliance with all applicable township standards.
G. A franchisee shall, at its expense, and by a time specified by the
township, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove
any of its property when required by the township by reason of traffic
conditions, public safety, street construction, street resurfacing or
widening, change of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water
pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks or any other type of municipal,
public utility improvements, street vacation, or for any other purpose
where the convenience of the township would be served thereby;
provided, however, that the franchisee shall, in all such cases, have the
privilege of abandoning any property in place.
H. If any removal, relaying or relocation is required to accommodate the
construction, operation or repair of the facilities of another person that
is authorized to use the public streets, a franchisee shall, after 30 days'
advance written notice, take action to effect the necessary changes
requested by the responsible entity. The township may resolve disputes
as to responsibility for costs associated with the removal, relaying or
relocation of facilities among those authorized to install facilities in the
public streets if the parties are unable to do so themselves.
I. In the event of an emergency, or where a broadband system creates or
is contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety or property, the
township may remove, relay or relocate that broadband system subject
to such prior notice to the franchisee as may be reasonable under the
circumstances giving rise to the emergency or danger involved.
J. A franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit issued by the township, temporarily raise or lower its
wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary
removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person
requesting same, and the franchisee shall have the authority to require
such payment in advance, except in the case where the requesting
person is the township, in which case no such payment shall be
required. The franchisee shall be given not less than 10 days' advance
notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
K. A franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees that overhang a
street or public right-of-way of the township so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and
cables of the franchisee, provided that the franchisee provides
reasonable prior notice to the township and complies with township
requirements. The township shall have the right to supervise such
trimming.
L. A franchisee shall use, with the owner's permission, existing
underground conduits or overhead utility facilities whenever feasible
and may not erect poles in public rights-of-way without the express
§ 53-29 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-29
1:72
permission of the township. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, the franchisee shall erect its facilities on existing power and
telephone poles pursuant to pole attachment agreements to be entered
into between the franchisee and the utility companies having ownership
of or otherwise having jurisdiction over such existing power and
telephone poles. Copies of agreements for use of conduits or other
facilities shall be filed with the township as required by the franchise
agreement or upon township request. No new poles shall be set by the
franchisee except where no poles exist or use of an existing utility pole
is not practicable due to excessive rearrangements or other conditions.
M. On streets where electrical and telephone utility wiring is located
underground, either at the time of initial construction of a broadband
system or at any time thereafter, a franchisee's cable shall also be
located underground at the franchisee's expense. Between a street and
a subscriber's residence, a franchisee's cable must be located
underground if both electrical and telephone utility wiring are located
underground. If either electric or telephone utility wiring is aerial, a
franchisee may install aerial cable except where a property owner or
resident requests underground installation and agrees to bear the
additional cost of such installation over and above the cost of aerial
installation.
N. All wires, cable lines and other transmission lines, equipment and
structures shall be installed and located to cause minimum interference
with the rights and convenience of property owners, and shall be
constructed and maintained by the franchisee so as not to interfere with
television and radio reception by inhabitants not using the services of
the franchisee. The township may issue such rules and regulations
concerning the installation and maintenance of a broadband system
installed in, on or over the streets, as may be consistent with this
chapter and the franchise agreement. The township shall have the right
to install and maintain free of charge upon the poles owned by the
franchisee any wire and pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere
with the broadband system operations of the franchisee.
O. All safety practices required by law shall be used during construction,
maintenance and repair of a broadband system. A franchisee shall not
place facilities, equipment or fixtures where they will interfere with any
gas, electric, telephone, water, sewer or other utility facilities, or
obstruct or hinder in any manner the various utilities serving the
residents of the township of their use of any street or any other public
right-of-way, and shall at all times fully comply with the requirements of
Act 287 pertaining to "Call One."
P. Prior to erection of any towers, poles or conduits or the construction,
upgrade or rebuild of a broadband system authorized under this
chapter, the franchisee shall first submit to the township and other
designated parties for approval a concise description of the facilities
proposed to be erected or installed, including engineering drawings, as
required, together with a map and plans indicating the proposed
§ 53-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-29
1:73
§ 53-30. Publicizing proposed construction work.
Except for emergency repair work, the franchisee shall publicize proposed
construction work at least one week prior to commencement of that work
by causing written notice of such construction work to be delivered to the
Township Manager and by making reasonable efforts to notify those persons
most likely to be affected by the work in at least one of the following ways:
by telephone, in person, by mail, by distribution of flyers to residences, or
in any other manner reasonably calculated to provide adequate notice.
location of all such facilities. For the erection of towers, the franchisee
shall in addition comply with the requirements of Chapter 170, Zoning,
as may be amended from time to time. No erection or installation of
any tower, pole, underground conduit or fixture or any rebuilds or
upgrading of the broadband system shall be commenced by any person
until approval therefor has been received from the township.
Q. Any contractor proposed for work or construction, installation,
operation, maintenance or repair of broadband system equipment must
be properly licensed under laws of the state and all applicable local
ordinances.
R. In the event the use of any part of a broadband system is discontinued
for any reason for a continuous period of 12 months, or in the event
such broadband system or property has been installed in any street
without complying with the requirements of this chapter or a franchise
agreement, or the franchise is terminated or canceled or has expired,
the franchisee, within 30 days after written notice by the township,
shall commence removal from the streets of all such property as the
township may require.
S. The township may extend the time for the removal of abandoned
facilities for a period not to exceed 180 days.
T. In the event of such removal or abandonment, the franchisee shall
restore the area to a condition satisfactory to the township.
§ 53-29 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-30
1:74
ARTICLE VIII
Operation and Reporting Provisions
§ 53-31. Open books and records.
The township shall have the right to inspect and copy upon two weeks'
written notice at any time during normal business hours at the broadband
system office or at such location as the township and the franchisee may
agree, all books, receipts, maps, plans, financial statements, contracts,
service complaint logs, performance test results, records of requests for
service and other like material of the franchisee which the township deems
appropriate in order to monitor compliance with the terms of this chapter, a
franchise agreement, a rate regulation filing or applicable law.
§ 53-32. Reports required.
The franchisee shall upon the request of the township make the following
reports available to the township for inspection and copying at the
franchisee's office:
A. All reports required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
including, but not limited to, any proof of performance tests and results,
equal employment opportunity (EEO) reports, and all petitions,
applications and communications of all types submitted by the
franchisee to the FCC, the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC),
or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having
jurisdiction over any matter affecting operation of the franchisee's
system.
B. An annual report setting forth the physical miles of plant construction
and plant in operation during the fiscal year shall be submitted to the
township. Such report shall also contain any revisions to the broadband
system "as built" maps filed with the township. The annual report shall
be available in February.
C. Construction reports shall be available to the township bimonthly after
the franchise is awarded for any construction undertaken during the
term of the franchise until construction is complete, including any
rebuild that may be specified in the franchise.
D. Proof of performance test results shall be available to the township
when sections of the broadband system are rebuilt and as required in
this chapter.
E. Technical tests required by the township as specified in this chapter
and the franchise agreement shall be available to the township
promptly upon completion of such tests.
F. Ownership reports for the franchise area shall be available annually to
the township 90 days after the end of the franchisee's fiscal year to
reflect any changes from the preceding year in the following:
§ 53-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-32
1:75
§ 53-33. Records required.
(1) Any persons, who at any time during the preceding year did control
or benefit from an interest in the franchise of 5% or more.
(2) All officers and members of the Board of Directors of the
franchisee.
G. The following broadband system and operational reports shall be
available annually to the township:
(1) A report on the broadband system's technical tests and
measurements.
(2) A report on programs and services offered by the franchisee,
including public, educational, governmental and leased access
channels.
(3) An annual summary of the previous year's activities including, but
not limited to, subscriber totals for each category of service
offered, including number of pay units sold, new services offered,
and the amount collected annually from other users of the
broadband system and the character and extent of the service
rendered thereto.
(4) An annual summary of complaints received and handled in addition
to any reports required in the franchise.
(5) An annual projection of broadband system and service plans for the
future.
H. The franchisee shall prepare and make available to the township, at the
time and in the form prescribed, such additional reports with respect to
its operation, affairs, transactions or property as may be reasonably
necessary and appropriate to the performance of any of the rights,
functions or duties of the township in connection with this chapter or
the franchise.
A. The franchisee shall at all times maintain:
(1) A record of all complaints received and interruptions or
degradation of service experienced for the preceding twelve-month
period prior to a performance review.
(2) A full and complete set of plans, records and "as built" maps
showing the approximate location of all broadband system
equipment installed or in use in the township, exclusive of
subscriber service drops.
B. Upon the request of the township for specific locations in the township,
the franchisee shall mark the exact locations of the broadband system
equipment installed or in use at the specified locations, in accordance
with the Underground Utility Line Protection Law, the Act of December
§ 53-32 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-33
1:76
§ 53-34. Performance evaluation.
§ 53-35. Proprietary information.
10, 1974, P.L. 852, No. 287, 73 P.S. § 176 et seq., as amended by Act 38
of 1991, and as may be amended from time to time.
C. The township may impose reasonable requests for additional
information, records and documents from time to time.
A. The township may, at its discretion, hold scheduled performance
evaluation sessions annually.
B. Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of
the franchise at the request of the township.
C. All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a
newspaper of general circulation. The franchisee shall notify
subscribers of all such evaluation sessions by announcement on a local
origination channel on the system between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. for five consecutive days preceding each session.
D. Topics that may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation
session may include, but not be limited to system performance and
construction, franchisee compliance with this chapter and the
franchise, customer service and complaint response, subscriber
privacy, services provided, programming offered, service rate
structures, if applicable, franchise fees, penalties, free or discounted
services, applications of new technologies, judicial and FCC filings, and
line extensions.
E. During the review and evaluation by the township, the franchisee shall
fully cooperate with the township and shall provide such information
and documents as the township may need to reasonably perform its
review.
A. If this Article VIII or any request for information by the township under
this chapter requires the production of proprietary information, the
franchisee must produce the information. However, at the time the
allegedly proprietary information is submitted, the franchisee may
request that specific, identified portions of its response be treated as
confidential and withheld from public disclosure. The request must
state the reason why the information should be treated as proprietary
and the facts that support those reasons. The request for confidentiality
will be granted if the township determines that the preponderance of
the evidence shows that nondisclosure is consistent with the provisions
of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552, or the Pennsylvania
Right to Know Law, 65 P.S. § 66.1 et seq. If the township decides that
information can be withheld, it will issue a written decision explaining
the basis for withholding the information, and place that decision in a
public file for inspection. If the franchisee requests confidentiality and
§ 53-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-35
1:77
the request is denied, the franchisee may seek review within five
working days of the denial in any appropriate forum.
B. Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld as
proprietary with the township. The township shall weigh the policy
considerations favoring nondisclosure against the reason cited for
permitting inspection in light of the facts of the particular case. It will
then promptly notify the requesting entity and the franchisee that
submitted the information as to the disposition of the request. It may
grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or the
franchisee may seek review of the decision by filing an appeal in any
appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of any
appeal.
§ 53-35 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-35
1:78
ARTICLE IX
Consumer Protection Provisions
§ 53-36. Customer service requirements.
Every franchise agreement shall require a franchisee to comply with all
applicable federal, state and local customer service requirements and shall
specify the minimum customer service requirements the franchisee must
satisfy. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, every franchisee must satisfy
the following requirements, whether or not specified in its franchise
agreement:
§ 53-37. Notice of programming changes.
The franchisee shall give at least 30 days' notice to subscribers and the
township of any change in programming decisions or channel realignment.
§ 53-38. Reconnection.
The franchisee shall restore service to customers wishing restoration of
service, provided that the customer shall first satisfy any previous
obligations owed including the full payment of previous balances, penalties
and interest.
§ 53-39. Disconnection.
Subscribers shall have the right to have broadband service disconnected. A
refund of unused service charges shall be paid to the customer within 30
days from the date of termination of service.
A. The franchisee shall maintain a business office at a location where
subscribers may readily visit and may call without incurring toll
charges that shall be open at least during normal business hours, which
shall include evening hours and some weekend hours.
B. The franchisee shall render sufficient service, make repairs promptly
and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time
possible. The franchisee shall generally respond to all service calls
within 24 hours and correct cable malfunctions as promptly as possible,
and shall maintain a competent staff sufficient to provide adequate and
prompt service to its subscribers. The franchisee shall provide a pro
rata credit to subscribers for periods of interruption of service in
accordance with applicable law.
C. The franchisee shall maintain adequate telephone lines and personnel
to respond to subscriber complaints or inquiries and schedule service
calls in a timely manner. The franchisee shall respond to written
subscriber complaints in writing within 10 business days, with a copy to
the township. The franchisee shall also respond to township complaints
in writing within 10 business days.
§ 53-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-40
1:79
§ 53-40. Parental control option.
The franchisee shall provide parental control devices to all subscribers
who wish to be able to cut off any objectionable channel or channels of
programming from the broadband service entering the subscriber's home.
§ 53-41. Responsibilities of Township Manager.
The Township Manager shall be responsible as the township official for
receiving and acting upon any unresolved complaints. Written notice of
this complaint procedure, including the identity of the township official
responsible for receiving unresolved complaints, shall be given to each
subscriber at the time of initial subscription to the system.
§ 53-40 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-41
1:80
ARTICLE X
Rate Regulation
§ 53-42. Rate charge and rate schedule.
§ 53-43. Local regulatory framework.
A. Each franchisee shall state in its proposal to enter into an agreement
for the award of a franchise hereunder its initial monthly rates,
installation charges and all other charges, including but not limited to
equipment fees, late fees and other administrative charges, if any.
B. The franchisee shall give subscribers at least 30 days' notice of its
intention to change monthly rates, equipment charges and installation
charges by mailing notices thereof to each of the current subscribers to
whom such charges will apply. The franchisee shall give the Township
Manager or his designee 45 days' advance notice of any rate change.
C. The franchisee shall not, as to rates, charges, services or facilities,
make or grant any undue privilege or advantage to any party, nor
subject any party to undue prejudice or disadvantage, provided that the
franchisee may establish reasonable classifications of customers.
Nothing in this chapter prohibits the reduction or waiver of charges in
connection with temporary promotional campaigns or providing a
senior citizen discount, provided the same waivers are provided to all
similarly situated customers.
A. If the township is a certified franchising authority under the Cable Act,
it is empowered by the FCC to regulate rates for basic tier service and
customer service and equipment. Where the FCC, state or federal law
permits, no rate or charge may be imposed without the prior approval
of the township. A franchisee is prohibited from requesting or requiring
a subscriber to pay an illegal rate as a condition of providing service.
B. All rates must be reasonable. Where the FCC, state or federal law
permits, the township may adopt such regulations, procedures and
standards as it deems necessary to implement rate regulation and may
regulate rates by amendment to this chapter, by a separate resolution
or ordinance, by amendment to a franchise agreement, or in any other
lawful manner.
§ 53-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-43
1:81

ARTICLE XI
Franchise Fee
§ 53-44. Use of streets and public rights-of-way.
The township finds that the streets and public rights-of-way of the county,
state and township to be used by a franchisee for the operation of a
broadband system are valuable public property acquired and maintained
by the county, state and township at great expense to the taxpayers. The
township further finds that the grant of a franchise to use streets and public
rights-of-way is a valuable property right without which a franchisee would
be required to invest substantial capital.
§ 53-45. Payment to township.
A. The township shall be paid a franchise fee in an amount no less than the
greater of 5% of its gross annual revenues, or the maximum amount
permitted under applicable law. Every franchise agreement shall
specify the percentage the franchise is initially required to pay as a
percentage of gross revenues, but if the maximum amount permitted
increases, the franchisee shall, simultaneously with the effective date of
any change in any law or, if later, the effective date of any regulation
required to implement the law, increase the franchise fee to the
maximum allowed by that law.
B. The franchise fee is in addition to all other taxes and payments that the
franchisee may be required to pay under any federal, state or local law
and to any other tax, fee or assessment imposed by utilities and cable
operators for use of their services, facilities or equipment.
C. Payment of the franchise fee shall not be considered in the nature of a
tax.
D. No acceptance of any payment by the township shall be construed as a
release or an accord and satisfaction of any claim the township may
have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this
chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the
franchisee.
E. In the event any franchise fee payment or recomputation amount is not
made on or before the date specified herein, the franchisee shall pay
additional compensation and interest charges computed from such due
date, at an annual rate equal to the commercial prime interest rate of
the township's primary depository bank during the period such unpaid
amount is owed.
F. The franchise fee and any other costs assessed by the township against
a franchisee shall be paid quarterly to the township and shall
commence as of the effective date of the franchise, unless otherwise
agreed in the franchise agreement. The township shall be furnished at
the time of each payment with a statement verified by the franchisee's
§ 53-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-45
1:83
general manager reflecting the total amount of semiannual gross
revenues for the payment period. Quarterly payments shall be made to
the township no later than 45 days of March 30, June 30 and September
30 and within 60 days of December 31. Quarterly computation dates are
the last days of the months of March, June, September and December.
If requested by the township, an annual statement of gross revenues
shall be furnished to the township by an independent, certified public
accountant approved by the township. The franchisee shall provide an
annual complete audit statement for each calendar year within 90 days
from the end of that calendar year.
G. The township shall have the right to inspect and copy, subject to the
provisions regarding proprietary information in § 53-35 of this chapter,
the franchisee's records and the right to audit and to recompute any
amounts determined to be payable under this chapter for a period of
three years from the date of payment. Audits shall be at the expense of
the township unless the audit discloses an underpayment in excess of
3%, in which case the costs of the audit shall be borne by the franchisee
as a cost incidental to the enforcement of the franchise. Any additional
amounts due to the township as a result of the audit shall be paid within
30 days following written notice to the franchisee by the township of
the underpayment, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report,
unless written notice of disagreement is filed by the franchisee with the
township within such time period.
H. The franchisee shall maintain its fiscal and financial records in such a
manner as to enable the Board to determine the cost of assets of the
franchisee which are used in providing broadband services within the
township.
I. To the extent imposition of the franchise fee as enumerated in this
section is expressly prohibited by controlling state or federal law, the
township shall be paid by the franchisee, or other applicable user of the
public right-of-way, an impact fee in the amount as set from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 53-45 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-45
1:84
ARTICLE XII
Insurance; Surety; Indemnification
§ 53-46. Insurance required.
A franchisee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of a franchise specifically
agrees that it will maintain, throughout the entire length of the franchise
period, at least the following liability insurance coverage insuring the
township and the franchisee: workers' compensation and employer liability
insurance to meet all requirements of Pennsylvania law and comprehensive
general liability insurance with respect to the construction, operation and
maintenance of the broadband system, and the conduct of the franchisee's
business in the township, as follows:
§ 53-47. Qualifications of sureties.
All insurance policies shall be with sureties qualified to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; shall be with sureties with an A-1 or better
rating of insurance by Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition;
and in a form approved by the Township Manager.
§ 53-48. Policies available for review.
All insurance policies shall be available for review by the township, and a
franchisee shall keep on file with the township certificates of insurance.
§ 53-49. Additional insureds; prior notice of policy cancellation.
All insurance policies shall name the township, its officers, boards,
supervisors, agents, and employees as additional insureds and shall further
provide that any cancellation or reduction in coverage shall not be effective
unless 30 days' prior written notice thereof has been given to the township.
A franchisee shall not cancel any required insurance policy without
submission of proof that the franchisee has obtained alternative insurance
satisfactory to the township which complies with this chapter.
A. One million dollars for bodily injury or death to any one person, within
the limit, however, of $2,000,000 for bodily injury or death resulting
from any one accident, and $5,000,000 for all injuries or deaths
resulting from any one accident.
B. Five hundred thousand dollars for property damage resulting from any
one accident.
C. Workers' compensation insurance on all employees engaged in
installation or service of its equipment.
D. A certificate evidencing the insurance coverage herein provided shall
be filed by the franchisee with the township.
§ 53-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-50
1:85
§ 53-50. Indemnification.
A franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless
and defend the township, its officials, boards, commissions, commissioners,
agents and employees against any and all claims, suits, causes of action,
proceedings and judgments for damages or equitable relief arising out
of the construction, maintenance or operation of its broadband system,
the conduct of the franchisee's business in the township, or in any way
arising out of the franchisee's enjoyment or exercise of a franchise granted
hereunder, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is
authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or a franchise agreement.
This provision includes, but is not limited to, the township's reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or
proceeding; and claims arising out of copyright infringements or a failure by
the franchisee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors
or franchisees of programs to be delivered by the broadband system.
§ 53-51. Indemnification for Cable Act claims.
A franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and
hold harmless the township, and in its capacity as such, the officers, agents
and employees thereof, from and against any and all claims, suits, actions,
liability and judgments for damages or otherwise subject to Section 638 of
the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 558, arising out of or alleged to arise out of the
installation, construction, operation or maintenance of its system, including
but not limited to any claim against the franchisee for invasion of the right
of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation
or infringement of any copyright, trade mark, trade name, service mark or
patent, or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation. Nothing
herein shall prohibit the township from participating in the defense of any
litigation by its own counsel at its own cost and expense.
§ 53-52. No limit of liability.
Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by the
township shall be construed to limit the liability of the franchisee for
damages under any franchise issued hereunder.
§ 53-50 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-52
1:86
ARTICLE XIII
Enforcement Remedies
§ 53-53. Violations and penalties; additional remedies.
§ 53-54. Determination of appropriate remedies.
In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the township
shall take into consideration the nature of the violation, the person or
persons bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy
required in order to prevent further violations, and such other matters as
the township determines are appropriate to the public interest.
A. In addition to any other remedies available under this chapter or at law
or equity, the township may apply any one or a combination of the
following remedies in the event a franchisee materially violates this
chapter, its franchise agreement or applicable state or federal law:
(1) Impose liquidated damages in the amount of $250 per violation
which, if unpaid, shall be lienable by the township as a municipal
claim. Each day that a violation continues shall be separate
violation for which a separate fine may be imposed. The franchisee
shall pay all fines within 30 days. Payment of such fines by the
franchisee will not relieve the franchisee of its obligation to comply
with the requirements of this franchise.
(2) In addition to or instead of any other remedy, seek legal or
equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(3) Impose penalties available under state and local law for violation of
township ordinances.
B. Except as otherwise provided hereunder, prior to applying one or more
of the remedies provided in this section, the Township Manager shall
provide notice to the franchisee identifying the specific nature of the
violation. The franchisee shall, within 30 days, cure the violation, unless
the Township Manager determines that the violation cannot be
reasonably cured within such period. In the event that the violation is
not corrected within 30 days or such longer period determined by the
Township Manager, the township may proceed to apply the remedies
provided in this section as may be appropriate under the
circumstances.
§ 53-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-54
1:87

ARTICLE XIV
Transfers
§ 53-55. Township approval required.
No transfer shall occur without prior approval of the township.
§ 53-56. Application.
An application for a transfer shall provide complete information on the
proposed transaction, including details on the legal, financial, technical and
other qualifications of the transferee, and on the potential impact of the
transfer on subscriber rates and service. At a minimum, the information
required in § 53-12C of this chapter shall be provided with respect to the
proposed transferee. Within 30 days of receiving an application for transfer,
the township shall notify the franchisee of the information it requires to
make the determination in § 53-57 of this chapter, and shall take action in
that application within 120 days after receiving the requested information.
§ 53-57. Determination by township.
In making a determination as to whether to grant, deny, or grant subject
to conditions an application for a transfer of a franchise, the township shall
consider the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee
to operate the system; whether the incumbent operator is in compliance
with its franchise agreement and this chapter and, if not, the proposed
transferee's commitment to cure such noncompliance; whether the
transferee owns or controls any other broadband system in the township, or
whether operation by the transferee may eliminate or reduce competition
in the delivery of broadband service in the township; and whether operation
by the transferee or approval of the transfer would adversely affect
subscribers, the township's interest under this chapter, the franchise
agreement, or other applicable law, or make it less likely that the future
cable- and telecommunications-related needs and interests of the
community would be satisfied at a reasonable cost. The township reserves
the right to review the purchase price of any transfer or assignment of a
broadband system. Any negotiated sale value which the township deems
unreasonable will not be considered in the rate base for any subsequent
request for rate increases, if permitted by applicable law.
§ 53-58. Transferee's agreement.
No application for a transfer of a franchise shall be granted unless the
transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this
chapter and the franchise agreement, and that it will assume the obligations
and liabilities known and unknown of the previous franchisee under this
chapter and the franchise agreement.
§ 53-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-59
1:89
§ 53-59. Approval does not constitute waiver.
Approval by the township of a transfer of a franchise does not constitute
a waiver or release of any of the rights of the township under this chapter
or the franchise agreement, whether arising before or after the date of the
transfer.
§ 53-60. Processing fee.
As a condition of considering a transfer, the township may impose a fee
upon the transferee to cover its estimated out-of-pocket expenses in
considering the application for transfer of a franchise. Any amount collected
in excess of the estimated amount shall be returned to the transferee.
§ 53-59 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-60
1:90
ARTICLE XV
Revocation or Termination of Franchise
§ 53-61. Basis for revocation.
A franchise may be revoked by the township for a franchisee's failure to
construct, operate or maintain the broadband system as required by this
chapter or the franchise agreement, for defrauding or attempting to defraud
the township or subscribers, if the franchise is declared bankrupt, or for any
other material violation of this chapter or material breach of the franchise
agreement. To invoke the provisions of this section, the township shall give
the franchisee written notice of the default in its performance. If, within
60 calendar days following such written notice from the township, the
franchisee has not taken corrective action or corrective action is not being
actively and expeditiously pursued to the satisfaction of the township, the
township may give written notice to the franchisee of its intent to revoke
the franchise, stating its reasons; provided that no opportunity to cure shall
be provided where the franchisee has defrauded or attempted to defraud
the township or its subscribers, or in the event the franchisee is declared
bankrupt. In the case of a fraud or attempted fraud, the franchise may be
revoked after the hearing required under § 53-62; revocation for bankruptcy
shall be governed by § 53-63.
§ 53-62. Revocation procedure.
Prior to revoking a franchise, the township shall hold a public hearing,
upon 30 calendar days' notice, at which time the franchisee and the public
shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Following the public hearing,
the township may determine whether to revoke the franchise based on the
information presented at the hearing, and other information of record. If the
township determines to revoke a franchise, it shall issue a written decision
setting forth the reasons for its decision. A copy of such decision shall be
transmitted to the franchisee.
§ 53-63. Revocation after bankruptcy.
Any franchise may, at the option of the township following a public hearing
before the township, be revoked 120 calendar days after an assignment
for the benefit of creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee
to take over the business of the franchisee, whether in a receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other
action or proceeding, unless within that one-hundred-twenty-day period:
A. Such assignment, receivership or trusteeship has been vacated; or
B. Such assignee, receiver or trustee has fully complied with the terms
and conditions of this chapter and the franchise agreement and has
executed an agreement, approved by a court of competent jurisdiction,
assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms and conditions of this
chapter and the franchise agreement, and such other conditions as may
be established or as are required pursuant to Article XIV.
§ 53-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-64
1:91
§ 53-64. Revocation after foreclosure.
In the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the facilities,
equipment or property of a franchisee, the township may revoke the
franchise, following a public hearing before the township, by serving notice
on the franchisee and the successful bidder at the sale, in which event the
franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchise will be revoked and
will terminate 30 calendar days after serving such notice, unless:
§ 53-65. Rights on revocation.
If the township revokes a franchise, or if for any other reason a franchisee
abandons, terminates or fails to operate or maintain service to its
subscribers, the following procedures and rights are effective:
§ 53-66. Automatic forfeiture.
Notwithstanding § 53-62, where the township has issued a franchise
specifically conditioned in the franchise agreement upon the completion
of construction, system upgrade or other specific obligation by a specified
date, failure of the franchisee to complete such construction or upgrade, or
to comply with such other specific obligation as required, will result in the
automatic forfeiture of the franchise without further action by the township
where it is so provided in the franchise agreement, unless the township, at
its discretion and for good cause demonstrated by the franchisee, grants an
extension of time.
A. The township has approved the transfer of the franchise to the
successful bidder; and
B. The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the township to
assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the franchise
agreement and this chapter, and such other conditions as may be
established or as are required pursuant to Article XIV.
A. The township may require the former franchisee to remove its facilities
and equipment at the former franchisee's expense. If the former
franchisee fails to do so within a reasonable period of time, the
township may have the removal done at the former franchisee's and/or
surety's expense.
B. In the event of revocation, the township, by resolution, may acquire
ownership of the broadband system at an equitable price.
C. If a broadband system is abandoned by a franchisee or the franchisee
fails to operate or maintain service to its subscribers or otherwise
terminates the franchise, the ownership of all portions of the broadband
system in public rights-of-way shall revert to the township and the
township may sell, assign or transfer all or part of the assets of the
system.
§ 53-64 WESTTOWN CODE § 53-66
1:92
ARTICLE XVI
Rights of Individuals Protected
§ 53-67. Discriminatory practices prohibited.
The franchisee shall not deny service, deny access or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers, programmers or residents of the township
on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex or age.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the franchisee may offer price discounts to
senior citizens. The franchisee shall comply at all times with all applicable
federal, state and township laws, and all executive and administrative
orders relating to nondiscrimination.
§ 53-68. Equal employment opportunity.
A franchisee shall not refuse to employ, discharge from employment or
discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions or
privileges of employment because of race, color, religion, national origin,
sex or age. The franchisee shall comply with federal, state and local laws
and regulations governing equal employment opportunities, as the same
may be from time to time amended.
§ 53-69. Subscriber privacy.
A franchisee shall at all times protect the privacy of all subscribers pursuant
to the provisions of Section 631 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 551. A
franchisee shall not condition subscriber service on the subscriber's grant
of permission to disclose information which, pursuant to federal or state
law, cannot be disclosed without the subscriber's explicit consent.
§ 53-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-69
1:93

ARTICLE XVII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 53-70. Compliance with laws.
The franchisee shall comply with all laws and regulations which apply to the
transmission and distribution of audio, visual and video impulses and with
all other applicable federal, state and township laws and regulations as they
become effective, unless otherwise stated.
§ 53-71. Severability.
If any term, condition, or provision of this chapter shall, to any extent, be
held to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder hereof shall be valid in
all other respects and continue to be effective. In the event of a subsequent
change in applicable law so that the provision which had been held invalid
is no longer invalid, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and
effect without further action by the township and shall thereafter be binding
on the franchisee and the township.
§ 53-72. Emergency use.
Upon request of the township, the franchisee shall, at its sole expense, make
available to public safety providers, such as police, fire and emergency
management personnel, all systems and related facilities for emergency use
during any emergency or disaster, in accordance with FCC standards and
requirements as may be amended from time to time.
§ 53-73. Captions.
Captions and headings of this chapter are for convenience and reference
purposes only and shall not affect in any way the meaning and
interpretation of any provisions of this chapter.
§ 53-74. Calculation of time.
Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act, duty,
matter, payment or thing is required hereunder and a period of time or
duration for the fulfillment of doing thereof is prescribed and is fixed herein,
the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last
day of the prescribed or fixed period of duration time. When the last day of
the period falls on a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall not
be counted in the computation.
§ 53-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-74
1:95

ARTICLE XVIII
Franchise Effective Date; Time of Acceptance
§ 53-75. Franchise effective date.
All franchises shall be signed by the Chairman of the Board and attested to
by the Township Secretary. The franchise shall take effect after:
§ 53-76. Franchisee bound by terms and conditions.
Upon acceptance of a franchise, the franchisee shall be bound by all terms
and conditions contained herein, in the franchise agreement, and in its
application, to the extent incorporated in the franchise agreement.
A. It has been accepted by the franchisee; and
B. The franchisee and the township have signed a franchise agreement
and satisfied all conditions precedent set forth therein.
§ 53-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-76
1:97
Chapter 54
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 126.
§ 54-1. Nuisances prohibited. [Amended 11-18-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-2]
§ 54-2. Responsibility of owners and occupants. [Amended 8-6-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-5; 11-18-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-2]
A. Between the dates of May 1 and September 30 of any year, no person,
firm, corporation or other entity owning or occupying any land within
the Township of Westtown shall allow any grass, weeds or other
vegetation whatsoever, which is not normally considered edible or
planted and maintained for some useful or ornamental purpose, to grow
or remain upon such land uncontrolled, to cause any unpleasant or
obnoxious odor, to conceal any filthy deposit, to provide a place for the
accumulation of garbage or rubbish, to produce any obnoxious pollen or
seed, or to provide a breeding place for insects. Any such grass, weeds
or vegetation growing upon any land in the Township in violation of the
provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness, comfort and general
welfare of the citizens of the Township.
B. Bamboo is a group of perennial evergreens in the true grass family
(Poaceae) and are often called "tree" grasses because of their large,
woody, branched stems. Certain of the more than 1,450 species of
bamboo can be invasive and can grow to 40 feet in height and have
been planted next to public roadways in the Township. During wind,
rain and/or snow storm events, the stalks of the bamboo plants bend
and can block portions of public roads, cause a hazard to highway
traffic and impair the use and maintenance of the roads. The Board of
Supervisors has, therefore, determined that bamboo species, including,
but not limited to, Bambuseae, Phyllostachys and Pseudosasa, including
Common Bamboo, Golden Bamboo and Arrow Bamboo, shall not be
planted, maintained or otherwise permitted to exist within 40 feet of
the edge of pavement or the traveled portion of any public roadway in
the Township. All bamboo located on any property and within 40 feet of
the edge of pavement or the traveled portion of a public road is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
A. The owner of any premises which is vacant or occupied by the owner
and the occupant of any premises occupied by other than the owner
thereof shall remove, trim, cut or otherwise control all grass, weeds or
other vegetation growing or remaining upon such owned or occupied
§ 53-76 WESTTOWN CODE § 54-2
1:98
§ 54-3. Notice; failure to comply; work to be done by Township.
[Amended 11-18-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-2]
The Supervisors of the Township or their duly authorized agents are hereby
authorized to give notice by personal service or by United States mail
directed to the last known address of the owner or occupant, as the case
may be, of any lands whereon bamboo, grass, weeds or other vegetation
is growing or remaining in violation of the provisions of §§ 54-1 and 54-2
of this chapter and directing such occupant or owner to remove, mow, cut
or trim such bamboo, grass, weeds or vegetation so as to conform to the
requirements of this chapter. The owner or occupant shall conform to the
directions of the notice within five days after the issuance thereof. In the
event that any person, firm, corporation or other entity so notified shall
neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such notice within the period of time
stated therein, the Township or its authorized agents may remove, trim, cut
or mow such bamboo, grass, weeds or other vegetation, and the cost of such
removal, trimming, cutting or mowing, together with the additional penalty
provided by law, may be collected by the Township from such person, firm,
corporation or other entity in the manner provided by law, including the
placing of a municipal lien on the offending property.
§ 54-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
premises in violation of the provisions of § 54-1A of this chapter. It shall
be the duty of all owners and occupiers of lands owned or occupied
by them to keep the same in good order and to keep all fields, yards,
lots and other open areas mowed and trimmed and the same shall be
mowed once before June 15 and again before October 1 of each and
every year.
B. Property owners or occupants of properties containing bamboo in
violation of the prohibition set forth in § 54-1B of this chapter shall
remove and abate the growth of the bamboo within 40 feet of the edge
of the pavement or the traveled portion of a public road within the
Township and shall keep the same in good order and free of bamboo at
all times.
§ 54-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-4
1:99
Chapter 57
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Energy conservation — See Ch. 77.
Erosion, sediment control and grading — See
Ch. 80.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 87.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 105.
Plumbing — See Ch. 122.
Sewers — See Ch. 132.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 149.
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 54-4 WESTTOWN CODE § 54-4
1:100
ARTICLE I
Residential Code
[Adopted 4-2-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-415]
§ 57-1. Adoption of Residential Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Secretary of Westtown Township, being marked and designated as
the International Residential Code, 2006 Edition, including all appendix
chapters but Appendix L, Permit Fees (see International Residential Code
Section R102.5, 2006 edition), as published by the International Code
Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of Westtown
Township for regulating and governing the construction, alteration,
movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal
and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height
with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential
Code on file in the office of the Secretary of Westtown Township are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article,
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
§ 57-2 of this article.
§ 57-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section R101.1 Title, insert: Westtown Township, Chester County,
Pennsylvania.
B. Section R113.4 Violation penalties, delete in its entirety and replace
with the following: Any person who violates or permits a violation of this
code shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a
District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be
guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment
thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense, and each section of this code that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense.
C. Table R301.2(1) Design criteria, insert:
15.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, One- and Two-Family Dwelling
Code, adopted 12-4-1995 by Ord. No. 95-5.
§ 57-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-2
1:101
§ 57-2.1. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 95-5 of Westtown Township adopting the CABO One-and
Two-Family Dwelling Code, 1995, or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith
are hereby repealed, and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in
conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 57-2.2. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Township for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this article and the Code shall be established by the
Board of Supervisors by resolution from time to time.
§ 57-2.3. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is, for
any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this article. The Board of Supervisors
hereby declares that it would have passed this article, and each section,
subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one
or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared
unconstitutional.
§ 57-2.4. Legal effect.
Nothing in this article or in the Residential Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 57-2.1 of this article, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
§ 57-2.5. When effective.
This article and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders and
matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full force
and effect five days from and after the date of its final passage and adoption.
Ground
Snow
Load
Wind
Speed
(mph)
Seismic
Design
Category
Subject to
Damage
From
Weathering
Frost Line
Depth
(inches) Termite
Design
Temperature
(degrees)
Ice Barrier
Underlayment
Required
30 90 B Severe 36 Severe 10 Yes
D. Section P2603.6.1 Sewer depth, insert: 36 inches.
§ 57-2 WESTTOWN CODE § 57-2.5
1:102
ARTICLE II
Building Code
[Adopted 4-2-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-516]
§ 57-3. Adoption of Building Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Secretary of Westtown Township, being marked and designated as the
International Building Code, 2006 Edition, including all appendix chapters
(see International Building Code Section 101.2.1, 2006 edition), as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the Building Code of Westtown Township, for regulating and governing
the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures,
by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use, and the condemnation of buildings
and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of
such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code on file
in the office of the Secretary of Westtown Township are hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 57-4
below.
§ 57-4. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections of the Building Code are revised as follows:
A. Section 101.1 Title, insert: Westtown Township, Chester County,
Pennsylvania.
B. Section 113.4 Violation penalties, delete in its entirety and replace
with the following: Any person who violates or permits a violation of this
code shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a
District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be
guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment
thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense, and each section of this code that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense.
C. Section 1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas, insert:
Westtown Township, Chester County.
16.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Building Code, adopted
12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 96-7.
§ 57-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-4
1:103
§ 57-4.1. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 96-7 of Westtown Township adopting the BOCA National
Building Code, Thirteenth Edition, 1996, and all other ordinances or parts
of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 57-4.2. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Township for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this article and the Code shall be established by the
Board of Supervisors by resolution from time to time.
§ 57-4.3. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is, for
any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this article. The Board of Supervisors
hereby declares that it would have passed this article, and each section,
subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one
or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared
unconstitutional.
§ 57-4.4. Legal effect.
Nothing in this article or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 57-4.1 of this article, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
§ 57-4.5. When effective.
This article and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders and
matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full force
and effect five days from and after the date of its final passage and adoption.
D. Section 3410.2 Applicability, insert: The date of adoption of this
Building Code.
§ 57-4 WESTTOWN CODE § 57-4.5
1:104
ARTICLE III
Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 7-6-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-4]
§ 57-5. Administration and enforcement.
The municipality hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101
through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 57-6. Adoption of standards.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa.Code, Chapters 404
through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of this
municipality.
§ 57-7. Administration and enforcement; building permits required.
[Amended 12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-4]
A. Administration and enforcement of the Code within this municipality
shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the
governing body of this municipality from time to time by resolution:
(1) By the designation of an employee of the municipality to serve as
the Municipal Code Official to act on the behalf of the municipality;
(2) By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the municipality;
(3) By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an
intermunicipal agreement;
(4) By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of this
municipality;
(5) By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department
of Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement
of structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and
utility and miscellaneous use structures.
B. Pursuant to the authority contained in § 503(c) of the Construction
Code Act, 35 P.S. § 7210.503(c), and the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code Regulations, 34 Pa. Code § 403.1(b)(3), the
Township shall require building permits for all accessory structures of
250 square feet or more.
(1) For purposes of this chapter, "accessory structure" shall be defined
as a subordinate structure, the use of which is customarily
§ 57-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-7
1:105
§ 57-8. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing body
of this municipality in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the Code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes
set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is
undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of
Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 57-9. Effect on other ordinances.
All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were adopted
by this Municipality on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or exceed the
requirements of the Code shall continue in full force and effect until such
time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements
of the Code, as amended from time to time.
§ 57-10. Fees.
Fees assessable by the municipality for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this article and the Code shall be established by the
governing body by resolution from time to time.
incidental to that of the principal structure, used for an accessory
use and located on the same lot as the principal structure.
(2) Notwithstanding Subsection B above, a building permit shall be
required for all accessory structures regardless of their size that:
(a) Exceed 12 feet in height; or
(b) Propose electrical, gas, water, or sewage service or similar
utility service.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this article and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the Code are hereby amended
to conform with the comparable provisions of the Code.
B. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this municipality not
governed by the Code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 57-7 WESTTOWN CODE § 57-10
1:106
Chapter 61
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 61-1. Applicability.
This chapter applies to all principal buildings within the Township of
Westtown, Chester County, and each tract, lot or parcel of land.
§ 61-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building, the use of which is
customarily incidental to that of the principal building, used for an
accessory use and located on the same lot as a principal building.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — Any building or structure erected on a tract, lot
or parcel of land on which any use is carried out, except an accessory
building; including a dwelling, place of business or industry, or any other
use requiring a location identity.
§ 61-3. Assignment of street address numbers.
§ 61-4. Application for street address number.
The owner or occupant of a lot, building, dwelling unit or commercial
or business establishment to which no street address number has been
previously assigned shall, prior to occupancy thereof, make application to
the township for assignment of such street address number.
A. The Board of Supervisors or its designee shall have the power to assign
street address numbers to each lot and to each dwelling unit and
commercial or business establishment where there is more than one
such dwelling unit or establishment on a lot.
B. The Board of Supervisors or its designee shall have the power to correct
any errors with respect to the assignment of street address numbers, as
and when such errors are discovered, and shall have the power to
change and redesignate a street address number or numbers assigned
to any lot, dwelling unit or commercial or business establishment when
it is deemed that such change or redesignation is necessary or
desirable in order to provide street address numbers appropriate for
the purposes of uniquely identifying each lot, dwelling unit or
commercial or business establishment.
§ 57-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-5
1:107
§ 61-5. Specifications for street address number posting.
The designated street address number shall be posted on each building,
dwelling unit or commercial or business establishment or its associated
mailbox in accordance with the following specifications and regulations:
§ 61-6. Violations and penalties.
A. If the principal building is served by a mailbox mounted at the end of
the access drive, the designated street address number shall be posted
on both sides of the box or post.
B. If the street address number is not visible as described in Subsection A
above and there is no mailbox located at the access drive, the street
address number must be posted on a marker placed at the driveway
entrance.
C. If an access drive serves more than one principal building the street
address numbers shall be posted at the end of drive and auxiliary
numbers shall be posted to identify the main entrance to each structure
and/or dwelling unit.
D. The street address numbers shall be Arabic in design, shall have a
minimum height of three inches and shall be mounted in a secure
fashion in accordance with the appropriate specifications in Subsection
A, B or C above.
E. The numbers shall be so designed as to be readily legible and visible
during daylight hours by a person possessing normal vision from the
center lines of the facing street, and shall be placed so that trees,
shrubs and other obstructions do not block the line of sight of the
numbers from the center of the facing street to any appreciable degree.
A. The absence of street numbers, or the insecure fastening or absence of
any numeral thereof, or the use of any street address number not
assigned by Westtown Township, or the failure of a street address
number to meet the visibility requirements shall be a violation of this
chapter. Upon discovery of such violation, a notice of violation shall be
sent by certified mail to the property or occupant, or shall be personally
served on the property owner or occupant or his agent. Such notice
shall specify the specific provision of the chapter violated and shall
require compliance with the provisions of this chapter within 15 days
from the date of the notice.
B. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District
Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of
a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation constitutes or is
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each
§ 61-5 WESTTOWN CODE § 61-6
1:108
§ 61-7. Authority and enforcement.
The Zoning Officer, or his designee, shall have the authority to enforce this
chapter.
Chapter 63
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Prevention Bureau — See Ch. 14.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 54.
Building Code — See Ch. 57, Art. II.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 87.
§ 63-1. Outdoor burning restricted.
Except for recreational and ceremonial fires, it shall henceforth be unlawful
to burn or authorize (or, on one's own property, to permit) another to burn
anything outdoors anywhere within the township, except between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. A recreational fire is an outdoor fire which is used
to cook food for human consumption. A ceremonial fire is an open fire used
in conjunction with a recognized ceremony of a community, educational,
service or scouting organization.
§ 63-2. Burning of trash and domestic waste material.
It shall henceforth be unlawful to burn or authorize (or, on one's own
property, to permit) another to burn paper, rubbish or other domestic waste
material outdoors anywhere within the township, unless the fire is confined
within a completely enclosed container, incinerator, fireplace or grill, at
least 10 feet from a building and unless someone remains in attendance
during the burning. Incinerators, fireplaces or grills which are constructed
as part of a building and meet the requirements of the Township Building
Code17 are excluded from the ten-foot requirement. Perforations, openings
or screening for venting, but prohibiting burning particles or ash from being
discharged, are permitted.
section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.
C. After the issuance by Westtown Township of a notice of violation of the
provisions of this chapter, each day such violation shall continue shall
be deemed a separate offense subject to a like fine and penalty.
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 57, Building Construction, Article II, Building Code.
§ 61-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-3
1:109
§ 63-3. Burning of brush, grass or wood.
It shall henceforth be unlawful to burn or authorize (or, on one's own
property, to permit) another to burn brush, grass, wood or other materials
outdoors anywhere within the township, unless the fire is confined within
an enclosure which meets the requirements of § 63-2 above or if:
§ 63-4. Burning of leaves or commercial/industrial waste.
It shall henceforth be unlawful to burn or authorize (or, on one's own
property, to permit) another to burn leaves or commercial/industrial waste
material outdoors anywhere within the township at any time.
§ 63-5. Burning on public roads.
It shall henceforth be unlawful to burn or authorize (or, on one's own
property, to permit) another to burn leaves, brush, grass, wood, paper,
rubbish or other materials, or to light any fire upon or within five feet of a
public road or curb, or to light any fire within five feet of a utility pole or
utility equipment.
§ 63-6. Permission required to burn on private property.
It shall henceforth be unlawful to kindle a fire upon the land of another,
without the permission of the owner thereof, which permission, except in
the case of a family member or employee, shall be in writing.
§ 63-7. Fire ban due to drought.
It shall henceforth be unlawful to light or authorize (or, on one's own
property, to permit) another to light or attempt to light any outdoor fire
when a ban on such fires has been publicly announced by the Board of
Supervisors, or their authorized representative, in a time of drought.
§ 63-8. Authority to extinguish fires.
Any fire on public or private property may be extinguished by the local
fire company having jurisdiction, either with or without the consent of the
landowner or person in charge, if, in the opinion of the Westtown Township
Fire Marshal or a Westtown-East Goshen police officer, such fire constitutes
a danger to persons or property.
A. An open fire is at least 15 feet from a building; and
B. There is a cleared area free of trees, shrubs and other combustible
materials of at least 15 feet around it; and
C. There is someone in attendance; and
D. In large areas such as fields or woods, in addition to Subsections A
through C above, adequate manpower and equipment are available to
prevent its spread.
§ 63-3 WESTTOWN CODE § 63-9
1:110
§ 63-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 77
ENERGY CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 57.
§ 77-1. Adoption of Energy Conservation Code.
A certain document, being marked and designated as the "BOCA National
Energy Conservation Code, Seventh Edition, 1993," as published by the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., be and is
hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the Township of
Westtown in the County of Chester, State of Pennsylvania, for the control
of buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA
National Energy Conservation Code are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 77-2 of this chapter.
§ 77-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
A. The Pennsylvania State Building Energy Conservation Act 222, as
amended by Act 98 of 1985 and administered by Westtown Township for
Use Group R residential buildings, is hereby added in its entirety and
becomes the required standard for Use Group R structures.
B. Section E-101.5 is added to read as follows:
§ 63-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-2
1:111
§ 77-3. Saving clause.18
Nothing in this chapter or in the Energy Conservation Code hereby adopted
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court,
or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or cause of action
acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor shall
any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this chapter.
Chapter 80
EROSION, SEDIMENT CONTROL AND GRADING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 57.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
149.
Trees — See Ch. 158.
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 80-1. Purpose; title; statutory authority.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate modification of natural terrain and
alteration of drainage by providing for certain runoff, erosion and sediment
control measures within Westtown Township (the "township") to protect
public health, safety and welfare. This chapter shall be known and may be
cited as the "Westtown Township Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Grading
Control Ordinance." It implements Title 25, Rules and Regulations, Part 1,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection,
Subpart C, Protection of Natural Resources, Article II, Water Resources,
Chapter 102, Erosion Control.
§ 80-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this code shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or
is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each
section of this code that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 77-2 WESTTOWN CODE § 80-2
1:112
BEDROCK — The solid, undisturbed rock in place either at the ground
surface or beneath surficial soil deposits.
BORROW PIT — An open pit from which soil is excavated as a singleincident
for use at a single construction site.
DESIGN STORM — A storm with a one-hundred-year frequency.
DEVELOPMENT —
EARTHMOVING — Any act by which soil or bedrock is cut into, quarried,
displaced or relocated.
EROSION — The process by which soil and bedrock are worn away by the
action of wind, water and climate.
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical elevation of the ground surface prior to
earthmoving or filling.
FILL — A deposit of soil or other materials placed by man.
FINISHED GRADE — The final vertical elevation of the ground after
development.
GRADING PERMIT — The permit required to be issued prior to the
disturbance of the topography and vegetation of land in connection with the
conduct of activities regulated by this chapter.
NATURAL GROUND SURFACE — The ground surface in its original state
before any earthmoving, filling or stripping.
OPEN-PIT MINING — The continuing or recurring removal of material
below the ground surface by open excavation.
PERMIT — A grading permit.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, agency,
unincorporated association, municipal corporation or agency within the
State of Pennsylvania or any combination thereof.
SEDIMENT — Earth and rock in suspension in water or settled out of water
as a deposit on land or beds of bodies of water.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which sediment is deposited.
SITE — Any lot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or parcels
of land under one ownership where earthmoving, filling or stripping is, was
or will be performed.
SOIL — All earth material of whatever origin that overlies bedrock.
STRIPPING — The removal of vegetation and/or topsoil.
A. Any subdivision; or
Any alteration of land not for agricultural or conservation purposes
which includes earthmoving, filling or stripping on a tract of one or
more acres, including, but not limited to, road construction; utility
installation; public, commercial or industrial facility construction; and
mining and quarrying; including water resource management.
B.
§ 80-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-2
1:113
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial swale, stream, channel, drain or
culvert in which waters flow continuously or intermittently.
§ 80-3. Activities regulated; permit required.
Whenever the topography and vegetation are to be disturbed, a plan for the
control of erosion and sediment is required. The following regulations shall
apply to any person engaging in activities which disturb the topography and
vegetation of land:
§ 80-4. Application for permit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to do any site work in conjunction
with development, including but not limited to stripping, grading,
earthmoving, filling and establishment of open pit mines or borrow pits,
for any purpose without first securing a grading permit ("permit").
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to pave, fill, strip or change the
existing grade of any land within the township without first securing a
grading permit.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, modify, block, divert or
affect the natural overland or subsurface flow of stormwater within the
township without first securing a permit.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect or install any dam,
ditch, culvert, drain pipe, bridge or any other structure or construction
affecting the drainage of any premises in the township without first
securing a permit.
E. Whenever the topography or vegetation is to be disturbed, and the
proposal involves less than one acre, a permit shall be required, subject
to Subsection F of this section, but no fee shall be payable.
F. No permit shall be required hereunder for:
(1) Any activity for which a permit must be obtained from any agency
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
(2) Normal agricultural operations;
(3) Any developed residential lot where the following conditions are
met: the aggregate area stripped at one time does not exceed 5,000
square feet; the grade change does not exceed six inches; all bare
earth is promptly seeded, sodded or otherwise effectively protected
from erosion; and the earthmoving does not involve a quantity of
material in excess of 100 cubic yards; or
(4) Earthmoving incident to construction of individual wells and
sewage disposal systems.
A. Any person proposing to engage in activity requiring a permit
hereunder shall apply for a permit by written application, which shall
§ 80-2 WESTTOWN CODE § 80-4
1:114
§ 80-5. Data required for permit.
The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a plan of the property
showing:
include the applicant's agreement to comply with the regulations in
§ 80-8 hereof upon issuance of the permit.
B. The applicant is encouraged to consult with the surrounding
municipalities which can be affected by, or can affect, the proposed land
development. He/she should also consult the Westtown Township
ordinances and Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development,
which regulate the development of land within the township.
C. The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to rather than in
substitution of those provisions of Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land
Development, relating to storm and surface drainage and stormwater
management, grading and erosion control, and the stormwater
management criteria of said Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land
Development. However, the Township Engineer, in his sole discretion,
can authorize variance from the strict adherence to this chapter when a
subdivision or land development application is being reviewed by the
township under Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development, and
when, in such review procedure, he/she determines that the data
required to be submitted in an application for a permit hereunder has
been included in the subdivision or land development plans and
supporting documentation in substantial compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
D. A separate application shall be required for each operation regulated
hereby. Three copies of all the documents referred to in § 80-5 hereof
shall be submitted with each application, one of which, at the discretion
of the Township Engineer, shall be submitted to the Chester County
Conservation District for review and comment. At any time when the
township does not have either an employed or regulatory retained
Engineer or firm of engineers, all applications shall automatically be
forwarded to the said District for such purpose.
A. An area plan, or plans, describing existing and proposed features of the
area surrounding the site of work, including topography, existing
vegetation, watercourses, man-made features, the affected watersheds
and other pertinent natural features. This may be in the form of a recent
USGS map with the property and required features located thereon.
B. A topographical survey of the site, at a suitable scale of no less than one
inch equals 50 feet and contour interval of no more than two feet zero
inches, prepared by a registered surveyor or registered engineer,
including also a boundary line survey, the location and description of
vegetative cover, soil types (available from Chester County Soil
Conservation District) and any other pertinent existing natural or manmade
features.
§ 80-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:115
§ 80-6. Special requirements for permit.
When the area of site to be disturbed exceeds one acre, or when sites are
environmentally sensitive because of the presence of watercourses or usual
drainage conditions, the Township Engineer may require any or all of the
additional information. This information shall be supplied when the area to
be disturbed exceeds five acres and it shall then be prepared by a registered
professional civil engineer, agronomist or other professional qualified in
hydrology.
C. An improvements plan at the same scale as the topographical survey
showing and describing all changes to the site, including cuts, fills,
structures, paving and utilities. (This may be combined with the
topographical survey of Subsection B of this section on simple projects.)
D. A written description of soil erosion and sediment and control measures
(with appropriate plans and specifications), in accordance with
standards and specifications of the USDA Soil Conservation Service,
Chester County Conservation District and township ordinances,
including, without limitation, retention basins or other control
measures necessary to limit the rate of stormwater runoff to comply
with the requirements of § 80-6C hereof.
E. A time schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion
dates of the development sequence, the expected date of completion of
construction of each of the measures referred to in Subsection D of this
section and the time of exposure of each area prior to the completion of
such measures.
A. A plan shall indicate present and proposed sources, storage and
disposition of water being channeled through or across the site,
together with elevations, gradients and maximum flow rates. The
application shall describe the work to be performed, the materials to be
used and the manner, or method, or performance, including provisions
for protecting and maintaining existing drainage facilities, whether on
public or private property.
B. Calculations to determine runoff shall be based on the Soil-Cover
Complex Method, which is available from the USDA Soil Conservation
Service, West Chester, or if the applicant can demonstrate the
inappropriateness of such method, calculations may be based upon
other generally accepted and applicable engineering methods. The
design criteria for storm sewer piping, inlet systems, retention basin,
spillways, culverts, swales and all related facilities shall be those
published by the USDA Soil Conservation Service and available in its
office in West Chester. The coefficient of runoff used for all areas
upstream of any drainage structure shall be computed on the basis of
the projected land use contained in the Township Comprehensive Plan.
C. The following provisions shall apply to the carrying and disposal of
stormwater runoff:
§ 80-5 WESTTOWN CODE § 80-6
1:116
§ 80-7. Approval of permit.
The Township Engineer shall approve and issue all permits in letter form.
Fees, as set forth in § 80-10 hereof, shall be collected directly by the
township.
§ 80-8. Regulations for permit holders and others.
(1) All drainage facilities shall be designed in the most practical
fashion to control surface water runoff in such a manner as to
prevent erosion and flooding. Such facilities shall be designed to
retard the rate of stormwater runoff to approximately the same rate
as that existing prior to construction of the project.
(2) The applicant shall agree to the granting and recording of
easements for drainage facilities, including acceptance of the
discharge of water from the property of others, provisions for
maintenance of slopes and swales and access for the maintenance
of anti-erosion facilities.
D. 19If load-bearing fill is proposed, a soils investigation report shall be
submitted which shall consist of test borings, laboratory testings and
engineering analysis to correlate surface and subsurface conditions
with the proposed grading plan. The results of the investigation shall
include data regarding the nature, distribution and supporting ability of
existing soils and rocks on the site, conclusions and recommendations
to ensure stable soil conditions and groundwater control, as applicable.
The township may require such supplemental reports and data as is
deemed necessary by the Township Engineer. The following provisions
shall apply to plans involving fill:
(1) Fills toeing out on natural slopes steeper than four horizontal to
one vertical shall not be made unless approved by the Township
Engineer after receipt of a report by a registered professional
engineer, qualified in soils analysis, certifying that he/she has
investigated the property, made soil tests, and that, in his opinion,
such steeper slopes will safely support the proposed fill.
(2) Natural and/or existing slopes exceeding five horizontal to one
vertical shall be benched or continuously steeped into competent
materials as determined by the Township Engineer, prior to placing
all classes of fill.
A. The permittee is responsible for any property damage or personal
injury caused by his activity authorized by the permit.
B. No person shall modify, fill, excavate, pave or regrade land in any
manner as to endanger or damage public or private property, or to
cause physical damage or personal injury. All precautions will be taken
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 80-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-8
1:117
to prevent any damage to adjoining streets, sidewalks, buildings and
other structures which could be caused by settling, cracking, erosion or
sediment.
C. No person shall fail to adequately maintain in good operating order any
drainage facility on his premises. All watercourses, drainage ditches,
culverts, drain pipes and drainage structures shall be kept open and
free-flowing at all times.
D. No person shall deposit or place any debris or other material in any
watercourses or drainage structure in such a manner as to obstruct free
flow.
E. The owner of any property on which any work has been done, pursuant
to a permit granted under this chapter, shall continuously maintain and
repair all graded surfaces and anti-erosion devices such as retaining
walls, drainage structures or means, planting and ground cover,
installed or completed. The obligation shall apply not only to the permit
holder, but also to his successors in title to the property.
F. All finish graded surfaces shall be seeded, sodded, planted or otherwise
protected from erosion immediately upon completion of the grading
operation, and shall be watered, tended and maintained until growth is
well established. The disturbance and duration of exposure shall be
kept to a practical minimum.
G. Precautions shall be taken to prevent the unnecessary removal of trees
and to assure their protection by suitable tree wells, as determined by
the Township Engineer.
H. When required, adequate provision shall be made for dust control
measures as determined by the Township Engineer.
I. All plans and specifications accompanying applications for permits shall
include provisions for both temporary and permanent erosion and
sediment control.
J. The design, installation and maintenance of erosion and sediment
control measures shall be accomplished in accordance with standards
and specifications established by the USDA Soil Conservation Service
and the Chester County Soil Conservation District, except as otherwise
stipulated in this or other applicable township ordinances.
K. A quality control program is critical for fills. Therefore, wherever loadbearing
fill material is to be used, each layer of compacted fill shall be
tested to determine its dry density per ASTM D 1556. The density of
each layer shall not be less than 95% of maximum dry density as
determined by ASTM D 1557.
L. Inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the general
procedure outlined in § 80-9.
§ 80-8 WESTTOWN CODE § 80-8
1:118
§ 80-9. Inspections.
§ 80-10. Fees.
A fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors
is required upon initial submission of an application under this chapter,
except as provided by § 80-3D. Cost of inspections will be billed to the
applicant as inspections are completed at the rate as set from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. Payments shall be made within 30
days and no occupancy permits will be issued until all payments have been
made. If the applicant has paid a fee under another township ordinance
which is applicable to the requirements of this chapter, such as Chapter
149, Subdivision and Land Development, the Zoning Officer may waive any
or all of the fees under this chapter as he/she determines to be equitable.
If an application involves less than one acre, no fee will be required. The
permittee shall also be responsible for reimbursement to the township of
cost of review of the plans and application charged to the township by the
Township Engineer.
M. Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and be subject
to review at all times by the Township Engineer.
N. Major modifications of the approved application and plans shall be
submitted to the township and reprocessed in the same manner as the
original application and plans. Field modifications of a minor nature
may be authorized by the Township Engineer provided that written
authorization is given to the person performing work pursuant to this
chapter, with a copy forwarded to the Soil and Water Conservation
District.
A. All inspections shall be the responsibility of the Township Engineer or,
in his absence, a qualified person acceptable to the township. The
permittee shall notify the Township Engineer 48 hours before any work
is to be done.
B. Inspections will be carried out on a random basis, except as stated in
Subsection D of this section. However, a set of "as-built" plans shall be
on file at the site and at the township office, and, if required by § 80-6
hereof, they shall be authenticated by a registered professional
engineer.
C. Engineering check notes shall accompany all "as-built" plans with
structural or mechanical measures and serve as supporting evidence
that meet standards and specifications as contained herein.
D. A final inspection shall be conducted by the Township Engineer to
ensure compliance with this chapter. Satisfactory compliance with this
chapter shall be necessary before issuance of an occupancy permit, if
applicable.
§ 80-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-11
1:119
§ 80-11. Revocation or suspension.
Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the
Board of Supervisors of the township, after notice to the permit holder for:
§ 80-12. Expiration and renewal.20
Every permit issued hereunder shall expire at the end of the period of
time set out in the permit. The permittee shall fully perform and complete
all of the work required to be done within the time limit specified in the
permit. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work within the
specified time, he/she shall, within 30 days prior to expiration of the permit,
present in writing to the township a request for an extension of time, setting
forth therein the reasons for the requested extension. If, in the discretion
of the Township Engineer, such an extension is warranted, he/she may
grant additional time for the completion of the work. Where the Township
Engineer determines that the extension of time will require a substantial
modification of the runoff and erosion control plan by the Soil and Water
Conservation District, any extension of a permit shall be subject to approval
of such revised plans in accordance with the applicable procedure of this
chapter.
§ 80-13. Performance bond.
The Township Engineer, before issuing a permit for a project which exceeds
five acres, shall require cash bond or corporate surety bond in a form
satisfactory to him/her and the Township Solicitor conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the control measures and other conditions specified
in the permit within the time specified, or within any extension thereof
granted by the Township Engineer, in the amount of the total estimated cost
of all control measures and the cost of safeguards for adjoining properties.
Said bond may be combined with a bond filed under Chapter 149,
Subdivision and Land Development. Each bond shall be maintained and
renewed annually and shall be executed by a surety to a guaranty company
qualified to transact business in the state.
A. Failure to carry out the control measures described in the application at
the appropriate times as specified in the applicable time schedule or
within such reasonable extension as may be granted by the Township
Engineer;
B. Violation of any other condition of the permit;
C. Violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable law,
ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the work; and
D. Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or
creating a nuisance, hazard or endangering human life or the property
of others.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 80-11 WESTTOWN CODE § 80-14
1:120
§ 80-14. Remedies.
§ 80-15. Violations and penalties.
For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner,
general agent or contractor of a building or premises where such violation
has been committed or shall exist; the lessee or tenant of an entire building
or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist;
the owner, general agent, contractor, lessee or any other tenant of any part
of a building or premises in which part such violation has been committed or
shall exist; and the general agent, architect, contractor or any other person
who knowingly commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who
maintains any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist,
shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District
Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may
be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day
or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
A. If at any state the work does not conform to the permit, including
condition thereof, or to the plans and specifications, including
modifications thereof, or to the approved runoff and erosion control
plan, a written notice to comply shall be given to the permittee. Such
notice shall set forth the nature of corrections required and the time
within which corrections should be made. Upon failure to comply within
the time specified, the permittee shall be considered in violation of the
chapter, in which case the bond, if any, shall be forfeited and penalties
imposed under § 80-15 of this chapter.
B. In case of paving, filling, stripping, grading or regrading; any
disturbing, modifying, blocking or diverting the natural overland
subsurface flow of stormwater; or any construction, erection and
installation of any dam, ditch, culvert, drain pipe, bridge or any other
structure or obstruction affecting the drainage of any premises, in
violation of this chapter, or any regulations made pursuant thereto, the
proper township authorities, in addition to other remedies provided by
law, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent
such unlawful activity; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to
prevent the use of, in or about such premises. In addition, upon the
failure of any permit holder to complete the control measures specified
in his application, the township may, after revoking such permit,
proceed to complete such measures itself and recover the cost thereof
from the permittee or his surety.
§ 80-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-15
1:121
Chapter 84
FIRE HYDRANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 87.
§ 84-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE HYDRANT — A large discharge pipe with a valve for drawing water
from a water main, to which hoses can be attached for the purpose of firefighting
operations.
§ 84-2. Installation standards.
Any new fire hydrants installed in Westtown Township shall meet the
following minimum requirements as referenced from the National Fire
Protection Association Fire Protection Handbook, most recent edition:
A. The size of pipe. As a general rule, pipe less than six inches in diameter
should not be used for fire service. Six-inch pipe shall only be used
when looped in a gridiron where no leg is greater than 600 feet in
length. In congested districts, it is recommended that distributors shall
not be less than eight inches in diameter and interconnected within
every 600 feet. On principal streets and for all long lines, the
distributors shall be 12 inches or larger.
B. Pressure characteristics of systems. Minimum static pressures shall not
fall below 65 psig.
C. Minimum fire flows.
(1) For areas consisting of groupings of one-family and two-family
dwellings, not more than two stories high, the minimum fire flows
shall be provided as per the following table:
TABLE 17-3B
Fire Flows for Groups of Dwellings
Exposure
Distances
(feet)
Required Fire Flow
(gpm)
Over 100 500
31 to 100 750 to 1,000
§ 80-15 WESTTOWN CODE § 84-2
1:122
§ 84-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 87
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 57.
Open burning — See Ch. 63.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 84.
§ 87-1. Adoption of Fire Prevention Code.
A certain document, being marked and designated as the "BOCA National
Fire Prevention Code, Tenth Edition, 1996," as published by the Building
Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., be and is hereby
adopted as the "Fire Prevention Code" of the Township of Westtown in
the County of Chester, State of Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings
and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as
if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in § 87-2 of this chapter.
§ 87-2. Additions, insertions, deletions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
11 to 30 1,000
10 or less 1,500
(2) The above required fire flows are the minimum requirements. For
other type occupancies, the Fire Marshal reserves the right to
require higher fire flows or pressures based on the needs of the
particular occupancy.
A. Section F.101.1 (page 3) title shall have inserted therein "Westtown
Township" as the name of jurisdiction.
§ 84-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-2
1:123
§ 87-3. Establishment of limits.
Section F.3003.2 to be determined by the Code Official.
Chapter 99
INSURANCE
B. Section F.107.2.3, Permit and Fee Requirements, to be determined by
the Code Official.
C. Section F.112.3, Penalty for Violations:
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this code shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or
is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each
section of this code that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.
§ 87-2 WESTTOWN CODE § 87-3
1:124
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 5-1-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-1]
§ 99-1. General provisions.
§ 99-2. Fire loss certificate.
§ 99-3. Payment of claims.
A. No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay
a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within
the Township where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the
structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the insuring agent is
furnished by the Township Treasurer with a municipal certificate
pursuant to Section 508(b) of Act 98 of 1992 as amended, 40 P.S.
§ 638(b), and unless there is compliance with Section 508(c) of Act 98 of
1992 as amended, 40 P.S. § 638(c) and the provisions of this article.
A. The Township Treasurer or Assistant Treasurer shall, within 14
business days of the written request of the named insured and receipt
of a certification fee established by resolution of the Board from time to
time, provide a fire loss certificate to the insuring agent specifying:
(1) The tax description and physical address of the property;
(2) The name and address of the insuring agent;
(3) The date agreed upon by the insuring agent and the named insured
as the date of the receipt of a loss report of the claim; and
(4) The amount of any delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user
charges against the property and the amount of any costs incurred
by the Township for the removal, repair or securing of a building or
other structure on the property.
(a) A tax, assessment, penalty or user charge becomes delinquent
at the time and on the date a lien could otherwise have been
filed against the property by the Township under applicable
law or ordinance.
B. Upon receipt of a fire loss certificate showing any costs owed, the
insuring agent shall return the bill to the Township Treasurer and
transfer to the Township an amount from the insurance proceeds
necessary to pay the taxes, assessments, penalties, charges and costs
shown on the fire loss certificate. The Township shall receive the
amount and credit it to payment of the items shown in the fire loss
certificate.
A. No insuring agent doing business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a
§ 99-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-3
1:125
structure located within Westtown Township under the terms of Section
508(a) of the Insurance Company Law of 1921, as amended, 40 P.S.
§ 638(a), unless the insuring agent is furnished with a certificate
pursuant to § 99-2A of this article and unless there is compliance with
the procedures set forth in § 99-2B and § 99-3 of this article.
B. Where the loss agreed to between the named insured and the insuring
agent is less than 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire
policies covering the building or other structure, the insuring agent
shall pay the claim of the named insured in accordance with the policy
terms.
C. Where the loss agreed upon by the named insured and the insuring
agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all
fire policies covering the building or structure, the following
procedures must be followed:
(1) The insuring agent shall transfer funds from the insurance
proceeds to the designated officer of the Township in the aggregate
of $2,000 for each $15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that
amount of a claim, this section to be applied such that if the claim is
$15,000 or less, the amount transferred to the Township shall be
$2,000; or
(2) If at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named
insured and the insuring agent, the named insured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure, the insuring agent shall
transfer to the Township from the insurance proceeds the amount
specified in the estimate.
(3) The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all
companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or
other structure.
(4) After the transfer, the named insured shall submit a contractor's
signed estimate within 60 days of the costs of removing, repairing
or securing the building or other structure, and the designated
officer shall return the amount of the funds transferred to the
Township in excess of the estimate to the named insured, if the
Township has not commenced to remove, repair or secure the
building or other structure.
(5) Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the Township shall do
the following:
(a) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in a separate
fund to be used solely as security against the total costs of
removing, repairing, or securing the building or structure
which are incurred by the Township. Such costs shall include
all reasonable and customary engineering, legal or
administrative costs incurred by the Township in connection
§ 99-3 WESTTOWN CODE § 99-3
1:126
§ 99-4. Notification.
§ 99-5. Violations and penalties.
with such removal, repair, or securing of the building or any
proceedings related thereto; and
(b) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the Township with the name and address
of the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds
and the name and address of the name insured, certify that the
proceeds have been received by the Township and notify the
named insured that the procedures under this subsection shall
be followed; and
(c) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all
applicable regulations and orders of the Township and the
required proof of such completion received by the designated
officer:
[1] If the Township has not incurred any costs for repairs,
removal or securing, including all administrative,
personnel, overhead, engineering and legal costs, the
funds shall be returned to the named insured.
[2] If the Township has incurred costs for repairs, removal or
securing of the building or other structure, including all
administrative, personnel, overhead, engineering and
legal costs, the costs shall be paid from the fund and if
excess funds remain, the Township shall transfer the
remaining funds to the named insured.
(6) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Township to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the Township and the
named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
transfer of funds to the named insured if some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
A. Upon the enactment of this article, the Township Secretary shall file an
exact copy of the article with the Department of Community Affairs
together with the name, position and phone number of the municipal
official responsible for compliance with Section 508 of the Insurance
Company Law of 1921, as amended, 40 P.S. § 638.
A. Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
shall be convicted of a violation of any provision of this article or rule
and/or regulation issued pursuant to this article before any District
Justice shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 per
violation, together with attorneys' fees and the costs of prosecution,
§ 99-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-5
1:127
and/or sentenced to a period of imprisonment in the county jail for a
term not to exceed 30 days.
§ 99-5 WESTTOWN CODE § 99-5
1:128
Chapter 105
MECHANICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 57.
§ 105-1. Adoption of Mechanical Code.
A certain document, being marked and designated as the "International
Mechanical Code, 1996," as published by the International Code Council,
Inc., and the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc.,
and the International Conference of Buildings, and the Southern Building
Code Congress International, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the
Mechanical Code of the Township of Westtown in the County of Chester,
State of Pennsylvania, for regulating the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to and use of mechanical systems in the Township of
Westtown, providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees.
§ 105-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. Section M-100.1, Title, shall have inserted therein "Westtown
Township" as the name of jurisdiction.
B. Section P-114.3, Fee Schedule. Permit fees for all mechanical work shall
be as determined by the Board of Supervisors of Westtown Township.
C. Section P-117.4 Penalties. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this code shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding
brought before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution.
In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion
thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense, and each section of this code that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
D. Section P-118.2 Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue
any mechanical work in or about the structure after having been served
with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is
§ 99-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-2
1:129
Chapter 107
MUNICIPAL CLAIMS AND LIENS
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each
section of this code that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.
§ 105-2 WESTTOWN CODE § 105-2
1:130
ARTICLE I
Collection of Fees
[Adopted 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-8; amended in its entirety
3-5-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-4]
§ 107-1. Fees to be added to unpaid claim.
Westtown Township hereby approves the following fee schedule for the
collection of unpaid claims, which fees shall be added to the unpaid claim:
A. Notice expense. A fee, not to exceed $50, plus postage, shall be added
to the unpaid claim for providing notice of delinquency pursuant to
§ 7106 of the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act.21 Westtown Township
may hire a private company to perform this service and add the amount
of this charge to the unpaid claim.
B. Collection fees.
Type of Fee Amount of Fee
Handling fee for returned check $30
Handling fee to issue refund check $20
Bookkeeping fee for payment plan of three months
or less
$25
Bookkeeping fee for payment plan of more than
three months $50
$50
Guaranteed payoff fee $25
C. Legal fees.
Type of Fee Amount of Fee
Initial review and sending first demand letter $160
File lien and prepare satisfaction $250
Prepare writ of scire facias $250
Obtain reissued writ $30
Prepare and mail letter under Pa.R.C.P. No. 237.1 $30
Prepare motion for alternate service $250
Prepare request for production of documents in
preparation for trial
$25
Prepare pretrial memorandum $150
Prepare motion for judgment for want of sufficient
affidavit of defense pursuant to 53 P.S. § 7271
$150
Prepare default judgment $175
Prepare writ of execution $800
21.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 107-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-1
1:131
§ 107-2. Costs to be added to unpaid claims.
In addition, the reasonable and necessary out-of-pocket charges, costs,
expenses, commissions and fees incurred in collection, such as but not
limited to, postage, title searches, prothonotary fees and sheriff fees, shall
be added to the unpaid claims.
§ 107-3. Interest.
Interest will be assessed upon all delinquent unpaid municipal claims from
the date of delinquency at a rate of 10% per annum and added to the unpaid
claim.
§ 107-4. Collection procedures.
The following collection procedures are hereby established in accordance
with the Act:22
Type of Fee Amount of Fee
Attendance at sale; review schedule of distribution
and resolve distribution issues
$400
Continue sheriff sale $ 50
Petition to assess damages $ 50
Petition for free and clear sale $400
Prepare bankruptcy proof of claim $100
Services not covered above At an hourly rate
between $60
and $225 per
hour
A. At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney fees in
connection with the collection of an account, Westtown Township or its
designee shall mail or cause to be mailed, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a notice of such intention to the taxpayer or other
entity liable for the account (the "property owner").
B. If the certified mail notice is undelivered, then, at least 10 days prior to
the assessing or imposing such attorney fees, Westtown Township or its
designee shall mail or cause to be mailed, by first class mail, a second
notice to the property owner.
C. All notices required by this article shall be mailed to the property
owner's last known post office address as recorded in the records or
other information of Westtown Township, or such other address as it
may be able to obtain from the County Office of Assessment and
Revision of Taxes.
22.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 107-1 WESTTOWN CODE § 107-4
1:132
§ 107-5. Related action.
The proper officials of Westtown Township are hereby authorized and
empowered to take such additional action as they may deem necessary or
appropriate to implement this article.
§ 107-6. Appointment of Special Counsel.
Westtown Township appoints Michelle R. Portnoff, Esquire, as Special
Counsel for the limited purpose of collecting delinquent municipal claims
and hereby authorizes her, and attorneys under her supervision, to sign
any and all documents, including tax and municipal claims, on behalf of the
Township as its counsel.
D. Each notice as described above shall include the following:
(1) The type of tax or other charge, the date it became due and the
amount owed, including penalty and interest;
(2) A statement of Westtown Township's intent to impose or assess
attorney fees within 30 days after the mailing of the first notice, or
within 10 days after the mailing of the second notice;
(3) The manner in which the assessment or imposition of attorney fees
may be avoided by payment of the account; and
(4) The place of payment for accounts and the name and telephone
number of Westtown Township's representative designated as
responsible for collection matters.
§ 107-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-6
1:133
Chapter 113
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 63.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 116.
Solid waste — See Ch. 140.
Trees — See Ch. 158.
Motorized vehicles — See Ch. 167.
§ 113-1. Park rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations are hereby established for the
management and protection of parks and playgrounds located within the
Township of Westtown, hereinafter designated "the parks":
A. The parks shall be open daily to all township residents and their
accompanied guests between sunrise and sunset. No person, other than
authorized employees of the township, shall be in the park at any time
between sunset and sunrise.
B. No person shall injure, deface, remove, cut or damage any of the trees,
plants, shrubs, turf, buildings, structures or fixtures herein, or any
other property of the township located within the parks.
C. No person shall remove any bench, seat or table from the parks or
change the location thereof without written permission from the
Township Manager.
D. No person shall conduct himself within the parks so as to annoy any
other person using the parks for recreational purposes.
E. No person or organization shall hold any meeting or gathering
assembled through advertisement or public notice, or any gathering
otherwise assembled and composed of 10 persons, within the limits of
the parks, without having first obtained written permission from the
Township Manager. Such permit shall indicate the location of the park
where such gathering or meeting shall be held, and the hours of the
planned event. Such gathering shall not be held at any other location or
time within the park. The application for permit shall also indicate the
sponsoring person(s) or organization(s), the approximate number of
persons attending the planned event, the equipment to be used, and
such other pertinent information. The application for such permit shall
be in the name of a person who shall be responsible for seeing that all
refuse left by the group shall be placed in proper containers or removed
from the grounds before leaving the park. The application for such
permit shall be made at least two weeks prior to the time of the planned
use for which permission is being requested.
§ 107-6 WESTTOWN CODE § 113-1
1:134
F. For all gatherings for which police security is deemed necessary by the
Township Manager, such security must be paid for by the sponsor(s) of
the gathering.
G. The township may require a deposit from the sponsoring
organization(s) or party proposing to hold a meeting or gathering
within the limits of the parks. Such deposit, in an amount as set from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, is refundable in
part or in full subject to the conditions described in Subsections F and
K.
H. Motor vehicles of any kind are not allowed on park grounds without
special permission from the Township Manager, except those vehicles
used in the course of park maintenance or other necessary activity.
Parking on the property is prohibited except in authorized areas during
normal park hours. Bicycles are not permitted on any township park
trail or in any open space areas.
I. Sound equipment (amplification) shall be permitted in the parks only by
special written permission from the Township Manager.
J. No person shall set up any booth, table, stand or structure whatsoever
within the limits of the parks without written permission of the
Township Manager.
K. No person shall dispose of any refuse in the parks except in receptacles
designated for their respective purpose. All persons using the parks
shall dispose of all refuse left by them in such proper receptacles. If any
refuse is not disposed of in this manner and the township is put to the
expense of so doing, the organization or party shall forfeit an
appropriate amount of the deposit which may have been placed with the
township to reimburse it for such expense.
L. No person shall injure, deface or destroy any notice, rule or regulation
posted at any place within the parks by authority of the Board of
Supervisors. Nor shall any person post, at any place within the parks,
any notice or placard other than with the written permission of the
Township Manager.
M. No person shall set or maintain any fire in the park except in stoves and
fireplaces maintained for the purpose and located by authority of the
township. The Township Fire Marshal should be contacted when the use
of the Fire Circle is requested.
N. No person, other than an officer of the law, shall carry or discharge a
weapon within the limits of the parks.
O. Swimming or boating is not permitted in any park except in areas
provided and specified for that purpose.
P. All organized athletic events (leagues, tournaments, etc.) shall be
scheduled through the Township Park and Recreation Committee.
§ 113-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-2
1:135
§ 113-2. Oakbourne Mansion rules and regulations.
A. Person(s) signing the permit are responsible for ensuring the
compliance of their guests with these rules and regulations.
B. The person signing the permit must remain on-site during the course of
the event.
C. The permit holder is required to notify their guests of these rules and
regulations and to supply their vendors and employees with a copy of
these rules and regulations.
D. Twenty-four-hour advance notice of event cancellation is required in
order to obtain refund of deposit.
E. Use only the requested and approved facility area and equipment.
Second and third floors and basement are off limits at all times.
F. No alcoholic beverage use is permitted in the mansion or on the
grounds.
G. Smoking is not permitted within the facility.
H. Hours available: 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. (cleaned up and out).
I. Parking only in designated parking lots. No parking on lawn areas.
Large attendance events require special permission to use field area for
additional parking.
J. No nailing, tacking, stapling, etc., to walls or woodwork. Use of candles
is not permitted.
K. Cleanup must be done the day/evening of the event:
(1) Restore room and/or area to good order.
(2) Return chairs and tables to original arrangement.
(3) Separate recyclables and place trash in plastic bags and place in
kitchen. Do not put outside.
(4) Rental equipment. Delivery and pickup not within the hours
outlined in Subsection H above requires special arrangements with
the township prior to issuance of a permit.
(5) All decorations and signs are to be removed the day of the event.
L. All hallways and doors are to be kept clear of all objects at all times by
order of the Township Fire Marshal.
M. For all gatherings for which police security is deemed necessary by the
Township Manager, such security must be paid for by the sponsor(s) of
the event.
§ 113-2 WESTTOWN CODE § 113-2
1:136
§ 113-3. Oakbourne Mansion fee schedule.
§ 113-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
Chapter 116
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 113.
Peddling, soliciting and transient
merchants — See Ch. 119.
Motorized vehicles — See Ch. 167.
§ 116-1. Disturbing the peace defined and prohibited.
Disturbing the peace within the meaning of this chapter shall constitute
the making, causing or permitting to be made anywhere in the Township
N. Failure to comply with any or all of the above enumerated rules and
regulations will result in loss of facility use privileges and forfeiture of
deposit.
A. The fee schedule shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
B. Nonprofit organizations may use the facilities for meetings or training
sessions free of charge upon application to and approval by the Board of
Supervisors.
C. Nonprofit fund-raising affairs are subject to the above-stated fee
schedule.
D. All events, unless otherwise noted, require a deposit as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, refundable upon return
of the mansion to the agreed-upon condition.
§ 113-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-1
1:137
of Westtown any unnecessary noise, clamor, din or other sounds tending
to disturb the peace and quiet of the community, and the carrying on of
any business, trade, transportation, recreation or amusement at a time, in a
place or in a manner which causes any unnecessary noise or disturbances.
Any noise or other sounds shall be considered to be unnecessary and
to constitute disturbing the peace even though they are no louder than
is customary and are the unavoidable sounds or noises attendant upon
the ordinary operation or performance of business, trade, transportation,
recreation or amusement if they are made on Sunday or weekdays during
hours other than the usual and customary for such work or activity. Except
in cases of emergency, no person shall carry on any activity at a time or in
a manner which causes unnecessary annoyance or disturbs the peace and
quiet of the immediate neighborhood.
§ 116-2. Particular conduct prohibited.
Without in any manner intending to limit or restrict the generality of the
above definition of and prohibition against disturbing the peace, the
following are hereby declared to constitute disturbing the peace:
§ 116-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
A. The operation of radios, record players or other electrical or
mechanical instruments, or singing, shouting or playing musical
instruments in a manner and at a time which is generally considered
inappropriate and which unnecessarily disturbs the peace and quiet of
the immediate neighborhood;
B. Prowling or roaming on public streets or private property after sunset
and during hours other than the usual and customary hours for such
activities as walking, jogging, playing, visiting friends and neighbors,
where such activities cause unnecessary annoyance or disturb the
peace and quiet of the immediate surrounding neighborhood;
C. Loafing, loitering or congregating on the street corners or in front of
any place of business or private residence in the township;
D. The discharging on or across the streets or highways of air guns, spring
guns, rifles or firearms of any kind or character whatsoever;
E. Acting in or about the streets or other public places of the township in a
noisy, loud, boisterous and unseemly manner, or in such a manner as to
disturb the peace and quiet of the community.23
23.Editor's Note: Former Section 2(f), regarding domestic or farm animals, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 116-1 WESTTOWN CODE § 116-3
1:138
by the township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
Chapter 119
PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 113. Peace and good order — See Ch. 116.
§ 116-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-3
1:139

ARTICLE I
Transient Retail Merchants
[Adopted 11-18-1985 by Ord. No. 85-4]
§ 119-1. Purpose.
In order to protect the health, safety and general welfare and to secure the
safety of persons and property of the citizens of the Township of Westtown,
Chester County, Pennsylvania, by requiring persons engaged in a transient
retail business to conduct their activities in a proper manner and further, in
order to obtain positive identification of persons who shall so engage in the
township, the Board of Supervisors of said township does hereby enact and
ordain this article.
§ 119-2. Restricted activities; conflict with other ordinances.
From and after the effective date hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person,
whether acting on his own behalf or as the agent, servant and employee
of other persons not exempted by the provisions of § 119-7 hereof, who
is not the holder of a valid and unexpired license issued pursuant to this
article to conduct a transient retail business, which shall mean to engage
in selling, purchasing or soliciting the sale or purchase of food, printed
matter, services, goods, wares or merchandise of any description, or in
soliciting contributions, gifts or pledges of money or any other thing of
value, by visitation to private homes or residences or on the public streets
or highways within Westtown Township; or to engage in selling, soliciting
or taking orders for any goods, wares or merchandise, from a fixed location
within Westtown Township, on a temporary basis, which shall include, but
not be limited to, such activities conducted at the time of special occasions,
or celebrations, for seasonal purposes, or for or in advance of specific yearly
holidays. Nothing herein shall extinguish or modify the requirements placed
on persons engaged in refuse collection or the service of septic systems or
other township ordinances of Westtown Township; the same are intended to
continue in full force and effect.
§ 119-3. Application for license; fee; renewal.
Any person, not exempted by § 119-7 hereof, desiring to obtain a license to
engage in the activities described in § 119-2 hereof, shall make application
therefor in person to the Township Secretary.
A. The applicant shall submit, over his signature, the following
information, certified by the applicant to be true and correct:
(1) Name;
(2) Place and date of birth;
(3) Temporary address;
(4) Residence address;
§ 119-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-3
1:141
§ 119-4. Regulations for conduct of business.
Every person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to the provisions
hereof shall comply with the following regulations while carrying on
business or activities within the township:
(5) Address to which notices under this article shall be directed;
(6) Name and address of employer or principal, if any, and nature of
business or activity thereof;
(7) Nature of business or activity in which applicant wishes to engage
with the township;
(8) Statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted in the
jurisdiction of any crime other than of minor traffic violations and,
if so, of what crime or crimes;
(9) Two current photographs; and
(10) Exhibit county license if required by intended business.
B. Upon submission of such application and the payment of a license fee in
the amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors for all licenses, there shall be issued to the applicant a
license in the form of a card which, unless sooner revoked, shall entitle
the licensee to engage in the activities specified on his application for a
period of 30 days from the date of issuance; provided, however, that
before issuing any license the township police may require 72 hours to
confirm information required in Subsection A, and, further, the
township police may refuse to issue a license to any person if they have
reasonable grounds to believe that the issuance of the license to such
person would endanger the health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the township, and in such case the applicant shall be
required to make application in person to the Township Board of
Supervisors. All license fees shall be paid to the Treasurer of the
township for the use of the township.
C. Licenses may be renewed by the payment of the license fee as provided
for herein and by the submission of a statement that the information
supplied on the original application is still true or correct, or that the
information supplied on the original application should be amended to
reflect any changes since the original application.
A. He/she shall carry his license card at all times and exhibit it upon
request to any peace officer or any person upon whom he/she shall call
or with whom he/she shall talk in carrying on his licensed activities.
B. He/she shall not permit any other person to have possession of his
license card and shall immediately report its loss to the Township Police
Chief. He/she shall not cause or permit his license card to be altered or
defaced.
§ 119-3 WESTTOWN CODE § 119-4
1:142
§ 119-5. Revocation of license.
Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the Westtown-East Goshen
Police Department for failure of the licensee to comply with any of the
regulations set forth in § 119-4 hereof or upon the discovery that the
licensee has made any false statements in his application for license
hereunder.
§ 119-6. Request for reinstatement of license.
Any person whose license has been revoked shall be entitled to appear with
counsel, if he/she so desires, before the Board of Supervisors at a regular
meeting and be heard on behalf of a request for reinstatement of his license.
§ 119-7. Exempt parties.
The following persons are exempted from the licensing requirements of this
article:
C. He/she shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling house without
invitation or permission of the occupant and shall immediately leave
any premises upon request.
D. He/she shall not represent his license card to be an endorsement of
himself or of his goods or services or of the goods or services of his
principal or employer.
E. He/she shall immediately surrender his license card upon revocation of
his license as hereinafter provided.
F. He/she shall conduct his business between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m.
A. Persons soliciting contributions on behalf of organizations or nonprofit
corporations exempted from the provisions of or duly registered
pursuant to 10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq., the Solicitation of Funds for
Charitable Purposes Act, as amended; who, while soliciting, are
possessed of a card or other written evidence of their appointment or
authority to solicit for said organization or corporation.24
B. Farmers engaged in selling only the produce of their own farms from a
truck or other vehicle.
C. Persons who have been licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
to engage in an activity described in § 119-2 hereof, when so engaged;
including, without limitation, real estate, insurance or securities,
brokers and salesmen.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 119-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-7
1:143
§ 119-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
D. Persons engaged in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated
by the owner thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any
charitable or philanthropic purpose.
§ 119-7 WESTTOWN CODE § 119-8
1:144
Chapter 122
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 57. Sewers — See Ch. 132.
§ 122-1. Adoption of Plumbing Code.
A certain document, being marked and designated as the "BOCA
International Plumbing Code, 1995," as published by the Building Officials
and Code Administrators International, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as
the Plumbing Code of the Township of Westtown in the County of Chester,
State of Pennsylvania, regulating the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the
Township of Westtown, providing for the issuance of permits and collection
of fees.
§ 122-2. Modifications, additions and deletions.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. Section 101.1 Title. That these regulations shall be known as the
"Plumbing Code of Westtown Township."
B. Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule. The permit fees for all plumbing work
shall be as determined by the Board of Supervisors of Westtown
Township.
C. Section 106.5.3: eliminated in its entirety.
D. Section 108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this code shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding
brought before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution.
In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion
thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense, and each section of this code that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
E. Section 108.5 Stop-Work Orders.
§ 119-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-2
1:145
§ 122-3. Licensing of plumbers.
Any person who shall continue any plumbing work in or about the
structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe conditions, shall be guilty of a summary offense and shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution.
In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion
thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense, and each section of this code that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
F. Section 306.6.1 Sewer Depth.
Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall
be a minimum of 24 inches below finished grade at the point of septic
tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 36 inches
below grade.
A. Plumber's license. No person shall engage in the practice of plumbing,
either on his own behalf or on behalf of another, either as a master,
journeyman or apprentice plumber, without first securing a license
from the Township Plumbing Official. A resident of Westtown Township
who is not a plumber of any of the foregoing classes, who is not
engaged in the practice of plumbing as an occupation and who limits his
plumbing work to his own property within the township shall not be
required to secure a license.
B. Application for license. Any person desiring to secure such license shall
make application on forms prepared and provided by the township, and
before a license is issued, the Township Plumbing Official shall
determine that the applicant is competent and qualified to practice
plumbing on the level of the license for which he/she is making
application and that, to the extent required by the township, the
applicant is familiar with the provisions of the Plumbing Code. Any
conviction for violating the Plumbing Code or any rule or regulation
promulgated thereunder shall be taken into consideration in
determining whether or not the applicant is competent and qualified.
C. Terms of license, transferability, fees and penalties.
(1) Every license issued by the plumbing official shall be for a period
ending on the 31st day of December next following, and licenses
shall not be transferable. The fee for each such annual license and
for each annual renewal shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors, and shall be paid to the
Plumbing Official before any license or renewal thereof is issued.
(2) If a license is not applied for on or before January 1 of each year or
within 30 days after the applicant has practiced as a competent and
§ 122-2 WESTTOWN CODE § 122-3
1:146
Chapter 126
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 54.
qualified plumber, a penalty of 10% of the license fee shall be
imposed for each month thereafter, provided that in no case shall
the penalty exceed the amount of the license fee.
D. Offenses. The practice of plumbing on each separate job by an
unlicensed person shall constitute a separate offense.
E. Plumbing business. Every person engaged in the business of plumbing
shall employ only licensed plumbers, except that apprentices, helpers
and laborers may be employed where all of their work is supervised by
one or more licensed plumbers.
F. Reciprocity. The Plumbing Official may grant a license upon payment of
the stated fees, without examination, to a holder of a substantially
equivalent license from another jurisdiction, upon satisfying himself
that the standards and qualifications required by the other jurisdiction
are substantially equivalent to those required by Westtown Township.
G. Use of licensee's name by another. No person who has obtained a
plumber's license shall allow his name to be used by another person,
either for the purpose of obtaining permits or for doing business or
work under the license.
H. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPRENTICE — A person who begins his apprenticeship between the
ages of 16 and 40 years, who is engaged in learning the plumbing
trade by working with and assisting a journeyman or master plumber in
the installation, maintenance and repair of plumbing and drainage; and
who is covered by an apprenticeship committee.
JOURNEYMAN — Any person, other than a master or apprentice
plumber, who has demonstrated to the Plumbing Official his practical
knowledge of the installation of plumbing and has been licensed by the
Board to install plumbing under the direction of a master plumber.
MASTER — A person who has demonstrated his skill in planning,
superintending and installing plumbing and who, having satisfied the
Plumbing Official to his knowledge of the rules and regulations
governing the same and as to his business integrity, has been granted a
license as a master plumber.
§ 122-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-1
1:147
§ 126-1. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Secretary of Westtown Township, being marked and designated as
the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council, and as may be amended from time
to time, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code
of Westtown Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania for regulating and
governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and
structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures
are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation
of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the
demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of Property
Maintenance Code on file in the office of the Secretary of Westtown
Township are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in § 126-2 below.
§ 126-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections of the Property Maintenance Code are hereby
revised:
A. Section 101.1 Title, Insert: Westtown Township, Chester County,
Pennsylvania.
B. Section 103.5 Fees, Insert: Fees assessable by the Township for the
administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant to this article
and the Property Maintenance code shall be established by the Board of
Supervisors by resolution from time to time.
C. Section 106.4 Violation penalties, delete in its entirety and replace
with the following: Any person, firm or corporation who violates or
permits a violation of this Code shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding brought before a Magisterial District Judge under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may
be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each
day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this
Code that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
D. Section 112.4 Failure to comply, Insert: Not less than $500 or more
than $1,000.
E. Section 302.4 Weeds, Insert: 10 inches.
F. Section 304.14 Insect screens, Insert: March 1 to November 1.
§ 126-1 WESTTOWN CODE § 126-2
1:148
Chapter 132
SEWER SYSTEM COLLECTION AND CONVEYANCE
REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 57.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 122.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 146.
G. Section 602.3 Heat supply, Insert: October 31 to February 28.
H. Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces, Insert: October 31 to
February 28.
§ 126-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-2
1:149

ARTICLE I
Rents and Charges
[Adopted 11-11-1986 by Ord. No. 86-7]
§ 132-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the
terms used in this article shall be as follows:
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure intended to be used
wholly or in part for the purpose of carrying on a trade, business or
profession or for social, amusement, religious, education, charitable or
public use.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure intended to be used
wholly or in part for the manufacturing, fabricating, processing, cleaning,
laundering or assembling of any product, commodity or article.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or
waterborne wastes or form of energy rejected or escaping from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process, or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct from
sanitary sewage.
PRIVATE DWELLING OR LIVING UNIT — Any structure intended to be
occupied as a whole by one family or an apartment intended to be occupied
by one family or any other one-family living unit.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and commercial
and industrial establishments.
SEWER COLLECTION AGENT — The person charged by the Board of
Supervisors with the duties of collecting all sewer user fees and penalty
charges imposed by the Township and such other duties as may be
prescribed by this article.[Amended 1-4-1993 by Ord. No. 93-1]
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities owned and operated by the Township for
the collection, transportation, treatment or disposal of sanitary sewage.
TOWNSHIP — Westtown Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
§ 132-2. Imposition of charges; sewer districts. [Last amended
12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 97-7]
A. There is hereby imposed upon each property located within the
Township and served by the sewer system quarterly sewer rents or
charges at the rates and payable as hereinafter provided for the use,
whether direct or indirect, of the sewer system.
B. Creation of sewer districts.
(1) There are hereby created five sewer subdistricts in Westtown
Township, pursuant to 53 P.S. § 67507. Those districts shall be
§ 132-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-2
1:151
designated as follows: [Amended 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5;
7-3-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-2]
(a) West Goshen District, comprised of the following subdistricts:
[1] Sewer District I: The district composed of that area of the
Township known as Wedgewood/Westtown Park, and
associated areas, as depicted on the Westtown Township
Sewer District Map.25
[2] Sewer District II: The district composed of those areas of
the Township known as Coventry Village, High Point,
Cobblefield, Westmount Woods, Pleasant Grove, Jefferson
at Westtown, Enclave at Pleasant Wood, and associated
areas, as depicted on the Westtown Township Sewer
District Map.
[3] Sewer District III: The district composed of those areas of
the Township known as Westwood and Kerwood Drives and
East Pleasant Grove Road, and associated areas, as
depicted on the Westtown Township Sewer District Map.
[4] Sewer District IV: The district composed of that area of the
Township west of Wilmington Pike, north of Pleasant
Grove Road, south of Cheyney Drive including Tax Parcels
67-4-20, 67-4-21, and those parcels resulting from the
Greenstone Subdivision (formerly Tax Parcels 67-4-23 and
67-4-23.1).
(b) Westtown Chester Creek District: The district comprised of the
all properties east of the West Goshen District boundary line as
depicted on the Westtown Sewer District Map.
(2) Sewer rental rates for each sewer district in the Township shall be
as set forth in § 132-3 of this article.
C. There is hereby adopted by the Board of Supervisors the Westtown
Township Sewer District Map which shall depict the geographic limits
of each sewer district of the Township, which map shall be amended
from time to time as new sewer districts are added.
D. The effective date of the creation of the sewer districts established
hereby and the imposition of the rates charged in each district shall be
January 5, 1998.
25.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 132-2 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-3
1:152
§ 132-3. Rates for classifications other than those discharging
industrial waste. [Last amended 12-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-0826]
Customer Classifications Rental
A. Each single-family dwelling:
(1) West Goshen Sewer District:
(a) Subdistrict 1 $205 per
quarter
(b) Subdistrict 2 $205 per
quarter
(c) Subdistrict 3 $205 per
quarter
(d) Subdistrict 4 $205 per
quarter
(2) Westtown Chester Creek District $205 per
quarter
B. Each living unit in a multiple-occupancy
building (See Subsection C):
(1) West Goshen Districts $205 per
quarter
(2) Westtown Chester Creek District $205 per
quarter
C. Multiple use: In all sewer districts, in the case
of a combination of one or more private
dwelling or living units or with one or more
commercial establishments in one building and
each thereof having the use of the sewer
system through one sewer connection, then
each such private dwelling or living unit and
each such commercial establishment shall be
charged the applicable rates set forth above as
though each thereof were in a separate
structure and as though each thereof had a
direct and separate connection to the sewer
system.
D. In all sewer districts, each church, per
connection:
$205 per
quarter
26.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 1-1-2020 for the amended
rates.
§ 132-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-3
1:153
Customer Classifications Rental
E. In all sewer districts, each public or private
school (based on the daily average number of
pupils enrolled). Teachers and/or maintenance
personnel shall be classified as pupils for sewer
rental purposes. Enrollment will be calculated
separately for months when school is not in
session
$44 per pupil
per year
F. In all sewer districts, each automobile service
station
$205 per
quarter
G. Multiple Use: In the case of a combination of
one or more private dwelling or living units or
with one or more commercial establishments in
one building and each thereof having the use of
the sewer system through one sewer
connection, then each such private dwelling or
living unit and each such commercial
establishment shall be charged the applicable
rates set forth above as though each thereof
were in a separate structure and as though
each thereof had a direct and separate
connection to the sewer system.
H. In all sewer districts, each public and private
club swimming pool, regardless if in use only
three months:
$205 per
quarter
I. In all sewer districts, each public and private
pool club house:
$205 per
quarter
§ 132-4. Meter rate for nonresidential establishments. [Last
amended 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-327]
A. Sanitary sewage: [Amended 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03;
12-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-0828]
(1) In all sewer districts, the quarterly sewer rates or charges shall be
based on the quantity of water used as evidenced by meter
readings of water meters installed by the water supplier for the
purpose of measuring water purchased from said water supplier
and/or such other meters or measuring devices as may be installed
pursuant to any provisions of this article and shall be subject to the
minimum charge hereinafter provided, as follows:
(a) Quarterly metered flat rate: $13.41 per 1,000 gallons.
27.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date for the amended rates of
1-1-2009.
28.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date for the amended rates of
1-1-2020.
§ 132-3 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-4
1:154
§ 132-5. Measuring volume for purposes of § 132-4.
(2) Regardless of water consumption, the minimum quarterly charge
for sanitary sewage for any use shall be the equivalent rate of a
single-family dwelling (EDU):
(a) Minimum metered flat rate: $205 per quarter.
(3) Multiple use: In the case of a combination of one or more private
dwelling or living units or with one or more commercial
establishments in one building and each thereof having the use of
the sewer system through one sewer connection, then each such
private dwelling or living unit and each such commercial
establishment shall be charged the applicable minimum metered
flat rate set forth above as though each thereof were in a separate
structure and as though each thereof had a direct and separate
connection to the sewer system.
B. Industrial waste:
(1) In the event the Township consents to accept industrial waste into
the sewer system, charges will be made for all waste having total
suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand in excess of the
following concentrations:
(a) Suspended solids: 3 parts per million.
(b) BOD: 250 parts per million.
(2) The total charge for the total volume of waste having
concentrations in excess of the foregoing shalt be determined in
accordance with the following formula:
Total charge:
Q + (0.001 Q (BOD in pps -250) + (0.001 A (ss in ppm -300))
Where:
Q = Metered quantity charge
BOD = Biochemical oxygen demand
ss = Suspended solids
ppm = Part per million
A. Methods of measuring volume.
(1) Whenever a person purchasing all water used from the water
supplier discharges sanitary sewage and/or industrial waste into
the sewer system, the volume of water used, as determined from
meter readings made by or made available to the Township, shall
be used in computing the sewer rentals.
§ 132-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-5
1:155
(2) In cases where persons have sources of water supply in addition to
or other than from the water supplier and discharge sanitary
sewage and/or industrial waste into the sewer system, those
persons may provide a meter on such additional or other sources of
supply. The total amount of water used as shown by these meter
readings will be used in computing the sewer rentals. If no such
meter is installed, the Sewer Collection Agent shall estimate the
total amount of water used for the purpose of determining the
sewer rentals. [Amended 1-4-1993 by Ord. No. 93-1]
(3) In cases where persons use water from the water supplier and/or
from any other source such that all or any part of the water so used
is not discharged into the sewer system, the quantity of water used
to determine the sewer rentals shall be computed by one of the
following methods:
(a) By placing a meter or measuring device on the sewer
connection. The readings from this meter or measuring device
shall be used in computing the sewer rentals.
(b) By placing a meter or measuring device on the effluent not
discharging into the sewer system. The reading from this
meter or measuring device will then be deducted from the total
water meter readings and the remainder will be used in
computing the sewer rentals.
(c) When, in the opinion of the Sewer Collection Agent, it is not
desirable or not practical to install devices to continuously
determine the quantity of water not discharged to the sewer
system, the sewer manager will determine in such manner and
by such method as he/she may prescribe the percentage of
metered water discharged into the sewer system and the
quantity of water used to compute the sewer rentals shall be
the percentage so determined of the quality measured by the
water meter or meters. Any dispute as to the estimated amount
shall be submitted to the Township after notice of the estimate,
whose decision on the matter shall be final for the current
calendar year. [Amended 1-4-1993 by Ord. No. 93-1]
B. Measuring devices. All meters or measuring devices not provided by
the water supplier, but otherwise used under the provisions of this
article, may be furnished and installed by the Township at the expense
of the property owner and shall be owned by and under the control of
the Township and may be tested, inspected or repaired by the Township
employees whenever deemed necessary. The owner of the property
upon which such measuring device is installed shall be responsible for
its maintenance and safekeeping and all repairs thereto shall be made
by the Township at the property owner's expense, whether such repairs
are made necessary by ordinary wear and tear or other causes. Bills for
such installation and repairs shall be due and payable at the same time
and collected in the same manner as are the bills for sewer services;
§ 132-5 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-5
1:156
§ 132-6. Exclusion of industrial waste.
The Township reserves the right to refuse connection to the sewer system
or to disconnect a sewer or to compel pretreatment of industrial waste by
an industrial establishment in order to prevent discharge to the sewer of
industrial waste deemed to be harmful to the sewage collection system or
sewage plant, or to have a deleterious effect on the sewage treatment or
sludge handling processes, or which would cause a violation of any existing
sewage treatment agreement of the Township.
§ 132-7. Exclusion of harmful waste. [Amended 9-20-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-7]
such bills from and after their due date shall constitute a lien upon the
property upon which such measuring device is installed.
C. Meter reading. The Township shall be responsible for the reading of all
meters or measuring devices, unless such readings are otherwise made
available to the Township by the water supplier, and they shall be made
available to Township employees for meter reading at any reasonable
time.
A. No person shall discharge into the sewer system any exhaust steam or
any oils, tar, grease, gas, benzine or other combustible gases or liquids,
or any garbage (unless treated in an approved manner), offal, insoluble
solids or other dangerous or harmful substances which would adversely
affect the functioning of the sewer system or the processes of sewage
treatment. This restriction shall be in addition to the discharge
restrictions that appear in Article IV of this chapter. [Amended
2-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2]
B. Reporting. The owners and/or operators of a motor vehicle service
station, automobile sales agency which provides services to vehicles,
eating or drinking establishment and other commercial establishments
which are required to install a grease, oil or sand interceptor or
reclaimer and/or a hair trap must submit written verification to the
Township that the grease, oil or sand interceptor or reclaimer was
properly cleaned and emptied by a sewage waste hauler licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at least once a month. Every month, the
owners and operators shall send written notice to the Township which
states the following: the name of the person or contractor who
performed the cleaning of the grease, oil or sand interceptor or
reclaimer and/or a hair trap; the date of cleaning; and the location
where the material is disposed. The Township may conduct inspections
of the interceptors, reclaimer and/or traps at any time after notice to
the user and may require the user to submit additional reports or
conduct tests more frequently than monthly at its own expense if the
Township finds or suspects that the interceptor, reclaimer and/or trap
has not been properly cleaned.
§ 132-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-8
1:157
§ 132-8. Exclusion of water.
No person shall discharge into the sewer system any stormwater, surface
drainage, ground drainage, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, sump pump
discharge, drainage from tile fields, cooling water or unpolluted industrial
process waters. All such discharges shall be made into such sewers as are
specifically designated as storm sewers, if available, or to a natural outlet
approved by the Westtown Township Engineer.
§ 132-9. Changes in classification; additional classifications and
modifications.
If use or classification of any property should change within any quarter,
the difference in sewer rental, prorated on a monthly basis to the nearest
calendar month, will be charged or credited, as the case may be, on the bill
for the succeeding quarter. Additional classifications and additional sewer
rentals may be established by the Township from time to time.
§ 132-10. Time and methods of payment. [Amended 12-15-1998 by
Ord. No. 97-7]
§ 132-11. Late payment; liens; collections. [Amended 12-4-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-4; 1-4-1993 by Ord. No. 93-1; 4-1-1996 by Ord. No.
96-2]
A. The connection fees imposed and collected by the Township shall be
payable upon application for permit to make such connection.
B. Sewer rentals or charges shall be paid quarterly and quarterly billings
for sewer rentals shall be made by bills dated on the first days of
January, April, July and October of each year for the quarterly calendar
period immediately following the date of the bill.
C. The bills for sewer rentals under § 132-3 for the first quarter during
which a property is connected will be prorated on the basis of the
quarterly rate. All bills shall be due and payable on their respective
dates.
A. All bills shall be payable on the date received. All sewer rental charges
billed and unpaid shall be a lien against the property serviced by the
sewer system until paid. If said bills are not paid within 45 days after
the date they are mailed, a charge of 5% per quarter on the total unpaid
balance shall be added.
B. It shall be the duty of the Sewer Collection Agent during or after the
fourth month following the month in which bills were mailed to certify
the unpaid bills to the Township Solicitor who shall proceed to collect
such delinquent sewer rentals, together with penalties and costs
accrued thereon either by action at law or by filing a lien or liens for the
same in the office of the Prothonotary of the Court of Common Pleas of
Chester County, Pennsylvania, and such liens, together with penalty
§ 132-8 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-11
1:158
§ 132-12. Segregation of sewer revenues.
The funds received by the Township from the collection of the connection
charges imposed by it from sewer rentals and charges and all penalties
thereon, as herein provided for, any fines collected by the Township in
connection with the sewer system and any other funds received in
connection with the sewer system shall be segregated, earmarked and
deposited in a separate fund, to be designated "sewer revenue account,"
and shall be used only for the purpose of defraying the expenses of the
Township in the operation, maintenance and repair of the sewer system or
other expenses in relation to such sewer system and for such payments as
the Township may be required to make under any lease or agreement it may
enter into for and of or in connection with said sewer system.
§ 132-13. Duties of Sewer Collection Agent. [Amended 1-4-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-1]
The Township Sewer Collection Agent is hereby charged with the duties
of collecting all user fees and penalty charges imposed by the Board of
Supervisors. He/she shall also keep full, accurate and complete records of
all sewer rentals or charges, bills, receipts, payments and transmittals of
money to the Township.
§ 132-14. When effective; amendments.
The rates and any rules and regulations hereunder shall become effective
on the date of their enactment and adoption respectively and shall be
applicable to all properties as soon as they respectively become connected
with and have the right to use the sewer system. The Township reserves
the right to make such changes from time to time as in its opinion may
be desirable or beneficial, and add to or amend this article or change the
rates or charges in such manner and at such times as in its opinion may be
advisable.
and costs accrued thereon, shall be filed and collected in accordance
with the law. A charge as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors shall be imposed by the Township for filing and
legal costs for each property liened.
C. The Township may authorize the Solicitor to proceed with the sheriff
sale process for the liened property if the account is not paid in full
within six months after the lien is filed. At this time filing and legal costs
as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors shall
be added to the account.
D. All sewer rentals not paid within four months following the month in
which bills were mailed shall be deemed to be delinquent. All persons
connected to the sewer system must give the Township their correct
address. Failure to receive bills will not be considered an excuse for
nonpayment nor permit an extension of the period during which bills
are payable at face.
§ 132-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-15
1:159
§ 132-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
§ 132-15 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-15
1:160
ARTICLE II
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 8-19-1991 by Ord. No. 91-11]
§ 132-16. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive and retain sewage on
a temporary basis, whether from residential or commercial uses, and it
is hereby declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the
protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of this Township.
§ 132-17. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the
sewage at another site. Holding tanks include, but are not limited to, the
following:
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health, or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water or for recreation.
TOWNSHIP — Westtown Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
CHEMICAL TOILET — A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a
holding tank.
A.
COLLECTION FACILITIES — Sewer pipes, manholes and similar sewer
system facilities, plugged to prevent outflow.
B.
RETENTION TANK — A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to it by
a water-carrying system.
C.
VAULT PIT PRIVY — A holding tank designed to receive sewage where
water under pressure is not available.
D.
§ 132-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-18
1:161
§ 132-18. Rights and privileges granted.
The Township is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the
Township the control and methods of holding tank sewage disposal and the
collection and transportation thereof on a temporary basis and until such
time as a permanent method of sewage disposal has been provided for an
improved property.
§ 132-19. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Township is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and
regulations concerning holding tank sewage disposal which it may deem
necessary from time to time to effect the purposes herein, provided said
regulations shall not conflict with the rules and regulations of the Chester
County Health Department and/or the Department of Environmental
Protection of Pennsylvania.
§ 132-20. Rules and regulations to be in conformity with applicable
law.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Township shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the Township,
all applicable laws, and all applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania having
jurisdiction in this field.
§ 132-21. Rates and charges.
If applicable, the Township shall have the right and power to fix, alter,
charge and collect rates, assessments and other charges in the area served
by holding tank sewage disposal facilities at reasonable and uniform rates
as authorized by applicable law.
§ 132-22. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges.
The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property
utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by the Township or done
pursuant to the direction of and with permission from the Township, and the
disposal thereof shall be made only at such site or sites as may be approved
by the Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and/or the Chester County Health Department.
§ 132-23. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this article and any
other applicable ordinance of this Township, the provisions of any
applicable law, the terms of any applicable agreement between the
owner and the Township and the rules and regulations of the Township
§ 132-18 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-23
1:162
§ 132-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
§ 132-25. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation
of § 132-23 above shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the
Township by either seeking appropriate equitable or legal relief from a
court of competent jurisdiction.
and any cognizant administrative agency of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the Township or anyone acting under the direction of and/or
permission from the Township to collect, transport and dispose of the
contents therein.
§ 132-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-25
1:163

ARTICLE III
Sewer Construction and Connection
[Adopted 5-17-1999 by Ord. No. 99-3]
§ 132-26. Permit application.
§ 132-27. General regulations.
A. A plumbing permit to tap into the Township sanitary sewer system is
required prior to construction. Application forms are available at the
Township Municipal Building, 1081 Wilmington Pike, Monday through
Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Applicants are responsible for all
inspection costs in excess of the permit fee.
B. The appropriate tapping fee must accompany the permit application.
No permit will be issued without payment. Make check payable to
"Westtown Township."
C. Plumbing contractors must be registered with Westtown Township.
A. "Lateral" is defined as a pipe used to convey wastewater from a
property or facility to a wastewater main owned by Westtown Township.
This definition also applies to privately owned mains which collect
wastewater from one or more properties or facilities and connect to
wastewater mains owned by Westtown Township.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the plumbing contractor to verify the
location and elevation of all existing underground utilities and services
before the start of work in accordance with Act 187 of 1996,
Pennsylvania One Call.
C. Not more than one lateral per excavation/trench will be permitted.
D. Stormwater or groundwater discharge systems (examples include but
are not limited to sump pump systems, floor drains, french drains,
downspouts) are not permitted to be connected to the building
wastewater service lateral.
E. Abandoned septic tanks/cesspools shall be pumped dry and completely
backfilled with properly compacted clean fill. The Township, or its
designee, shall inspect the septic tank/cesspool prior to any backfilling
so as to verify the height-to-grade and to verify that the septic tank/
cesspool is pumped dry. The top and the wall of the abandoned tank
shall be demolished to an elevation of at least 24 inches below grade. In
all cases, existing septic systems will be abandoned or removed in
accordance with applicable Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and Chester County Health Department standards and
regulations.
F. No pipe fitting exceeding 45° is permitted. If two bends are used, a fivefoot
length of pipe shall be placed in between the bends.
§ 132-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-27
1:165
G. If an existing lateral tie-in, which was previously employed as part of an
on-site system, exits the building beneath a patio, deck, addition or
other permanent structure, it is the responsibility of the plumbing
contractor to determine the integrity of the existing lateral through lowpressure
air testing of said lateral. The permittee must submit the
results of the low-pressure air test to the Township, or its designee,
prior to commencing construction.
H. All gravity laterals shall undergo low-pressure air testing prior to
connections to the main. Testing shall follow the procedures in
Appendix A-1, Low-Pressure Air Testing of Sewer Laterals.29 All force
main laterals shall undergo hydraulic pressure testing prior to
connection to the main. Testing shall follow the procedures in Appendix
A-3, Grinder Pump Connections.30
I. Laterals constructed in areas in excess of 5% slope shall have clay/soil
dams installed in accordance with Appendix B-1, Typical Clay/Soil
Dam.31
J. Transition from one pipe material to another will be through the use of
a Fernco shielded coupling, or equivalent.
K. No lateral will be backfilled prior to the satisfactory completion of all
inspections and tests in order to ensure proper pipe bedding, layout and
operation. All testing, as per Subsection H of this section, shall occur
after backfilling.
L. Disturbed trench area must be restored and stabilized.
M. Disturbed roadway areas must be restored in accordance with
Appendix C, Typical Trench Detail.32
N. All pipe bedding and backfill shall be performed in accordance with
Appendix C, Typical Trench Detail.
O. All work, including backfilling, shall be in accordance with the thencurrent
Westtown Township Plumbing Ordinance33 and BOCA
International Plumbing Code referred to therein.
P. Minimum acceptable pipe materials are either ASTM D03034 SDR 35
type PSM for PVC pipe, or ASTM A746 for ductile iron pipe. The
minimum acceptable pipe diameter for either PVC or ductile iron shall
not be less than four inches in diameter for individual residential
dwellings. If it is not possible to maintain the minimum slope of 1/4 inch
per foot with four-inch diameter pipe, then a one-eighth-inch slope per
foot utilizing six-inch diameter pipe may be used if approved in advance
29.Editor's Note: Appendix A-1 is included at the end of this chapter.
30.Editor's Note: Appendix A-3 is included at the end of this chapter.
31.Editor's Note: Appendix B-1 is included at the end of this chapter.
32.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 122, Plumbing.
§ 132-27 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-27
1:166
§ 132-28. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
by the Township Engineer. Lateral sizes for commercial facilities or
multiunit residential buildings shall be six inches unless information
is submitted to confirm a four-inch lateral is sufficient to handle peak
flows. The Township Engineer shall review and approve such request.
[Amended 6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-4]
Q. All lateral installations will be completed in accordance with the
specifications noted on Appendix D, General Piping Details.34
R. Connection to mains shall be via one of the following approved
methods, as applicable:
(1) New mains. Connect to the pre-molded, in-line wye fitting. The
plumbing contractor shall review the land development drawings
or main construction drawings to identify location and depth of the
existing main. The Township may, at its sole discretion, require
videotape verification of proper connections to mains. Punch-in or
protruding connections are expressly prohibited.
(2) Existing mains. Connect to main using approved, gasketed, dualband
saddle wye. All holes are to be machine cut. Material from
cutting process is to be removed from the main without exception.
The Township may, at its sole discretion, require videotape
verification of proper connections to mains. Punch-in or protruding
connections are expressly prohibited.
(3) Pressure laterals. Connect to main via wye per the method
described in either Subsection R(1) or R(2), as appropriate. The
Township may, at its sole discretion, require direct connection to a
manhole. Reducing fittings off wye shall be used to meet the
pressure lateral diameter. Shutoff valve and valve box shall be
provided at the right-of-way line. The Township may, at its sole
discretion, require videotape verification of proper connections to
mains. Punch-in or protruding connections are expressly
prohibited.
S. Lateral inspections shall be scheduled at least 48 hours in advance.
T. The property owner is responsible for the lateral up to and including the
lateral's connection to the main.
34.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 132-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-28
1:167
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
§ 132-28 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-28
1:168
ARTICLE IV
Pretreatment Standards and Regulations for Industrial Wastewater
Discharges
[Adopted 2-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2]
§ 132-29. Legislative intent.
§ 132-30. Definitions; word usage.
A. Westtown Township entered an intermunicipal agreement with West
Goshen Township dated January 14, 1998, titled "Sewage Treatment
Agreement" (the "agreement") whereby West Goshen Township agreed
to accept sanitary sewage from Westtown Township into the West
Goshen Township Wastewater Treatment Plant. Pursuant to the
agreement, Westtown Township is required to develop, implement, and
enforce a federally mandated pretreatment program in compliance with
the federal regulations (codified at 40 Code of Federal Regulations Part
403) to control wastewater discharges from all industrial users in
Westtown Township whose sewage is discharged into the West Goshen
Township Sewage Collection System for treatment at the West Goshen
Township Wastewater Treatment Plant.
B. Westtown Township currently owns the Chester Creek Wastewater
Treatment Plant located on Westtown Road (the "Chester Creek Plant").
As of the effective date of this article, the Chester Creek Plant does not
accept sewage from any industrial users. If, in the future, the Township
agrees to accept industrial waste for treatment at the Chester Creek
Plant, the regulations set forth in this Article IV shall apply, and such
industrial user(s) shall comply with all standards and regulations in this
Article IV.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms
and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
ACTS — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
(the "Act"); and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January
24, 1966, P.L. (1965) 1535, as amended (the Sewage Facilities Act).35
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), Region III.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF USER — An authorized
representative of a user is:
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president if
the user is a corporation.
(1)
35.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 132-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-30
1:169
AVERAGE DAILY FLOW — The wastewater discharge volume for the
most recent calendar month divided by the number of calendar days in
that month.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in § 132-31
through § 132-33. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage.[Added 1-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1]
BOD (denotes "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure for five days at 20° C., expressed in terms of
weight and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/L)]. The standard
laboratory procedure shall be found in the latest edition of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage, published by the
American Public Health Association.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion
of an industrial user's facility for pretreatment.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRY — Any industry subject to pretreatment
standards as specified in 40 CFR (the "United States Code of Federal
Regulations"), Chapter 1, Subchapter N, establishing quantities or
concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be
discharged or introduced to a treatment plant by existing or new
industrial users in specific industrial subcategories.
A general partner or proprietor if the user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively.
(2)
A principal executive officer or a person having responsibility for
the overall operation of the user's facility if the user is a
governmental agency, unincorporated organization or other similar
entity.
(3)
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
Subsection A(1) through (3) above if:
(a) The authorization is made in writing;
The authorization specifies either an individual or a position
having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility
from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the
position of plant manager, or a position of equivalent
responsibility, or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company; and
(b)
The written authorization is submitted to the Westtown
Township Sewer Manager.
(c)
(4)
§ 132-30 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-30
1:170
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards.
COD (denotes "chemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen,
expressed in mg/L, required to chemically oxidize the organic and
inorganic matter in a water or wastewater sample under the standard
laboratory procedure. The standard laboratory procedure shall be that
in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Sewage, published by the American Public Health Association.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — BOD, COD, total suspended solids, total
Kjeldahl nitrogen, total phosphorus, fecal coliform bacteria and oil and
grease.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The sample resulting from the combination of
individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an
increment of either flow or time.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Westtown Township Board of
Supervisors.
DAILY MAXIMUM — The arithmetic average of all the effluent samples
for a pollutant collected during a calendar day.[Added 1-19-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-1]
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT — The maximum allowable discharge limit
of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits
are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass
discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits
are expressed in terms of concentration, the daily discharge is the
arithmetic average measured of the pollutant concentration derived
from all measurements taken that day.[Added 1-19-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-1]
ENGINEER — Any consulting engineer appointed by Westtown
Township.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency, including,
where appropriate, the Administrator or other duly authorized official
of said agency.
EXTRA-STRENGTH WASTEWATER — A wastewater having total
suspended solids (tss) in excess of 300 parts per million (ppm) and
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in excess of 250 ppm, which may
be acceptable for discharge to the sewerage system, subject to prior
approval of the Sewer Manager and the discharger's payment of a
surcharge as established in this article. The concentration levels set
forth in this definition may be revised from time to time by resolution of
the control authority.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the commercial
handling, storage and sale of produce.
§ 132-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-30
1:171
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a
one-time basis, with no regard to the flow in the waste stream, over a
period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any person discharging anything other than
domestic waste to the sewerage system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit authorizing a
person to deposit or discharge industrial wastewater into the sewerage
system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — Any water which, during a
manufacturing, or processing operation, including those regulated
under Sections 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act, comes into direct contact
with or results from the production or use of any raw material,
intermediate product, finished product, by-product or waste product,
or any other water contaminated by an industrial and/or commercial
process, and distinct from domestic wastewater.
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT — The maximum concentration of a pollutant
allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis
of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling.[Added
1-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1]
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the
treatment, conveyance, processes or operations of the sewerage system
or a decrease in treatment efficiency or which contributes to a violation
of any requirement of an NPDES permit, or which prevents the use
or disposal of sewage sludge in compliance with any of the following
statutory or regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder:
Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), any criteria, guidelines
or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act
(SWDA), including Title II and Title IV, commonly referred to as the
"Resource Conservation and Recovery Act" (RCRA),36 the Clean Air Act,
the Toxic Substances Control Act and the Marine Protection, Research
and Sanctuaries Act.
LOCAL DISCHARGE LIMITS — Numerical limitations on the
concentration, mass or other characteristics of wastewater, wastes or
pollutants discharged to the sewerage system by industrial users, and
which are developed by Westtown Township in compliance with
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, National Prohibitive
Discharge Standards or other applicable federal and state regulations.
For users who are connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage
system, the local discharge limits shall be developed by West Goshen
Township in compliance with National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, National Prohibitive Discharge Standards or other
applicable federal and state regulations.37
36.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 755.1 et seq.
§ 132-30 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-30
1:172
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The sum of all daily discharges measured
during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges
measured that month.[Added 1-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1]
MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT — The highest allowable average of daily
discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily
discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number
of daily discharges measured during that month.[Added 1-19-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-1]
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1317), as from time to time amended, and which are defined in 40
CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, as from time to
time amended.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT
or NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the
Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342), as from time to time amended.
NATIONAL PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARD OR PROHIBITED
DISCHARGE — Any regulation developed under the authority of
Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act, which
standards will be applicable to such source if such categorical
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section.
Determination of the applicability of new source standards shall be
made as provided in the Act and 40 CFR 403.3.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling purposes
which does not come into direct contact with any raw material,
intermediate product, waste product or finished product.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole
or partial, of any property, or his agent.
PASS-THROUGH — Discharge through the sewerage system which
exists in quantities or concentrations, alone or with discharges from
other sources, which causes a violation of any condition of an NPDES
permit issued to a municipality or municipal authority, including an
increase in magnitude or duration of a violation.
PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
(DEP) — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any department or agency of the
commonwealth succeeding to the existing jurisdiction or responsibility
of that Department.
37.Editor’s Note: The former definition of "milligrams per liter," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 1-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1.
§ 132-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-30
1:173
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, partnership, copartnership,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, group,
society or other legal entity whatsoever, government entity, either
commonwealth or local, and their agencies, commissions, departments
and instrumentalities, or the legal representatives, heirs, successors
and assigns thereof.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration
expressed as moles per liter, which indicates the degree of acidity or
alkalinity of a substance.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, sewage sludge, garbage, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt or industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste discharged into water.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sewerage
system. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other means,
except as prohibited by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and 40
CFR 403.6(d), as amended from time to time.
PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR — The Westtown Township Sewer
Manager or authorized designee. For users who are connected to the
West Goshen Township sewerage system, West Goshen Township or its
Sewer Manager shall serve as the Pretreatment Coordinator.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment
standard imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the control authority in accordance
with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act, or by Westtown Township, which
applies to industrial users. This term includes National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, local discharge limits and prohibited
discharge limits established by this article or other regulatory authority
having jurisdiction.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A registered professional engineer
skilled in the field of wastewater treatment.
SANITARY SEWAGE, DOMESTIC SEWAGE or SEWAGE — The normal
water-carried household and toilet wastes from residences, businesses,
buildings, institutions, commercial and industrial establishments.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM or SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities owned and
operated by the Township for the collection, transportation, treatment
or disposal of sanitary sewage. For users in Westtown Township whose
sewage is treated by West Goshen Township pursuant to an
§ 132-30 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-30
1:174
intermunicipal agreement dated January 14, 1998, such term shall
include the West Goshen Township sewerage system as defined herein.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Except as provided for in
Subsection A(3) and (4) of this definition, a "significant industrial user"
is:[Amended 1-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1]
An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
or
(1)
An industrial user that;
Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(a)
Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the POTW; or
(b)
Is designated as such by the Pretreatment Coordinator on the
basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement.
(c)
(2)
The Township may determine that an industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards is a nonsignificant categorical
industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding
that the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons
per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless
specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the
following conditions are met:
The industrial user, prior to Township finding, has consistently
complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements;
(a)
The Industrial User annually submits the certification
statement required in § 132-41B(1) together with any
additional information necessary to support the certification
statement; and
(b)
The Industrial User never discharges any untreated
concentrated wastewater.
(c)
(3)
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection A(2)
of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Township may at any time, on its own initiative or
in response to a petition received from an Industrial User, and in
accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that
such User should not be considered a Significant Industrial User.
(4)
§ 132-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-30
1:175
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC) — The term shall be
applicable to all significant industrial users (or any other Industrial
User that violates the items in Subsection A(3), (4), or (7)
below:[Amended 1-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1]
SLUG CONTROL PLAN — A report prepared by an industrial user and
provided to the Township in accordance with this article which details
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those
in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the
same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) the numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement,
including Instantaneous Limits as defined in § 132-30.
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those
violations in which 33% or more of all the measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal
or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement including instantaneous limits as, defined in § 132-30,
multiplied by the applicable criteria (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats,
oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except pH).
(2)
Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement
as defined by § 132-30 (daily maximum or longer-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Township
determines has caused, either alone or in combination with other
discharges, an interference or pass-through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public.
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to the health of the Township personnel, the
environment or the general public; or has resulted in exercising
any emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
(4)
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule date or a compliance schedule milestone
contained in the user's industrial waste discharge permit or
enforcement action for starting construction completing
construction or attaining final compliance.
(5)
(6) Failure to accurately and timely report incidents of noncompliance.
Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the Pretreatment Coordinator
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.
(7)
Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules.
(8)
§ 132-30 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-30
1:176
the existing and proposed facility plans and operating procedures to be
followed by that user in the event of a slug load.
SLUG LOAD — Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration that may
cause a violation of any pretreatment requirement or pretreatment
standard set forth in this article.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the latest Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued
by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and
Budget.
STANDARD METHODS — The latest edition of Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater (Standard Methods), a
manual published by the American Public Health Association specifying
analytical procedures for testing and analysis of wastewater.
STATE — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting exclusively therefrom.
SURCHARGE — An additional charge for the treatment of extrastrength
wastewater in excess of the basic charge for the treatment of
wastewater.
TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN) — The sum of the organic
nitrogen and ammonia nitrogen present in wastewater, as measured by
standard laboratory procedure as described in Standard Methods.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) — The total suspended matter
that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water or
wastewater and is removable by laboratory filtration as prescribed in
Standard Methods.
TOWNSHIP — Westtown Township, a political subdivision of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
USER — Any person who contributes wastewater into the sewerage
system.
WASTEWATER — The combined flow of sanitary sewage and industrial
wastewater, together with such quantities of infiltration and inflow as
may be present.
WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP — A political subdivision of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which, pursuant to an intermunicipal
agreement with Westtown Township dated January 14, 1998, has
agreed to accept sanitary sewage from Westtown Township for
treatment at the West Goshen Township Wastewater Treatment Plant.
WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP SEWERAGE SYSTEM — The sewage
collection and treatment system of West Goshen Township and West
Goshen Township Sewer Authority and any pipe, conduit or other
equipment which carries wastewater to the West Goshen Township
publicly owned treatment plant (POTW) or any of its component parts.
§ 132-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-30
1:177
§ 132-31. Prohibitions and restrictions on all users.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no user shall discharge or
cause to be discharged to the sewerage system any sewage, industrial
wastewater or other matter or substance:
B. Words in the present tense include the future. The singular number
includes the plural number. The plural number includes the singular
number. The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is
permissive.
A. Having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the
sewerage system resulting in interference, but in no case with a
temperature at the introduction into the sewerage system which
exceeds 120° F. or is less than 40° F., and in no case, heat in such
quantities that the temperature of the influent to the POTW exceeds
104° F.
B. Containing petroleum oils, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or other
products of mineral origin, animal fats, oil, wax or grease, or other
similar substances (collectively called "oil and grease"), in amounts that
will cause pass-through or interference.
C. Containing any liquids, solids or gases at concentrations which are, or
may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances,
to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
sewerage system or to the operation of the POTW. Prohibited materials
include, but are not limited to, gasoline, fuel oil, kerosene, naphtha,
paint products, sulfides and any substance having a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140° F. using the test methods specified in 40
CFR, Chapter 1, Subpart C, Section 261.21.
D. Containing solid or viscous substances at concentrations which will
cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference, such as
but not limited to ashes, cinders, spent lime, stone dust, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metals, glass, rags, grass clippings, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, bentonite, lye, building
materials, rubber, asphalt residues, hairs, bones, leather, porcelain,
china, ceramic wastes, polishing wastes or glass grindings.
E. Having a pH, stabilized, lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or having any
other corrosive or scale-forming property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, bacterial action or personnel of the
sewerage system.
F. Containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants, (BOD
etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either single or by interaction with other
pollutants, may injure or cause either interferences or a pass-through
or interference in the sewerage system, constitute a hazard to humans,
animals, plants, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the
§ 132-30 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-31
1:178
POTW, or exceed any limitation set forth in a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard.
G. Containing any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which,
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create
a public nuisance or result in toxic gases, vapors or fumes in the
sewerage system in a quantity that will cause worker health and safety
problems.
H. Containing objectionable color not removed in the treatment process,
such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
I. Containing radioactive substances of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits which are prohibited by applicable state or federal
regulations.
J. Prohibited by any permit, statute, rule, regulation, ordinance or
resolution issued or promulgated by the Township or any public agency
having jurisdiction, including the state and the EPA.
K. Containing any substance which will cause the sewerage system to
violate the Municipal Authority's NPDES permit, the West Goshen
Township Sewer Authority's NPDES permit (for users who are
connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage system) or the
receiving water quality standards.
L. Containing any substance which shall cause the sewerage system to be
in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or
regulations developed under Section 405 or other applicable or
amended sections of the Act, or be in noncompliance with any criteria,
guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal promulgated
pursuant to the Solid Waste Control Act, or State Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act or state criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used.
M. Containing nonbiodegradable complex carbon compounds.
N. Constituting a slug load.
O. Containing stormwater, surface water, uncontaminated groundwater,
roof runoff, foundation drain water or drainage from the fields.
P. Containing any garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in size.
Q. Containing pesticides, unless upon written request, special permission
is obtained from the Township.
R. Causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment
plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test. [Added 1-19-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-1]
§ 132-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-31
1:179
§ 132-32. Trucked or hauled wastewater.
§ 132-33. Strength of waste surcharge.
S. Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances that might cause
excessive foaming in the POTW. [Added 1-19-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-1]
A. Tank truck or hauled waste discharges to the sewerage system are
prohibited, except as authorized hereinafter.
B. Tank truck or hauled wastes may only be discharged into sewerage
system upon the issuance of a discharge permit by the Township.
C. Tank truck or hauled wastes authorized for discharge shall be
discharged only at the location, time and at a rate fixed by the
discharge permit.
D. Tank truck or hauled waste discharges shall not include any industrial
wastewater except as authorized in writing by the Township.
E. Prior to discharge, the tank truck or hauled waste shall be subject to
inspection and sampling by the Township.
F. Tank truck or hauled waste discharges shall be subject to rates and
charges in accordance with a schedule established by the Township, as
amended from time to time.
A. Any user discharging wastewater to the sewerage system defined as
extra-strength wastewater in this article or as revised in such
resolutions as the Township or West Goshen Township in the case where
the user is connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage system
shall adopt from time to time shall pay the surcharge established in this
Chapter or as amended by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The
effective date of any change in definitions or fees shall be stated in all
such resolutions.
B. No user shall discharge into the sewerage system any extra-strength
wastewater without a written permit from the Township providing for
sampling and the payment of a surcharge to the Township or West
Goshen Township (in the case where the user is connected to the West
Goshen Township sewerage system), in accordance with the formulas
set forth in the current pretreatment chapter. The Township and West
Goshen Township (in the case where the user is connected to the West
Goshen Township sewerage system) shall retain and have the right at
any time to give notice to the industrial user that extra-strength
discharges will no longer be accepted.
C. The surcharge computations shall be based on the wastewater sample
analyses for the most recent complete calendar quarter. Surcharges
shall be based on wastewater sample analyses (or, in the absence
thereof, on the Township estimates) for the calendar quarter which they
§ 132-31 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-33
1:180
§ 132-34. Prohibitions and restrictions on industrial users.
apply. The surcharge formulas are independent of each other and
measure different characteristics of the same wastewater. Surcharges
measured by each formula are cumulative.
D. The surcharge billings shall be in addition to any other quarterly sewer
use charge paid by the user to the Township. Payment of a surcharge
shall not relieve the user of its obligation to comply with the local
loading limits promulgated by resolution in § 132-34B of this article.
A. Permit required for discharge of industrial wastewater. Prior to the
discharge of any industrial waste or other waste not defined as sanitary
sewage into the sewerage system, the discharger shall first obtain an
industrial wastewater discharge permit issued by the Township.
B. Local discharge limits.
(1) The Township shall by resolution adopted by the Township's Board
of Supervisors establish and promulgate local discharge limits
regulating the discharge of specific pollutants to the sewerage
system by industrial users. Local discharge limits may be
established for any substance which is discharged, or likely to be
discharged, to the sewerage system. Such limits shall be calculated
as mandated by the Pretreatment Coordinator and the Engineer,
and may be amended from time to time by the control authority.
(2) Local discharge limits may limit concentration, mass or a
combination of the two.
(3) The procedure for the calculation of local discharge limits shall be
as recommended by the EPA.
(4) Local discharge limits shall be calculated to prevent interference;
pass-through; the discharge of toxic materials in toxic amounts;
threats to worker health and safety; physical, chemical or
biological damage to the sewerage system; and noncompliance
with the Township's NPDES permit or the West Goshen Township
Sewer Authority's NPDES permit (in the case where the user is
connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage system).
(5) Local discharge limits applicable to industrial users shall be
adopted by resolution of the Township. Local discharge limits
applicable to all industrial users shall be included in all industrial
waste discharge permits.
(6) Discharging any pollutant in excess of a local discharge limit
established for that pollutant shall be a violation of this article.
(7) The Pretreatment Coordinator may develop best management
practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in individual wastewater
§ 132-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-34
1:181
§ 132-35. Spills or slug loads.
discharge permits, to implement local limits and the requirements
of § 132-31. [Added 1-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1]
A. All industrial users shall provide and maintain at their own expense
facilities adequate to prevent an accidental discharge or slug load of
any substance stored or used at the industrial user's facilities that, if
discharged into the sewerage system, will violate any of the provisions
of §§ 132-31 and 132-34 of this article. Slug control plans shall be
submitted, as requested, to both the Township and West Goshen
Township in the case where the user is connected to the West Goshen
Township sewerage system, detailing the facility plans and operating
procedures to be utilized by the industrial user for this protection. Slug
control plans shall contain, at a minimum, the following information, in
addition to such additional data as shall be required from time to time
by the Pretreatment Coordinator:
(1) A description of discharge practices, including nonroutine
discharges, and a complete description of stored chemicals.
(2) Procedures for immediately notifying the Pretreatment
Coordinator and the municipality to whose sewer collection system
the industrial user is connected of accidental discharges and slug
loads into the sewerage system.
(3) Procedures to prevent adverse impacts from such discharges and
procedures to prevent reoccurrence of all such discharges.
B. An industrial user proposing to connect to the sewerage system after
the effective date of this article shall submit a copy of its slug control
plan to the Township and West Goshen Township in the case where the
user is connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage system and to
the Pretreatment Coordinator for approval, or demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Pretreatment Coordinator they are not needed,
before connection to the sewerage system. Review of such plans and
operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the
responsibility to modify the industrial user's facility as necessary to
meet the requirements of this article.
C. In the case of an accidental discharge or slug load to the sewerage
system of any pollutant, the industrial user shall immediately notify by
telephone both the municipality to whose sewer system the industrial
user is connected and the Pretreatment Coordinator of the incident.
The notification shall include information regarding the location of the
discharge, the kind of pollutants involved, the concentration and
volume of the discharge and corrective actions planned or taken.
[Amended 1-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1]
D. Within five days following an accidental discharge or slug load, unless
waived by the Pretreatment Coordinator, the industrial user shall
§ 132-34 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-35
1:182
§ 132-36. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
If the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, located in 40 CFR
Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, as amended from time to
time, for any industrial user are more stringent than limitations imposed
under this article for industrial users in that subcategory, then the
pretreatment standards shall apply and are hereby incorporated in this
article. The Township shall notify all affected industrial users of the
applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. If an industrial
user subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard has not
previously submitted an application for an industrial waste discharge
permit, the industrial user shall apply for a permit within 90 days of the
promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
§ 132-37. Dilution prohibition.
Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment
standard or pretreatment requirement, no industrial user shall increase the
use of process water or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a
partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance
with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The Township may impose
mass limitations on industrial users in cases where the imposition of mass
limitations is appropriate.
§ 132-38. State requirements.
State requirements and limitations on industrial wastewater discharges
shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those established and imposed in this
article.
submit to the municipality to whose sewer system the industrial user
is connected and to the Pretreatment Coordinator a detailed written
report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be
taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences.
Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any liability on
account thereof. [Amended 1-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1]
E. A notice shall be permanently posted by each industrial user on a
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to
call in the event of an accidental discharge or slug load. Employers shall
ensure that all employees who may cause such an accidental discharge
to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
[Amended 1-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1]
F. Significant industrial users are required to notify the Pretreatment
Coordinator immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the
potential for a slug discharge. [Added 1-19-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-1]
§ 132-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-39
1:183
§ 132-39. Township's right of revision.
The Township reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the sewerage system.
§ 132-40. Industrial waste discharge permits.
A. General.
(1) No industrial users shall connect to or discharge wastewater to the
sewerage system without an industrial waste discharge permit.
(2) Upon written application to the Township, but prior to discharge,
the Pretreatment Coordinator may determine that industrial users
which are not significant industrial users or do not have industrial
wastewater do not require an industrial waste discharge permit
and may discharge industrial wastewater to the sewerage system,
but are required to comply with all other provisions of this article.
If an industrial user makes changes to the processes, flow,
wastewater concentration, wastewater characteristics or other
operations reported in the most recent industrial waste discharge
questionnaire filed by the industrial user with the Township, and
those changes result in its meeting the definition of an industrial
user, the industrial user shall immediately upon becoming aware
that such a change has occurred, or 90 days prior to such a change
if it is planned, notify in writing both the Township and West
Goshen Township in the case where the user is connected to the
West Goshen Township sewerage system and, if the application and
proposed discharge are in compliance with this article, obtain an
industrial waste discharge permit, which shall be issued within 90
days of submission of the permit application.
(3) Where an industrial user, subject to a newly promulgated National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted
an application for an industrial waste discharge permit, the user
shall, within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard:
(a) Obtain an industrial waste discharge permit; and
(b) Provide the baseline monitoring information required by 40
CFR 403.12(b), as amended from time to time. This information
shall be incorporated into the application for an industrial
waste discharge permit.
B. Permit application.
(1) Industrial users shall file with the Pretreatment Coordinator a
complete and accurate industrial waste discharge permit
application in the form prescribed by the Township.
§ 132-39 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-40
1:184
(2) The application for an industrial waste discharge permit shall be
fully completed and verified in writing by the industrial user or a
duly authorized and knowledgeable officer, agent or representative
thereof. The application shall contain, in units and terms
appropriate for evaluation, such scientific or testing data or other
information as may be required by the Township, and the industrial
user shall pay an application fee to and shall reimburse the
Township for all expenses incurred as a result of the processing of
the signed application. The Township and West Goshen Township in
the case where the user is connected to the West Goshen Township
sewerage system shall have, at their discretion, the right to inspect
the premises, equipment and material and laboratory testing
facilities of the applicant.
(3) Notwithstanding the above, the applicant shall provide the
following minimum information to the Pretreatment Coordinator:
(a) Name and address of the user; name, title and telephone
number of responsible official; name, title and phone number
of person to contact for information about the industrial waste
discharge.
(b) Description of the industry and the manufacturing processes or
operations that occur there and the types of products that are
produced.
(c) Applicable standard industrial classification codes for activities
conducted at the facility.
(d) Statement as to whether the industry is subject to compliance
with National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, and if so,
which ones apply.
(e) Indication and description of the sources of or the processes
that produce industrial wastewaters.
(f) Wastewater constituents and characteristics as required by the
Township and as determined by a reliable analytical
laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant
to Section 304 (g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as
amended. If the discharge is from a proposed new discharge,
wastewater characteristics shall be reliably estimated in
accordance with accepted procedures.
(g) Volume of industrial wastewater to be discharged to the
sewerage system and the methods of measuring the same.
Flow volume information shall include the time and duration of
the discharge and the average daily and thirty-minute peak
wastewater flow rates, including monthly and seasonal
variations, if any.
§ 132-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-40
1:185
(h) Description of any wastewater treatment facilities or processes
used or proposed to be used to treat the industrial wastes prior
to their discharge to the sewerage system.
(i) Schematic flow diagram showing the existing and proposed
sources of industrial wastewater and the on-site treatment
processes.
(j) The quantity of sludge removed from the industrial user's
facility system and their method and location of disposal.
(k) Description of any other wastes that are removed from the
industrial user's facility system, their quantities and methods
and locations of disposal.
(l) List of raw materials used or stored on the premises, their
material safety data sheets, their approximate quantity of
usage on a monthly basis and what they are used for.
(m) Plans and specifications for a sampling manhole.
(n) A list of any additional environmental control permits held by
or for the facility, such as air quality permits, RCRA permits,
stormwater management permits and all other required
permits.
(o) Such additional information as the Township shall require.
(4) Review and approval.
(a) The industrial waste discharge permit application shall be
reviewed by the Township and West Goshen Township in the
case where the user is connected to the West Goshen Township
sewerage system and if acceptable to such municipality, shall
be submitted to the Pretreatment Coordinator for review and
approval.
(b) No industrial waste discharge permit shall be issued to an
industrial user whose discharge of materials to sewers,
whether shown upon the application or determined after
inspection and testing conducted by the Township or West
Goshen Township in the case where the user is connected to
the West Goshen Township sewerage system, is not in
conformance with federal, state or the Township's ordinances
and resolutions. If an application is denied, the Township shall
state in writing the reason or reasons for denial, and said
written communication shall be delivered to the applicant, and
if applicable, to the municipality to whose sewer system the
industrial user is proposing to connect.
(5) If the Township denies an application for an industrial waste
discharge permit, the industrial user may, within 60 days after its
receipt of the Township's denial, request review by the control
§ 132-40 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-40
1:186
authority of such denial. The request for review shall be in writing
and shall specify the grounds for review, and shall be accompanied
by such appropriate supporting information and documents as shall
be sufficient to apprise the control authority of the substance of the
industrial user's position. The control authority at a public hearing
shall review the industrial waste discharge permit application, the
Township's written denial, and such other evidence and matters as
the industrial user shall present at a public hearing. It shall also
consider all evidence offered by the Township or the Pretreatment
Coordinator and any interested party. The public hearing shall take
place no later than 45 days following receipt of the industrial user's
written request for the review. The control authority's written
decision shall be provided to the industrial user within 20 days of
the close of the public hearing or hearings and shall be final.
(6) If, based on the characteristics of the industrial user's waste
discharge, additional pretreatment and/or operation and
maintenance procedures are required to meet any Township,
municipal, state or federal pretreatment standards, the industrial
user shall submit to the Township and West Goshen Township (in
the case where the user is connected to the West Goshen Township
sewerage system) prior to issuance of the industrial waste
discharge permit the shortest, reasonable schedule by which the
industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment. The
Township and West Goshen Township (in the case where the user is
connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage system) shall
include a compliance schedule acceptable to the Township and/or
West Goshen Township as the case may be, in the user's industrial
waste discharge permit, which shall be conditional upon
compliance with timely implementation of the additional
pretreatment required. The following conditions shall apply to this
schedule:
(a) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form
of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contract for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, etc.).
(b) No increment shall exceed nine months.
(c) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit to
both the Pretreatment Coordinator and the municipality to
whose sewer system it is connected a written report, including,
as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment
of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on
which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the
§ 132-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-40
1:187
reason for delay and the steps being taken by the industrial
user to return the construction and implementation to the
schedule established. In no event shall more than three months
elapse between such progress reports to the Pretreatment
Coordinator and the municipality to whose sewer system it is
connected.
C. Permit action. A permit issued under this section may be modified,
revoked and reissued or terminated for good cause, including but not
limited to the following:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
(2) Material or substantial alterations or additions to the discharger's
operation which were not covered in its current permit.
(3) A change in any condition that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
D. Permit conditions.
(1) Industrial waste discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations,
resolutions, user charges and fees established by the Township and
West Goshen Township in the case where the user is connected to
the West Goshen Township sewerage system. Permits shall contain
the following:
(a) Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable petreatment standards; [Amended 1-19-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-1]
(b) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports, including the information to be contained and the
signatory requirements of these reports. These requirements
shall include an identification of pollutants (or best
management practice) to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state,
and local law; [Amended 1-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1]
(c) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records
relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the Township
and affording the Township and West Goshen Township in the
case where the user is connected to the West Goshen Township
sewerage system access thereto;
(d) Requirements for notification of the Township and West
Goshen Township in the case where the user is connected to
the West Goshen Township sewerage system in advance of any
new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial
§ 132-40 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-40
1:188
change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being introduced into the sewerage system;
(e) Requirements for notification of slug discharges;
(f) List of prohibited discharges;
(g) Statement of duration of the permit;
(h) Notification of the rules regarding transferability, if allowed;
(i) Notification of penalties provided for noncompliance; and
(j) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule;
(k) Right of entry requirements upon the property and within the
facility for which the permit is issued by authorized
representatives of the Township and the municipality to whose
sewer system the user is connected; [Amended 1-19-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-1]
(l) Indemnification of the Township and such municipality from all
liability resulting from or on account of any discharge; and
[Amended 1-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1]
(m) Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
Pretreatment Coordinator to be necessary. [Added 1-19-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-1]
(2) Permits may also contain other requirements, including but not
limited to:
(a) Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge
or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(b) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities and pretreatment facilities;
(c) Compliance schedules; and
(d) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Township or
the municipality to whose sewer system the industrial user is
connected to ensure compliance with this article, applicable
municipal ordinances or other requirements.
(3) Issuance of an industrial waste discharge permit in no way relieves
the industrial user from any liability on account of its discharge into
the sewerage system, whether such discharge is permitted thereby
or not.
E. Permit duration and permit fees.
§ 132-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-40
1:189
(1) Industrial waste discharge permits shall be issued for an initial oneyear
period and shall expire at the end of that one-year period
unless the Township or West Goshen Township in the case where
the user is connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage
system elects to revoke the permit on or before its expiration. Upon
the user's payment of the requisite permit fee to the Township,
renewal permits shall be issued for a period not to exceed five years
upon written application of the permittee made at least 60 days
prior to the permit's expiration. Subsequent permits may be issued
upon payment to the Township of the requisite fee for up to fiveyear
periods upon prior written application made to the Township
at least 90 days before the permit's scheduled expiration. The
terms and conditions of the permit shall be subject to modification
by the Township or West Goshen Township in the case where the
user is connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage system
during the term of the permit. The industrial user shall be informed
of any proposed changes in its permit at least 30 days prior to the
effective date of the change. However, the Township or West
Goshen Township in the case where the user is connected to the
West Goshen Township sewerage system shall use their best efforts
to inform the industrial user of such change at least 60 days prior
to the effective date of the change, but its/their failure to do so shall
not preclude or delay implementation of the required change. In
the event that such changes require major changes in pretreatment
by the industrial user, and the industrial user's failure to comply
with the amended discharge requirements does not itself or with
other failures to comply put the Township or West Goshen
Township in the case where the user is connected to the West
Goshen Township sewerage system in substantial danger of
violating any agreement, permit, regulation, ordinance or law, then
the Pretreatment Coordinator may grant the industrial user a
period not to exceed six months from the date otherwise required
for compliance within which to effect such changes to its
pretreatment facilities as are necessary to comply with the permit's
terms and conditions. Upon demonstration of justifiable cause
proven by the permittee within the said six-month period, the
Pretreatment Coordinator may extend the date otherwise required
for compliance for such additional reasonable period of time as he/
she determines necessary. No extensions shall be considered or
granted unless the industrial user makes written request for a time
extension and submits to the Township and West Goshen Township
in the case where the user is connected to the West Goshen
Township sewerage system an implementation schedule acceptable
to the Township and such municipality contemporaneously with the
extension request.
(2) Permit fees and renewal fees shall be established by resolution
adopted and amended from time to time by the control authority
and shall include but not necessarily be limited to the following: an
application review fee, an administrative fee, a sampling fee, an
§ 132-40 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-40
1:190
§ 132-41. Reporting requirements for industrial users.
analytical costs fee, any surcharges and/or fines and any
miscellaneous expenses incurred from the purchase or utilization
of any sampling apparatus and/or activities.
F. Permit transfer. Industrial waste discharge permits are issued to a
specific industrial user for a specific operation. An industrial waste
discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new
owner, new user, different premises, different facilities or a new or
changed operation without the approval of the Township and West
Goshen Township in the case where the user is connected to the West
Goshen Township sewerage system. The succeeding owner or industrial
user shall file a new application and, until permit or modification
thereof is issued, shall comply with the terms and conditions of the
existing industrial waste discharge permit and such additional permit
conditions as the Township and such municipality shall require.
G. Waste characteristic change. Any industrial user who plans or becomes
aware of a change in the method of operation or in the pretreatment
facilities which will increase the concentration of pollutants which are
regulated by this article or the volume of wastewater discharged to the
sewerage system shall notify the Township and West Goshen Township
in the case where the user is connected to the West Goshen Township
sewerage system of the change at least 90 days prior to such change. If
required by the Township or the municipality, the industrial user shall
apply for an industrial waste discharge permit that reflects the
proposed changes. The new industrial waste discharge permit will be
subject to a fee to reimburse the Township and such municipality for all
expenses incurred as a result of the processing of the permit and permit
application. Approval or denial of a new industrial waste discharge
permit shall be regulated by the procedures established hereunder for
the issuance of an original permit.
H. Files. The Township shall maintain files in which copies of all industrial
waste discharge permits, revisions thereto, and supporting data will be
filed for reference. Files shall be maintained for a period of at least five
years. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of
any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or when
requested by the EPA.
A. Compliance date report under National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in the case
of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the sewerage system, any industrial user subject to
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall submit to the
Township and West Goshen Township in the case where the user is
connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage system a written
report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the
discharge from the regulated process which are limited by categorical
§ 132-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-41
1:191
standards, and the average and maximum daily flow from these process
units in the user's facility which are limited by such categorical
standards. The report shall state whether the applicable categorical
standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional operations and maintenance and/or pretreatment are
scheduled to bring the industrial user into compliance with the
applicable categorical standards. This statement shall be signed by
an authorized representative of the user and, when requested by the
Township, certified by a qualified professional.
B. Periodic compliance reports. [Amended 1-19-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-1]
(1) Each industrial user shall submit to the Township and the
municipality to whose sewer system it is connected, during the
months of April, July, October and January, or by such date as
otherwise specified in the industrial user’s industrial waste
discharge permit or otherwise by the Township, a complete and
accurate written report, in form and content as prescribed by the
Township, indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in
the discharge during the reporting period which are regulated by
the industrial waste discharge permit. All monitoring data obtained
for purposes of determining compliance with the industrial waste
discharge permit by certified analytical techniques must be
reported by the industrial user. In addition, this report, where
applicable, shall include a record of all daily flows which, during
the reporting period, exceeded the maximum daily flow listed in the
industrial user‘s industrial waste discharge permit. In cases where
the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best
management practice (BMP) or pollution-prevention alternative,
the user must submit documentation required by the Pretreatment
Coordinator or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine
the compliance status of the user. All periodic compliance reports
shall also contain the following certification statement signed by
the authorized representative of the user:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in
accordance with a procedure designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the facilities proposed to be connected to the sewerage
system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware
that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations relating to unsworn falsifications.
§ 132-41 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-41
1:192
(2) A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial
user by the Pretreatment Coordinator must annually submit the
following certification statement signed by the authorized
representative of the user. This certification must accompany an
alternative report required by the Pretreatment Coordinator:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with categorical Pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and
belief that during the period from _______ to ______ [insert dates]:
(a) The facility described as [facility name] met the definition of
nonsignificant categorical industrial user as per § 132-30;
(b) The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements during this reporting period; and
(c) The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting
period.
This compliance certification is based on the following
information.
(3) The Township may impose mass limitations where the imposition of
mass limitations is appropriate. In such cases, the periodic
compliance report required by Subsection B(1) shall state the mass
of pollutants regulated in the industrial user's discharge permit to
the sewerage system. These reports shall contain the results of
sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the
nature and concentration, or, where requested by the Township,
production and mass of pollutants contained therein, which are
limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of
monitoring shall be prescribed in the industrial users industrial
waste discharge permit. All sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA
pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136,
and amendments thereto, or with any other test procedures
approved by the EPA.
(4) For categorical industries that have mass limits as categorical
standards, the Township may specify equivalent concentrations to
regulate the strength of the industrial user's discharge. If
concentration limits are regulated in lieu of mass discharge limits,
the industrial user must provide the Township and West Goshen
Township (in the case where the user is connected to the West
Goshen Township sewerage system) with the following information
as part of each written compliance report:
(a) For the reporting period, the rate of production of the process
for which categorical standards have been established.
§ 132-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-41
1:193
(b) The average wastewater flow rate generated by the regulated
production activity for the reporting period.
(c) Thirty days' notice of any anticipated change in production.
(5) The industrial wastewater discharged into the sewerage system
shall be sampled and analyzed by and at the expense of the
industrial user, and copies of the original laboratory reports listing
the results of the analyses and the analytical methods used shall be
submitted to the Pretreatment Coordinator.
(6) Except as indicated in Subsection B(7) below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flow-proportional
composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the
Township. Regardless of sampling technique used the samples
must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including
appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and
appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during
a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis
as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may
be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics
and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the
laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by
the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA
methodologies may be authorized by the Township, as appropriate.
In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with
instantaneous limits.
(7) For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and
ninety-day compliance reports, a minimum of four grab samples
must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide
and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical
sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical
sampling data are available, the Pretreatment Coordinator may
authorize a lower minimum. For periodic compliance reporting the
industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples
necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements.
(8) Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid,
into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the
date of receipt of the report shall govern.
(9) All records and information resulting from the monitoring activities
required by the industrial waste discharge permit, any additional
records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring
activities undertaken independent of such requirements, and
documentation associated with established best management
practices shall be retained by the industrial user for at least five
§ 132-41 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-41
1:194
§ 132-42. Monitoring facilities.
years. This period of retention shall be extended during the course
of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or the
Township or when requested by either the Township or the EPA.
C. Baseline monitoring report.
(1) Where an industrial user, subject to a newly promulgated National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted
the baseline monitoring information required by 40 CFR 403.12(b),
as from time to time amended, the industrial user shall, within 180
days after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, provide this information to the Township
and West Goshen Township (in the case where the user is
connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage system). The
report shall include all items required by 40 CFR 403.12(b).
(2) A new source, or an industrial user proposing to discharge wastes
into the sewerage system that is subject to a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, shall submit to the Township and West
Goshen Township (in the case where the user is connected to the
West Goshen Township sewerage system) the baseline monitoring
report required by 40 CFR 403.12(b) at least 90 days prior to
commencement of discharge from the regulated process or facility.
D. Noncompliance discharge report. [Amended 1-19-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-1]
(1) If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation of
this article, an applicable pretreatment standard or the industrial
user‘s industrial waste discharge permit, the industrial user shall
notify the Pretreatment Coordinator and municipality to whose
sewer system the industrial user is connected within 24 hours of
becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also
repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the Pretreatment Coordinator and to such
municipality within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.
(2) Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the Township
performs sampling at the user’s between the time when the initial
sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the
Township receives the results of this sampling, or if the Township
has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial
user.
A. When requested by the Township or West Goshen Township in the case
where the user is connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage
system, all industrial users shall provide and operate, at their own
expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow
measurements of its industrial waste discharge. The monitoring facility
§ 132-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-42
1:195
§ 132-43. Inspection and sampling.
The Township and West Goshen Township in the case where the user is
connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage system may inspect the
facilities of any industrial user. Persons or occupants of premises where
wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the Township or its
representative, or West Goshen Township in the case where the user is
connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage system or its
representatives, as a condition of the permit issued by the Township
authorizing any discharge to the sewerage system, ready access at all
reasonable times, and in the event of emergency situations posing an
immediate threat to the sewerage system, to all parts of the premises,
buildings and facilities for the purpose of inspection, sampling records
examination and copying, or in the performance of any of their duties. The
Township, such municipality and the EPA shall have the right to set up
on the industrial user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.
should normally be situated on the industrial user's premises, but the
Township or West Goshen Township in the case where the user is
connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage system may, when
such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the
industrial user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street
or sidewalk area, subject to the issuance of proper permits for such
purpose, and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or
parked vehicles.
B. The monitoring facility shall be constructed in accordance with plans
and specifications approved by the Township and West Goshen
Township in the case where the user is connected to the West Goshen
Township sewerage system. There shall be ample room in or near such
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the
expense of the industrial user. The facility shall be located as to be
accessible at all times to persons authorized by the Township or West
Goshen Township in the case where the user is connected to the West
Goshen Township sewerage system. By obtaining an industrial waste
discharge permit, the industrial user consents to the entry upon its land
and facility and agrees to facilitate such entry by representatives of the
Township and such municipality, and further consents to the use of the
monitoring facility for observation, sampling and measuring of the
wastewater discharge at all times. Construction of the monitoring
facility shall be completed within 120 days following issuance of the
industrial waste discharge permit.
C. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facilities in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge. [Added 1-19-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-1]
§ 132-42 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-43
1:196
Where an industrial user has security measures in force which would
require proper identification and clearance before entry onto their
premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its
security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification,
personnel from the Township, such municipality or the EPA will be
permitted to enter, without delay.
§ 132-44. Pretreatment.
A. Industrial users shall provide necessary pretreatment and flowequalizing
facilities as required to comply with this article and shall
achieve compliance with all applicable National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as specified by the
appropriate federal regulations, or as otherwise required by the
Township. Any industrial user required to pretreat or flow-equalize
wastewater to a level in compliance with the provisions of this article
shall be provided, operated and maintained at the industrial user's sole
expense. Detailed plans and other materials and documents showing
the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted
to the Pretreatment Coordinator and West Goshen Township in the case
where the user is connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage
system for review before construction of the facility. The review of such
plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the industrial
user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to
produce an effluent in compliance with the provisions of this article.
Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities, flow-equalizing
facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be reviewed
and commented on by the Township and West Goshen Township in the
case where the user is connected to the West Goshen Township
sewerage system prior to the industrial user's initiation of the changes.
B. The industrial user may allow a bypass, which does not cause
pretreatment standards to be violated, but only for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. If an industrial user knows in
advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior written notice to
the Pretreatment Coordinator and to the municipality to whose sewer
system it is connected at least 10 days before the date of the bypass.
The industrial user shall give oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that
exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the Pretreatment
Coordinator and the municipality to whose sewer system it is connected
immediately after an unanticipated bypass incident is brought under
control, but in no event later than four hours from the time the
industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. A written report shall also
be provided to the Pretreatment Coordinator within five working days
of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The
written report shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause;
the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the
bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and, the steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
§ 132-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-44
1:197
§ 132-45. Hazardous waste discharge.
§ 132-46. Confidential information.
C. The Township shall annually publish in the local daily newspaper of
largest circulation within the Township's service area a list of industrial
users serviced by the Township which were in significant
noncompliance with any applicable pretreatment standards or
pretreatment requirements during the preceding twelve-month period.
D. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards and
pretreatment requirements shall be made available to the Township,
West Goshen Township (in the case where the user is connected to the
West Goshen Township sewerage system) and the EPA upon request.
E. The Township and West Goshen Township (in the case where the user is
connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage system) shall have
access to all such pretreatment facilities and flow-equalizing facilities
as required by this article at all reasonable times for purposes of
inspection and testing, and in the event of an emergency posing a
threat to the sewerage system, at any time.
A. It shall be a violation of this article and the industrial user's discharge
permit for an industrial user to discharge any quantity of waste to the
sewerage system, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Section 261.1 et seq., Subparts A
through D, as from time to time amended. In the event of an accidental
discharge, the industrial user shall provide an immediate written
notification of such discharge, but in no event later than 4 hours from
the time the user becomes aware of or in the exercise of reasonable
prudence should have become aware of the discharge, to the Township,
to West Goshen Township in the case where the user is connected to the
West Goshen Township sewerage system, to the EPA Region III Waste
Management Division Director and to the DEP. Failure to provide such
notice shall constitute a violation of this article.
B. The notification required by Subsection A shall include the name of the
hazardous waste as in 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Section 261.1 et seq.,
Subparts A through D, as from time to time amended, the EPA
hazardous waste number, the type of discharge (continuous, batch or
other), and a certification under penalties of perjury that the industrial
user has a program in place to reduce to compliance levels the volume
and toxicity of hazardous wastes illegally discharged to the sewerage
system. If the industrial user's discharge to the sewerage system
constitutes more than 100 kilograms of such waste, the notification
shall also include an identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the waste and an estimation of the mass and concentration
of such constituents.
A. Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits, notifications, monitoring
§ 132-44 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-46
1:198
§ 132-47. Measuring volumes of wastewater.
programs and inspections shall be available to the public or any
governmental agency upon written request unless the industrial user
specifically requests in writing and is able to demonstrate to the
Township's satisfaction that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets of the industrial user.
B. When requested by the person furnishing a written report, those
portions of a report that have been accepted by the Township as
confidential shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but
shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies
for uses related to this article, the NPDES permit, state disposal system
permits and/or the state or federal pretreatment programs; provided,
however, that such portions of any report shall be available for use by
the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement
proceedings involving the person or industrial user furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be
recognized as confidential information.
C. When information accepted by the Township as confidential is
transmitted to any governmental agency by the Township, a written
notification to the industrial user shall be provided by the Township
listing the confidential information transmitted and the governmental
entity requesting the information.
A. The flow volume used to determine wastewater flows and surcharges
shall be specified in the industrial waste discharge permit and be based
on:
(1) Direct wastewater metering;
(2) Metered water use; or
(3) Such other method acceptable to the Township.
B. Both the Township and West Goshen Township in the case where the
user is connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage system may,
in their discretion, require that each industrial user connected to its
sewer system which has been issued an industrial waste discharge
permit install, calibrate, maintain and use any meter or measuring
device specified therein at the industrial user's own expense. The
municipality which accepts the industrial waste shall be responsible for
the reading of all meters or measuring devices. The Township and West
Goshen Township in the case where the user is connected to the West
Goshen Township sewerage system shall have the absolute right, but
not the duty, of reading the meters, from time to time, at its discretion.
The meters and devices shall be made available for meter reading at
any reasonable time, and in the event of an emergency posing a threat
to the sewerage system, at any time.
§ 132-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-48
1:199
§ 132-48. Enforcement.
A. Immediate suspension of discharge presenting imminent danger.
(1) The Township and West Goshen Township in the case where the
user is connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage system
shall order the immediate suspension of discharge of wastewater to
the sewer system when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion
of the Township or West Goshen Township, as the case may be, in
order to stop or prevent an actual or threatened discharge which
presents an imminent danger of harm to people, to the sewerage
system or to the environment, or interference ("dangerous
discharge").
(2) Any industrial user notified of an order to suspend shall comply
therewith immediately. In the event of a failure of the industrial
user to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Township
or West Goshen Township in the case where the user is connected
to the West Goshen Township sewerage system, shall take such
steps as it deems necessary to enforce compliance with the order to
effect the suspension of discharge of the industrial user's
wastewater into the sewerage system, including immediate
severance of the industrial user's sewer connection to the
Township's or to West Goshen Township's sewerage system. The
Township or West Goshen Township shall permit reinstatement of
the discharge upon satisfactory proof of the elimination of the
imminent and substantial danger referred to above. The industrial
user shall submit a detailed written report to the Township and
West Goshen Township (in the case where the user is connected to
the West Goshen Township sewerage system) describing the causes
of the actual or threatened discharge and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence within 15 days of the date of the first
such discharge or threat of discharge. The Township and West
Goshen Township (in the case where the user is connected to the
West Goshen Township sewerage system) shall have the concurrent
right and power to suspend discharge by such industrial user to the
sewerage system and to enforce the requirements of this
subsection.
(3) Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the Township and
West Goshen Township (in the case where the user is connected to
the West Goshen Township sewerage system) from enforcing this
article, or any part hereof, or from enjoining and preventing the
discharge of any hazardous waste or any other discharge deemed
unlawful or dangerous to the sewerage system by any legal process
selected by the Township and West Goshen Township (in the case
where the user is connected to the West Goshen Township
sewerage system), including but not limited to an action or actions
at law or in equity for injunctive relief and damages, administrative
enforcement proceedings, criminal enforcement proceedings
authorized by any federal or state statute or law, or through any
§ 132-48 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-48
1:200
§ 132-49. Enabling regulations.
As a precondition to the Township's acceptance of sewage effluent
containing industrial wastewater from another municipality, each such
municipality connected to the sewerage system shall, within 90 days after
other authorized legal proceeding. All remedies of the Township
and West Goshen Township in the case where the user is connected
to the West Goshen Township sewerage system shall be cumulative.
B. Termination of service. Any user who violates any provision of this
article, any regulation promulgated by the Township pursuant to this
article or any enabling legislation, any resolution promulgated by the
Board of Supervisors pursuant to or related to this article, any
applicable state or federal regulations or an industrial waste discharge
permit or any condition thereof shall be subject, in addition to any civil
or criminal penalties which may be imposed, to severance of its sewer
connection to the sewerage system, termination of its sewage service
and revocation of its industrial waste discharge permit.
C. Notification of violation. Whenever the Township or West Goshen
Township in the case where the user is connected to the West Goshen
Township sewerage system finds that the industrial user has violated or
is violating this article, an industrial waste discharge permit or any
prohibition, limitation, condition or requirements contained herein, or
has failed to timely provide the Township or West Goshen Township in
the case where the user is connected to the West Goshen Township
sewerage system with the information needed to accurately determine
compliance with any pretreatment standard or pretreatment
requirement, the Township or West Goshen Township in the case where
the user is connected to the West Goshen Township sewerage system,
or both, may serve upon such person or industrial user who is in
violation a written notice of violation. The notice may require a
response in the form of a plan, explanation, compliance schedule or
other appropriate response within a specified time period. Compliance
with any such requirement shall be mandatory.
D. Legal action by municipalities. If any industrial user violates the
provisions of this article, Township, federal or state pretreatment
standards or pretreatment requirements, its industrial waste discharge
permit, any prohibition, limitation, condition or requirements contained
therein or herein or any order issued by the Township or other
governmental authority having jurisdiction related to the sewerage
system or the sewer service of the Township or West Goshen Township
in the case where the user is connected to the West Goshen Township
sewerage system, either the Township or West Goshen Township in the
case where the user is connected to the West Goshen Township
sewerage system, or both, may commence an action or actions at law or
in equity for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Court of
Common Pleas of Chester County, and may, in addition, take such other
enforcement action as provided for in this section.
§ 132-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-49
1:201
adoption of this article, enact regulations imposing the discharge
restrictions (and require compliance with industrial waste discharge
permits), charges, reporting and monitoring requirements no less stringent
than those set forth in this article on all users within its jurisdiction, and
establishing procedures for compliance with this article. Such requirement
shall be embodied in a written agreement between the Township and such
municipality. All such regulations so adopted shall be amended within 60
days, as necessary, to impose the same standards and requirements as
those imposed by the Township through amendment of this article. Such
municipality shall, upon adoption of the required regulations, give written
notice to all commercial and industrial dischargers connected to the
municipality's sewerage system of all of the regulatory compliance
requirements related to industrial waste discharge permits.
§ 132-50. Civil penalties for industrial users.
A. The Township may establish by resolution adopted by the Board of
Supervisors a recommended schedule of civil penalties which may be
imposed by the Township against any industrial user who violates a
provision of this article or its industrial waste discharge permit that is
in significant noncompliance or which fails to respond timely and
adequately to any notice of violation issued by the Township in
accordance with the Township's civil assessment policy. In assessing
such penalties, the Township shall provide the noncomplying industrial
user with the opportunity to show cause why a civil penalty pursuant to
§ 132-52 hereof should not be assessed. Notice shall be served upon the
industrial user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by
the Township's Board of Supervisors, or a hearing officer designated by
the Board for that purpose. Notice of the hearing shall be served by the
Township's administrative staff upon the industrial user and any other
party in interest at least 10 days before the hearing by regular United
States Mail, postage prepaid.
B. In furtherance of any such proceeding, the Board or hearing officer, as
the case may be, shall have the following powers:
(1) Issue in the name of the Township notices of hearings requesting
the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;
(2) Issue subpoenas and take the evidence; and
(3) Make findings of fact, conclusions of law and render a decision and
order, which may include the imposition of a civil penalty or such
other order as the Board shall direct.
C. Testimony at the hearing shall be under oath and recorded
stenographically. A transcript shall be made available to any party to
the proceeding upon payment of the charges therefor. All other
administrative costs of the proceedings, including but not limited to
stenographer attendance fees, advertising, postage and notices and
§ 132-49 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-50
1:202
§ 132-51. Injunctions against violations of pretreatment standards.
The Township may seek injunctive relief in a proceeding in equity for
the prevention, abatement or termination of any prohibited discharge to
the sewerage system, for a violation of any pretreatment standard or for
violation of any other provision of this article in any of the following
circumstance. In any such proceeding, the Township may seek to collect any
civil penalties assessed, or unpaid, pursuant to §§ 132-50 and 132-52 hereof.
§ 132-52. Violations and penalties.
similar costs, shall be paid for by the user, who shall deposit with its
request for hearing a deposit escrow fee of $1,000 from which the
administrative fees shall be paid. Any balance remaining after payment
of all such costs shall be returned to the user requesting the hearing.
A. A discharge from an industrial user presents an imminent danger of
substantial harm to the sewerage system, Township personnel, the
environment or the public or imperils or results or may result in a
violation of any federal or state permits held by the Township or the
West Goshen Township Sewer Authority relating to the use, operation
and maintenance of the sewerage system.
B. A discharge from an industrial user presents an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the environment.
C. A discharge from an industrial user causes the Municipal Authority or
the West Goshen Township Sewer Authority to violate any condition of
their NPDES permit.
D. An industrial user has shown a lack of ability or intention to comply with
a pretreatment standard.
A. Fines to be established by Township and by municipalities. As a
precondition to the Township's acceptance of sewage effluent
containing industrial wastewater from another municipality, each
municipality that discharges or is connected to the sewerage system
shall, within 90 days of the adoption of this article, enact an ordinance
which provides that any industrial user who is found to have violated
the ordinance specified by § 132-49 hereof shall be liable to a fine of up
to $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution and the municipality's
reasonable attorney's fees, for each offense in a criminal enforcement
proceeding commenced before a District Justice. Each day on which a
violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and
distinct offense. Such requirement shall be embodied in a written
agreement between the Township and such municipality. In addition to
all other remedies and penalties provided for in this article, the
Township may commence and prosecute an enforcement action before
any District Justice for a violation of this article as provided for in this
section wherein the violator shall be subject to the fine, costs and fees
provided for herein; provided, however, that should any violation of this
§ 132-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-52
1:203
article constitute a violation of the Sewage Facilities Act,38 a District
Justice shall be authorized to impose a fine of up to $5,000, together
with the costs of prosecution and the municipality's reasonable
attorney's fees, for each such offense.
B. Action to enforce municipalities' ordinances applicable to any user.
Each municipality shall at the direction of the Township take any action
permitted by law or in equity to enforce any ordinance enacted
pursuant to §§ 132-49 or 132-52A of this article.
C. Civil penalties for violations by industrial users. To the extent that any
provisions of this article are enabled by the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act, Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. (1965) 1535, as amended,39
any industrial user who violates any substantive or procedural provision
of § 132-34 et seq. hereof or any term or condition of any industrial
waste discharge permit may, in addition to all other civil and criminal
penalties authorized by this article, be assessed a civil penalty of up to
$5,000 for each such violation, as is determined by the Township
depending upon the severity of the violation, pursuant to the
procedures and standards set forth in Section 13.1 of the Sewage
Facilities Act, 35 P.S. § 750.13a and 13b(b). In addition, the Township
may assess against and collect from such violator the cost of damages
caused by such violation and the cost of correcting the violation. Each
violation for each separate day shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a single operational upset
which gives rise to simultaneous violations shall be treated as a single
violation.
D. Uses of civil penalties collected by Township. Civil penalties collected
pursuant to this section shall be placed in a restricted account and shall
only be used for the repair of damage and any additional maintenance
needed or any additional costs imposed as a result of the violation for
which the penalty was imposed, to pay any penalties imposed upon the
Township by the federal or state governments for violation of
pretreatment standards, for the costs incurred by the Township to
investigate and take enforcement action that resulted in a penalty being
imposed and for the monitoring of discharges in a pretreatment
program. Funds remaining in the restricted account after the foregoing
uses have been met may be used for capital improvements to the
Township's sewerage system.
38.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
39.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 132-52 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-52
1:204
ARTICLE V
On-Lot Sewage Management
[Adopted 12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-3]
§ 132-53. Short title; introduction; purpose.
§ 132-54. Definitions.
A. This article shall be known and may be cited as "an Ordinance providing
for an On-Lot Sewage Management Program for Westtown Township."
B. In accordance with the Second Class Township Code (53 PS § 65101 et
seq.), the Clean Streams Law (Act of June 27, 1937, P.L. 1987, No. 394
as amended, 35 P.S. § 691.1 to 691.1001), and the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act (Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535 as amended, 35 P.S.
§ 750.1 et seq. known as "Act 537"), it is the power and the duty of
Westtown Township to provide for adequate sewage treatment and
disposal facilities and for the protection of the public health by
preventing the discharge of untreated or inadequately treated sewage.
The Official Sewage Facilities Plan for Westtown Township indicates
that it is necessary to formulate and implement a sewage management
program to effectively prevent and abate water pollution and hazards to
the public health caused by improper treatment and disposal of sewage.
C. The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation, inspection,
maintenance and rehabilitation of on-lot sewage disposal systems; to
further allow intervention in situations which may constitute a public
nuisance or hazard to the public health; and to establish penalties and
appeal procedures necessary for the proper administration of a sewage
management program.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 537 — The Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S.
§ 750.1 et seq., known as the "Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act."
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A person with demonstrated knowledge and
experience regarding on-lot sewage disposal system design, operation,
and maintenance who is authorized to function within specified limits
as an agent of Westtown Township to administer or enforce the
provisions of this article.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors, Westtown Township, Chester
County, Pennsylvania.
COMMUNITY ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage system which
serves two or more lots, or two or more equivalent dwelling units, and
uses a system of piping, tanks, or other facilities for collecting, treating,
and disposing of sewage into a soil absorption area, retaining tank, or
cesspool.
§ 132-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-54
1:205
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (DEP).
INDIVIDUAL ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage system which
serves a single lot and a single equivalent dwelling unit, and uses a
system of piping, tanks, or other facilities for collecting, treating, and
disposing of sewage into a soil absorption area, spray field, retaining
tank, or cesspool.
INDIVIDUAL RESIDENTIAL SPRAY IRRIGATION SYSTEM (IRSIS) —
An individual sewage system which serves a single dwelling and which
treats and disposes of sewage through using a system of piping,
treatment tanks, and soil renovation through spray irrigation.
INITIAL TREATMENT UNIT — Term used to describe the on-lot
disposal system receiving unit to which sewage is delivered from a
sewage generating facility. The term includes, but is not limited to,
septic tanks, aerobic treatment units, and cesspools.
LIQUID WASTE — Septage pumped from septic tanks, cesspools,
holding tanks, privies, or chemical toilets which does not include any
toxic, industrial, or hazardous wastes.
LIQUID WASTE HAULER — Any person engaged in the business of
pumping and transporting liquid waste within Chester County using
vehicles licensed by the Chester County Health Department.
LOT — A parcel of land, undivided by any street or dedicated future
street right-of-way. Such parcel shall be separately described by metes
and bounds, the description of which is recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Chester County by deed description or is
described by an approved subdivision plan recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Chester County.
MAINTENANCE CONTRACTOR — A private independent contractor
who has been given training by the original equipment manufacturer
on the operations of applicable sewage system components, has been
authorized by the manufacturer to service said components, or has
demonstrated technical expertise in the field of on-lot sewage system
maintenance. All maintenance contractors shall be approved by the
Township to provide such maintenance services within the borders of
the Township.
MALFUNCTION — A condition which occurs when an on-lot sewage
disposal system discharges sewage onto the surface of the ground,
into groundwaters of this commonwealth, into surface waters of this
commonwealth, backs up into a building connected to the system or
in any manner causes a nuisance or hazard to the public health or
pollution of ground- or surface water or contamination of public or
private drinking water wells. Systems shall be considered to be
malfunctioning if any condition noted above occurs for any length of
time during any period of the year.
§ 132-54 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-54
1:206
OFFICIAL SEWAGE FACILITIES ACT 537 PLAN — A comprehensive
plan for the provisions of adequate sewage disposal systems, adopted
by the Board and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act.
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any community on-lot sewage
system or individual on-lot sewage system as defined herein.
PERSON — Any individual, association, public or private corporation
for profit or not for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department,
board, bureau or agency of the commonwealth, political subdivision,
municipality, district, authority, or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty or
imposing a fine or imprisonment, the term "person" shall include the
members of an association, partnership or firm and the officers of any
local agency or municipal, public or private corporation for profit or not
for profit.
REHABILITATION — Work done to modify, alter, repair, enlarge or
replace an existing on-lot sewage disposal system.
RETAINING TANK — A watertight receptacle that receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate
disposal of the sewage at another site. This term is synonymous with
the term "holding tank."
SEPTAGE — The residual scum, sludge, and other materials pumped
from, but not limited to, initial treatment units, other treatment tanks,
retaining tanks, pump tanks, and the systems they serve.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products
or excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or
animals and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or
inimical to the public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of
water for domestic water supply or for recreation or which constitutes
pollution under the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as
"the Clean Streams Law," as amended.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — A person certified by
DEP who is employed by the Chester County Health Department. Such
person is authorized to conduct investigations and inspections, review
permit applications, and do all other activities as may be provided for
such person in the Sewage Facilities Act, the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder and this article or any other ordinance
adopted by the Township or Chester County Health Department.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — A comprehensive set of legal
and administrative requirements encompassing the requirements of
this article, the Sewage Facilities Act, the Clean Streams Law, the
regulations promulgated thereunder and such other requirements
adopted by the Board to effectively enforce and administer this article.
§ 132-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-54
1:207
§ 132-55. Applicability.
From the effective date of this article, its provisions shall apply to all
portions of the Township served by on-lot sewage disposal systems. Within
such an area or areas, the provisions of this article shall apply to all persons
owning any property serviced by an on-lot sewage disposal system and to
all persons installing or rehabilitating on-lot sewage disposal systems.
§ 132-56. Permit requirements.
§ 132-57. Inspections.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Westtown, Chester County,
Pennsylvania.
B. The definition of any term defined herein is specific to this article. Any
term which is not defined herein shall have that meaning attributed to it
under the Sewage Facilities Act and regulations promulgated thereto,
also solely for the purposes of this article.
A. No building permit shall be issued for a new building which will utilize
an on-lot sewage disposal system until an on-lot sewage disposal system
permit has been issued by the Chester County Health Department SEO.
Proof of on-lot sewage disposal system permit issuance shall be
presented to the Township in the form of a properly executed permit
signed by the Chester County Health Department SEO.
B. No occupancy permit shall be issued for a new building which will
utilize an on-lot sewage disposal system until the sewage disposal
system has been installed and the completed installation is approved by
the Chester County Health Department SEO. Proof of on-lot sewage
disposal system final installation approval shall be presented to the
Township in the form of a properly executed permit signed by the
Chester County Health Department SEO.
C. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for and no work shall
begin on any alteration or conversion of any existing structure if said
alteration or conversion will result in the increase or potential increase
in sewage flows from the structure, until either the structure's owner
receives a permit from the Chester County Health Department SEO for
alteration or replacement of the existing sewage disposal system or
until the structure's owner and the appropriate officials of the Township
receive written notification from the Chester County Health
Department SEO that such a permit will not be required. The Chester
County Health Department SEO shall determine whether the proposed
alteration or conversion of the structure will result in increased sewage
flows.
D. Sewage permits may be issued only by a Sewage Enforcement Officer
employed by the Chester County Health Department.
§ 132-54 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-57
1:208
A. Initial inspections.
(1) Each person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal
system shall employ a maintenance contractor to complete an
initial inspection for the purpose of determining the type,
condition, and maintenance needs of each on-lot sewage disposal
system. All such inspections shall be completed within three years
of the effective date of this article, although the Board may define
subsets of the Township where initial inspections shall be
completed in shorter prescribed periods in order to facilitate
administration.
(2) Initial inspections may be conducted concurrent with the pumping
requirements of § 132-59A or § 132-59B, as applicable. However, if
the liquid depth in the initial treatment unit is above the unit's
outlet piping, the initial treatment unit must be pumped dry at the
time of inspection. Pumping may also be required at the time of
inspection for other conditions which would prevent a satisfactory
inspection where such conditions are identified by the maintenance
contractor and the requirement for pumping is verified by the
Township's authorized agent. [Amended 11-17-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-2]
(3) A written inspection report signed by the maintenance contractor
shall be furnished to the Township by the person owning the
property served by the on-lot sewage disposal system within 30
days of the inspection. All written inspection reports shall be on a
form provided by the Township.
(4) Initial inspection requirements may be waived for the following
conditions:
(a) A new system has been installed in accordance with all Chester
County Health Department and DEP standards within one year
prior to the effective date of this article. Copies of all approved
Chester County Health Department permit data, including plot
plan, as-built plot plan, design specifications, and installation
inspection reports must be submitted to the Township by the
property owner to qualify for a waiver from the initial
inspection requirements.
(b) A property owner has applied for a Chester County Health
Department permit to repair a malfunctioning on-lot sewage
disposal system but no repair was deemed possible by the
Health Department. Copies of all Chester County Health
Department documentation, including the permit application
form, soils testing field reports, and a written determination
from the Health Department that no repair is possible must be
submitted to the Township by the property owner to qualify for
a waiver from the initial inspection requirements. Any such
waiver will not absolve the property owner from the
§ 132-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-57
1:209
§ 132-58. Operation.
responsibility to maintain the on-lot sewage disposal system in
a manner to prevent malfunction, including frequent pumping,
water conservation, or any other means deemed acceptable by
the Chester County Health Department. The property owner
shall further assume an ongoing responsibility to revisit
options for repair of the on-lot sewage disposal system with the
Chester County Health Department at least annually in order
to determine whether any new technologies may have been
approved by DEP which would allow for permit issuance to
repair the on-lot sewage disposal system.
B. Routine inspections.
(1) Each person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal
system shall employ a maintenance contractor to complete routine
inspections for the purpose of evaluating ongoing condition and
maintenance needs of each on-lot sewage disposal system in the
Township.
(2) Routine inspections shall be completed every three years after the
date of initial inspection, the date of a new on-lot sewage disposal
system installation pursuant to § 132-57A(4)(a), or the date of any
waiver granted pursuant to § 132-57A(4)(b), as applicable. Routine
inspections shall also be completed every three years after final
installation approval by the Chester County Health Department
SEO for all on-lot sewage disposal systems constructed after the
effective date of this article.
(3) Routine inspections may be conducted concurrent with the
pumping requirements of § 132-59A or B, as applicable.
(4) A written inspection report signed by the maintenance contractor
shall be furnished to the Township by the person owning the
property served by the on-lot sewage disposal system within 30
days of the inspection. All written inspection reports shall be on a
form provided by the Township.
A. Only normal domestic wastes shall be discharged into any on-lot
sewage disposal system. The following shall not be discharged into the
system:
(1) Industrial waste.
(2) Automobile oil and other nondomestic oil.
(3) Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including but not
limited to, pesticides, disinfectants (excluding household cleaners),
acids, paints, paint thinners, herbicides, gasoline and other
solvents.
§ 132-57 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-58
1:210
§ 132-59. Maintenance.
(4) Clean surface water or groundwater, including water from roof or
cellar drains, springs, basement sump pumps, french drains, airconditioner
condensate discharges, and dehumidifier discharges.
(5) Wastewater resulting from hair treatment at a multi-chaired beauty
shops.
(6) Any nonbiodegradable materials.
B. The Township may require other operation or maintenance procedures
to ensure proper on-lot sewage disposal system performance.
A. Each person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal
system shall have the initial treatment unit pumped within three years
of the effective date of this article by a Chester County Health
Department licensed liquid waste hauler. Thereafter, the property
owner shall have the system pumped at least once every three years.
Receipts from the Chester County Health Department licensed liquid
waste hauler shall be submitted by the property owner to the Township
within the prescribed pumping periods.
B. The required pumping frequency may be modified at the discretion of
the Board of Supervisors or the Township's authorized agent if the
initial treatment unit is undersized, if an inspection reveals solids or
scum in excess of 1/3 of the liquid depth of the tank, if the hydraulic
load on the system increases significantly above average, if a garbage
grinder is used in the building, if the system malfunctions or for other
good cause shown.
C. All on-lot sewage disposal system pumping shall be performed in
accordance with Chapter 504 of the Chester County Health Department
regulations and shall also conform to the following minimum standards,
unless other standards are specified by an equipment manufacturer:
(1) At all times, the pumper truck operator's personal safety, as well as
protection of the environment and the landowner's property, shall
receive the highest priority.
(2) Initial treatment units shall only be pumped from or through the
manhole or access port (i.e., the largest tank opening).
(3) Initial treatment units shall not be pumped from or through the
observation or inspection port.
(4) When necessary to break up solids, backwashing with clean water
or material of a similar nature already on board the pumper truck
may be employed. Mechanical means (scraping, raking, etc.) are
not necessary but may be employed, provided that appropriate
safeguards are taken to prevent injury.
§ 132-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-59
1:211
§ 132-60. System rehabilitation.
(5) When backwashing, care shall be taken not to fill or refill the initial
treatment units to a level greater than 12 inches below the
elevation of the outlet pipe, where applicable.
(6) No liquids or solids are to be discharged into or through the outlet
pipe, where applicable.
(7) Initial treatment units shall be deemed to be cleaned when all
organic solids are removed and the total average liquid depth
remaining is less than one inch.
(8) At all times, and in all phases of operations, the liquid waste hauler
shall comply with all laws and regulations regarding the activities
associated with on-lot sewage disposal system maintenance and
disposal of materials removed therefrom.
D. Any person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal
system which utilizes any components or technologies deemed by DEP
to require more detailed operation and maintenance requirements than
provided for in this article, including but not limited to individual
residential spray irrigation systems (IRSIS), alternate systems, or
experimental systems shall be further subject to the maintenance
responsibilities recommended by DEP for said system. The Township
may impose additional requirements as deemed necessary to provide
for the increased oversight inherent in these cases, including but not
limited to collection of an annual fee and additional financial security.
E. Surface contouring shall be required as necessary to direct surface
water and drainageways away from all components of on-lot sewage
disposal systems.
F. Additional maintenance activity may be required as needed including,
but not limited to, providing reasonable access to initial treatment unit,
cleaning and unclogging of piping, servicing and the repair of
mechanical and electrical equipment, leveling of distribution boxes,
tanks and lines, removal of obstructing roots or trees, etc.
A. No person shall operate or maintain an on-lot sewage disposal system
in such a manner to constitute a malfunction. Any suspected
malfunction shall be reported to the Chester County Health Department
SEO, who shall make a final determination as to functional status and
rehabilitation measures required. Any person owning a building served
by an on-lot sewage disposal system determined to be in a state of
malfunction by the Chester County Health Department SEO shall
perform all corrective measures required by the SEO to abate the
malfunction. The Chester County Health Department SEO shall have
the authority to require abatement of any malfunction by the following
methods: cleaning, repair or replacement of components of the existing
system, adding capacity or otherwise altering or replacing the system's
§ 132-59 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-60
1:212
§ 132-61. Retaining tanks.
initial treatment unit, expanding the existing disposal areas, replacing
the existing disposal area, replacing the system with a retaining tank,
frequent pumping, or any other alternative appropriate for the specific
site.
B. In the event other remedies described in this section fail to abate a
malfunction, the Chester County Health Department's Sewage
Enforcement Officer and/or the Township's authorized agent may
require the installation of water conservation equipment and the
institution of water conservation practices in structures served. Water
using devices and appliances in the structure may be required to be
retrofitted with water saving appurtenances or they may be required to
be replaced by water conserving devices.
C. Should none of the remedies described in this section be totally
effective in eliminating the malfunction of an existing on-lot sewage
disposal system, the property owner is not absolved of responsibility for
that malfunction. The Township and the Chester County Health
Department may require action by the property owner to lessen or
mitigate the malfunction to the extent necessary.
D. There may arise geographic areas where numerous on-lot sewage
disposal systems are known or are suspected to be in a state of
malfunction. A resolution of these area-wide problems may necessitate
detailed planning and a revision to the portion of the Sewage Facilities
Plan pertaining to areas affected by such malfunctions. When a DEPauthorized
Official Sewage Facilities Plan Revision has been
undertaken, mandatory repair or replacement of individual
malfunctioning sewage disposal systems within the area affected by the
revision may be delayed, pending the outcome of the plan revision
process. However, immediate corrective action may be compelled
whenever a malfunction, as determined by the Chester County Health
Department and/or the Department, represents a serious public health
or environmental threat.
A. Retaining tanks shall only be utilized as a remedy for a malfunctioning
on-lot sewage disposal system when it has been determined by the
Chester County Health Department SEO and the Township that no
other remedy is viable.
B. Where no on-lot sewage disposal system malfunction has been
identified by the Chester County Health Department, the use of
retaining tanks shall be subject to approval by the Board, the Chester
County Health Department, and DEP. Board approval shall be further
predicated upon a satisfactory operation and maintenance agreement
specific to each use, to which both the Township and the property
owner shall be party. The Township may impose additional
requirements as deemed necessary, including but not limited to
collection of financial security and an annual fee.
§ 132-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-61
1:213
§ 132-62. Liens.
The Township, upon written notice from the Chester County Health
Department's Sewage Enforcement Officer that an imminent health hazard
exists due to failure of the property owner to maintain an on-lot sewage
disposal system, shall have the authority to perform, or contract to have
performed, the work required by the Chester County Health Department's
Sewage Enforcement Officer. The owner shall be charged for the work
performed and, if necessary, a lien shall be entered therefor in accordance
with applicable law.
§ 132-63. Disposal of septage.
§ 132-64. Administration.
C. Retaining tank installation and use shall be subject to all the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code § 71.63 (relating to retaining tanks) and
the requirements of the Chester County Health Department.
D. Any person owning a building served by a retaining tank shall annually
provide to the Township a copy of a maintenance contract with a liquid
waste hauler licensed by the Chester County Health Department. The
contract shall provide for regular removal of the retaining tank
contents in accordance with Section 11 and with a frequency sufficient
to prevent the contents from overflowing on the ground surface. The
contract shall also specify the Chester County Health Department
license number of the liquid waste hauler and the disposal site(s) of the
retaining tank contents.
E. Retaining tank use shall be further subject to the provisions of the Code
of the Township of Westtown, Chapter 132, Article II, which governs
holding tank use.
A. All septage originating within the Sewage Management District shall be
disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the Solid Waste
Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.) and all
other applicable laws and at sites or facilities approved by DEP.
B. Pumper/haulers operating within the Township shall operate in a
manner consistent with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste
Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. §§ 6018.101 through
6018.1003), all other applicable laws, and Chester County Health
Department regulations.
A. The Township shall fully utilize those powers it possesses through
enabling statutes and ordinances to effect the purposes of this article.
B. The Township shall employ or contract with qualified individuals to
carry out the provisions of this article. Those employees and/or
contractors shall include an authorized agent and may include an
administrator and such other persons as may be necessary. The
§ 132-61 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-64
1:214
§ 132-65. Appeals.
Township may also contract with private qualified persons or firms as
necessary to carry out the provisions of this article.
C. The Township's authorized agent shall have the right to enter upon land
for the purpose of administering the provisions of this article. The
Township shall provide a written notice to the property owner no less
than 14 days prior to any entry upon property for these purposes,
unless the Township, Chester County Health Department or DEP has
determined that potential an imminent public health hazard exists, in
which case the Township may conduct such actions at any reasonable
time. The Township's authorized agent shall have a photographic proof
of identification and shall present same to the property owner upon
request whenever entering upon land to administer the provisions of
this article.
D. All records pertaining to sewage permits, building permits, occupancy
permits and all other aspects of the Sewage Management Program shall
be made available for inspection consistent with the provisions of the
Open Records Law.
E. The Board shall establish all administrative procedures necessary to
properly carry out the provisions of this article.
F. The Board may by resolution establish a fee schedule, and authorize the
collection of fees, to cover the cost to the Township of administering
this article.
A. Appeals from final decisions of the Township or any of its authorized
agents under this article shall be made to the Board in writing within 30
days from the date of written notification of the decision in question.
B. The appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Board at its next
regularly scheduled meeting, if a written appeal is received at least 14
days prior to that meeting. If the appeal is received within 14 days of
the next regularly scheduled meeting, the appeal shall be heard at the
following regularly scheduled meeting. The Board shall thereafter
affirm, modify, or reverse the aforesaid decision. The hearing may be
postponed for a good cause shown in writing by the appellant or the
Township. Additional evidence may be introduced at the hearing,
provided that it is submitted with the written notice of appeal.
C. A decision shall be rendered in writing within 30 days of the date of the
hearing.
D. Hearings under this subsection shall be conducted pursuant to the Act
of December 2, 1968 (P.L. 1133, No. 353), known as the "Pennsylvania
Local Agency Act."
§ 132-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-66
1:215
§ 132-66. Violations and penalties.
In addition to a proceeding under any other remedy available to the
Township at law or in equity for a violation of any provision of this article
or any rule or regulation promulgated under this article or any order
issued by the Township or any permit issued by the Chester County Health
Department and/or the Township pursuant to this article, the Township,
after notices and hearing, may assess a civil penalty against any person
for that violation. All proceedings by the Township to impose civil penalties
pursuant to this section shall be governed in all respects by the provisions
of § 13.1 of Act 537 (35 P.S. § 750.13a) which are incorporated herein by
reference in their entirety.
§ 132-66 WESTTOWN CODE § 132-66
1:216
Chapter 140
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 63.
§ 132-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-66
1:217

ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted 6-6-1994 by Ord. No. 94-2]
§ 140-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Municipal Waste and Recycling
Ordinance".
§ 140-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings hereinafter ascribed to them, except when the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act adopted by the State of Pennsylvania in 1988.40
ALUMINUM — Used cans comprised of 100% aluminum.
BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Empty food or beverage containers consisting of
ferrous sides and bottom and an aluminum top.
BULK WASTE — Any discarded items that are of a size such that they cannot
be placed in a standard size municipal waste container. Bulk waste shall not
include construction debris, hazardous materials, automotive parts, tires or
leaves.
CLEAR GLASS — Empty bottles, jars and food or beverage containers made
of clear transparent glass. Expressly excluded are nonglass, plate glass,
blue, green or brown glass, porcelain and ceramic products.
COLORED GLASS — Empty bottles, jars and food or beverage containers
made of green or brown glass.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY/ESTABLISHMENT — All properties/
establishments used for commercial or industrial purposes.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS — Customary, nonhazardous waste building
materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition
operations.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Any structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste which consists in any part of a chemical,
compound, mixture, substance or article designated by a federal agency,
including the United States Environmental Protection Agency,
commonwealth, county or township agency to be "hazardous," "toxic" or
"dangerous," as those terms are defined by or pursuant to federal, state,
county or local law.
40.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 140-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-2
1:219
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Any bond, copier, letterhead or
mimeograph paper typically sold as "white ledger" paper; and computer
paper.
INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY/ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment
engaged in service, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
MULTIUNIT RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY/ESTABLISHMENTS — Occupied
dwellings having more than four units per structure which do not have
separate entrances for each unit onto a public or approved private street
and do not have separate facilities for each unit for municipal waste
collection. Dwelling units having or attached to a commercial use are
included in this category.
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY/ESTABLISHMENT — Any facility or building
owned or operated by a local government or county government, local
government or county government authority, state government or agency or
federal government or agency.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING PROGRAM — A source-separation and collection
program for municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials, or
a program for designated drop-off points or collection centers for recycling
municipal waste or centers for recycling municipal waste or sourceseparated
recyclable materials, that is operated by or on behalf of a
municipality. The term includes any source-separation and collection
program for composting yard waste that is operated by or on behalf of
a municipality. The term shall not include any program for recycling
construction/demolition waste or sludge from sewage treatment plants or
water supply treatment plants.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
in the Solid Waste Management Act41 from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, waste water treatment plant
or air pollution control facility. Municipal waste shall also include garden
residues, grass clippings, shrubbery and tree trimmings and similar
materials, excluding leaves. The term does not include source-separated
recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPER — Includes paper of the type commonly referred to as
newsprint and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having
printed thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and
other matters of public interest, specifically excluding magazines and
periodicals.
PERSON — Every natural person, firm, corporation, partnership,
association or institution.
41.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 140-2 WESTTOWN CODE § 140-2
1:220
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY/ESTABLISHMENT — Occupied single-family or
multifamily dwelling having no more than four units per structure.
Condominiums, townhouses and like dwellings having a separate entrance
for each unit onto a public or approved private street and which have
individual facilities for each unit for municipal waste collection are included
in this category.
SEPARATION/SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS —
Materials that are separated from municipal waste at the point of origin for
the purposes of recycling. The term is limited to clear glass, colored glass,
aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans, high-grade office paper, newsprint,
corrugated paper and plastics.
§ 140-3. Dumping restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, dump, spill, throw, place or
bury, or permit another to deposit, dump, spill, throw, place or bury in or
upon any parcel of land, lot, street, highway, gutter or in any alley or in any
water or stream or in any quarry or ditch within the limits of the Township
of Westtown any municipal waste.
§ 140-4. Municipal waste storage and collection.
The storage and collection of all municipal waste from residential, multiunit
residential, commercial, municipal and institutional properties shall comply
with the provisions of this article and such rules and regulations as may
from time to time be adopted by resolution of the Township Supervisors.
§ 140-5. Establishment of mandatory recycling program.
On and after July 1, 1991, and under the regulations and schedules issued
by the township in accordance with the terms of this article, there is hereby
established a mandatory recycling program in which township residents
and property owners shall participate and which requires the recyclable
materials generated within the township and set forth in § 140-7 to be
separated from other municipal waste materials stored on the premises
where generated until collection.
§ 140-6. Applicability.
A. The provisions of this article establishing a mandatory recycling
program shall be applicable to residential property which qualifies to
have municipal waste collected by or on behalf of the township.
B. With respect to residential establishments with more than four units,
the owner shall comply by establishing a collection system at its sole
cost and expense. The collection system must include suitable
containers for the sorting and separation of the recyclable materials in
easily accessible locations. The owner must provide written instructions
to the occupants of such units stating the materials to be recycled, how
the materials are to be prepared and how to use the collection system.
§ 140-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-6
1:221
§ 140-7. Recyclable materials.
§ 140-8. Designation of collector.
The owner must provide for collection of the recyclable materials at
least once per month.
C. Commercial, municipal and institutional establishments shall develop,
implement and maintain a recycling program and provide at their sole
cost and expense for the separation, storage and collection of the
recyclable materials. Owners, operators or administrators of such
establishments shall inform and instruct all employees, patrons and
residents on the features and requirements of the recycling program.
Persons occupying commercial, municipal or institutional
establishments may obtain an exemption from the recycling
requirements in this article only in accordance with § 1501(c)(1)(iii) of
Act 101 of 1988.42
A. All residential properties, including those with more than four units,
shall be required to separate for collection at least three materials as
set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. These materials shall be
chosen from the following: clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel
and bimetallic cans, high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated
paper and plastics.
B. All commercial, municipal and institutional establishments shall be
required to separate for collection high-grade office paper, corrugated
paper and aluminum.
C. All residential, commercial, municipal and institutional establishments
shall separate leaf waste from municipal waste and either compost,
place for separate collection or otherwise dispose of it in an approved
manner.
A. All municipal waste and materials designated by the township to be
recycled shall be collected from residential properties only by the
collector/hauler selected by the township as the successful bidder
determined through competitive bidding, as allowed by 53 P.S.
§ 4000.304(c). The selected collector/hauler shall comply with all
specifications and regulations adopted by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors and shall comply with the licensing requirements in
§ 140-9.
B. Residential establishments with more than four units, and commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments, shall contract at their sole
cost and expense for the collection of municipal waste and the required
recyclables. Such establishments may select any collector/hauler
licensed by Westtown Township in accordance with § 140-9.
42.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.1501.
§ 140-6 WESTTOWN CODE § 140-9
1:222
§ 140-9. Licensing of municipal waste and recyclables collectors.
[Amended 10-4-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8]
§ 140-10. Reporting requirements for licensed haulers.
§ 140-11. Imposition of residential collection fees.
There is hereby imposed upon each residential property which qualifies to
have such collection made by or on behalf of the township a fee for the
collection of municipal waste, recyclables and leaves:
A. Only a person licensed by the County of Chester under the Chester
County Municipal Waste Flow Control Ordinance may collect municipal
waste and recyclables within the township.
B. All persons licensed by Chester County to collect municipal waste and
recyclables within the township shall file annually with the township a
copy of the Chester County municipal waste hauler license application
required by the County Municipal Waste Flow Control Ordinance,
together with all supporting documentation, and a copy of the annual
license issued by the county. All material shall be submitted to the
township within 30 days of the date of issuance of the annual license.
C. Failure to file the material required by this § 140-9 shall subject the
licensee to the penalties provided for in this article.
A. All persons licensed by Chester County to collect municipal waste or
recyclables under § 140-9 shall submit a quarterly report to the
township on a form provided by the township or on a form provided by
the licensee which includes all of the information required under this
§ 140-10. [Amended 10-4-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8]
B. The report shall contain a list of the establishments in the township,
including street addresses, for which the licensee collected municipal
waste and/or recyclables.
C. The report shall give the total weight of municipal waste and the total
weight of each recyclable material collected by the licensee in
Westtown Township. Weight slips for the waste and recyclables
included in the report shall be made available to the township upon
request.
D. Failure to file the required report in a timely manner shall subject the
licensee to the penalties provided for in this article. [Amended
10-4-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8]
A. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
B. Bills for collection fees shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
property and will be mailed to the owner's address on file with the
township, unless and until a different address is specified in writing by
§ 140-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-11
1:223
§ 140-12. Residential collection schedule.
Municipal waste, recyclables and leaves shall be collected curbside from
each residential property which qualifies to have collection made by or on
behalf of the township in accordance with the following:
the owner of such property to the township. Failure of the owner to
receive a bill as a result of an incorrect address or otherwise shall
not excuse payment of collection fees or extend the time for payment
thereof. It shall be incumbent upon all owners of property for which
such collection services are provided to notify the township of the
correct billing address or any changes thereto.
C. Collection fees shall be billed in advance for the next calendar quarter
on the first of the month preceding the quarter for which the collection
service will be rendered.
D. All quarterly bills shall be due and payable on their respective dates as
follows:
(1) Payments shall be made by the 15th day of the second month of the
calendar quarter for which the service is billed. [Amended
6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 95-4]
(2) If paid after the 15th day of the second month of the calendar
quarter for which the service is billed, a ten-percent penalty shall
be added to the face amount of the bill. [Amended 6-5-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-4]
(3) Payments made, as evidenced by the United States Post Office
postmark, on or previous to the last date of a payment period shall
be deemed a payment within such period.
E. All collection fees not paid by the penalty period as determined in this
article shall be deemed to be delinquent. This article is adopted
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Law, 53
P.S. § 7101 et seq., so that all delinquent fees, penalties and charges
thereon may be collected by appropriate legal action, including a lien
against the property or any manner and by any proceeding otherwise
provided by law. A charge as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors shall be imposed by the township for filing and
legal costs for each property liened. The township may authorize the
Solicitor to proceed with the sheriff sale process for the liened property
if the account is not paid in full within six months after the lien is filed.
At this time, filing and legal costs as set from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors shall be added to the account. [Amended
4-1-1996 by Ord. No. 96-443]
A. Municipal waste, not less often than once each week. [Amended
6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-3]
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 140-11 WESTTOWN CODE § 140-12
1:224
§ 140-13. Collection by unauthorized persons prohibited.
§ 140-14. Public information and education program.
Every six months after the initiation of this recycling program, the township
shall notify all persons occupying residential, commercial, institutional and
municipal premises within its boundaries of the requirements of this article
and of the features of the recycling program. The Board of Supervisors
may, in its discretion as it deems necessary and appropriate, place an
advertisement in a newspaper circulating in the municipality, post a notice
in public places where public notices are customarily posted, include a
notice with other official notifications periodically mailed to residential
taxpayers or utilize any combination of the foregoing.
§ 140-15. Rules and regulations.
The collection of municipal waste and recyclable materials by municipal
waste collectors and the preparation for collection of municipal waste and
recyclable materials by property owners and residents of the township
shall be made in compliance with the regulations to be adopted by the
Board of Supervisors of Westtown Township to carry out the intent and
B. Recyclables, once each week on one of the municipal waste collection
days.
C. Leaves, three times during leaf season.
D. Bulk waste, once per month on one of the municipal waste collection
days.
E. The scheduled days and routes for the collections in Subsections A, B, C
and D shall be set by the collector/hauler selected by the township in
accordance with § 140-8A of this article. Notice to residents of the
scheduled collection days shall be the responsibility of the collector/
hauler. Regulations regarding the preparation and placement of
materials for collection shall be set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
A. From the time the recyclable materials herein defined are placed at the
curb or other designated place for collection by the township pursuant
to the provisions of this article and other rules and regulations adopted
thereunder, said recyclable materials shall become and be the property
of the township or its assigns.
B. It shall be a violation of this article for any person not duly authorized
by the township to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked
up any recyclable materials placed at the curb or any other designated
place for collection by the township pursuant to the provisions of this
article. Any and each unauthorized collection and violation hereof from
one or more residences shall be construed to be separate and distinct
offenses punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 140-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-15
1:225
purpose of this article. Such rules and regulations shall be approved by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors and, when so approved, shall have
the same force and effect as the provisions of this article. The said rules
and regulations may be amended, modified or repealed, by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 140-16. Compliance.
Every person, whether as owner or occupier of a property within the
township, who produces municipal waste, recyclables or like material as
referred to in this article, or being responsible for the existence or disposal
of such materials, shall be responsible to pay the fees and other charges
as provided for herein and shall be the proper subject of the enforcement
procedures as provided for herein.
§ 140-17. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each
section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.
B. The township may enforce the terms of this article by appropriate
proceedings in law or equity.
C. This penalty provision shall not be construed to prevent prosecutions
under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code for violations of this article.
§ 140-15 WESTTOWN CODE § 140-17
1:226
Chapter 144
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 57.
Erosion, sediment control and grading — See
Ch. 80.
Sewer system collection and conveyance
regulation — See Ch. 132.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 146.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 149.
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 140-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-17
1:227

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 144-101. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Westtown Township Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
§ 144-102. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from land disturbance and development throughout a watershed
increases flooding, flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and
sedimentation, overtaxes the capacity of streams and storm sewers,
greatly increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage
stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood reduction
efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces infiltration
and groundwater recharge, increases nonpoint source pollution to
waterways, and threatens public health and safety.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land disturbance and development throughout a watershed can
harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of streambeds and stream banks, thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat, and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy
metals, and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted
through loss of recharge.
C. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
minimization of impacts of new development, redevelopment, and other
earth-disturbance activities causing accelerated runoff and erosion and
loss of natural infiltration, is fundamental to the public health, safety,
and general welfare of the people of the municipality and all of the
people of the Commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
D. Stormwater is an important water resource that provides infiltration
and groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Impacts from stormwater runoff can be minimized by reducing the
volume of stormwater generated and by using project designs that
maintain the natural hydrologic regime and sustain high water quality,
infiltration, stream base flow, and aquatic ecosystems. Cost-effective
and environmentally sensitive stormwater management can be
achieved through the use of nonstructural site design techniques that
minimize impervious surfaces, reduce disturbance of land and natural
resources, avoid sensitive areas (e.g., riparian buffers, floodplains,
§ 144-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-102
1:229
§ 144-103. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect public health, safety and general
welfare, property and water quality by implementing drainage and
stormwater management practices, criteria, and provisions included herein
for land development, construction and earth-disturbance activities, to
achieve the following throughout the municipality:
steep slopes, wetlands, etc.), and consider topography and soils to
maintain the natural hydrologic regime.
F. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
G. Federal and state regulations require the municipality to implement a
program of stormwater controls. The municipality is required to obtain
a permit and comply with its provisions for stormwater discharges from
its separate storm sewer system under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
H. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal or other storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of the waters of the commonwealth.
A. Reduce the frequency and magnitude of flooding and stormwater
impacts affecting people, property, infrastructure and public services.
B. Sustain or improve the natural hydrologic characteristics and water
quality of groundwater and surface waters.
C. Protect natural resources, including riparian and aquatic living
resources and habitats.
D. Maintain the natural hydrologic regime of land development sites and
their receiving watersheds.
E. Minimize land disturbance and protect and incorporate natural
hydrologic features, drainage patterns, infiltration, and flow conditions
within land development site designs.
F. Reduce and minimize the volume of stormwater generated, and manage
and release stormwater as close to the source of runoff as possible.
G. Provide infiltration and maintain natural groundwater recharge to
protect groundwater supplies and stream base flows, prevent
degradation of surface water and groundwater quality, and to otherwise
protect water resources.
H. Reduce stormwater pollutant loads to protect and improve the
chemical, physical, and biological quality of ground- and surface
waters.
I. Reduce scour, erosion and sedimentation of stream channels.
§ 144-102 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-103
1:230
J. Reduce flooding impacts and preserve and restore the natural floodcarrying
capacity of streams and their floodplains.
K. Protect adjacent and down-gradient lands from adverse impacts of
direct stormwater discharges.
L. Minimize impervious surfaces and connected impervious surfaces to
promote infiltration and reduce the volume and impacts of stormwater
runoff.
M. Provide proper long-term operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management facilities, BMPs and conveyances that are
implemented within the municipality.
N. Reduce the impacts of runoff from existing developed land undergoing
redevelopment while encouraging new development and
redevelopment in urban areas and areas designated for growth.
O. Implement an illicit discharge detection and elimination program that
addresses nonstormwater discharges.
P. Provide performance standards and design criteria based on
watershed-based stormwater management planning.
Q. Provide standards to meet certain NPDES stormwater permit
requirements.
R. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93, to protect, maintain, reclaim and
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of the
commonwealth.
S. Implement the requirements of total maximum daily load (TMDLs)
where applicable to waters within or impacted by the municipality.
T. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
U. Fulfill the purpose and requirements of PA Act 167 (PA Act 167, Section
3):
"(1) Encourage planning and management of stormwater runoff in
each watershed which is consistent with sound water and land
use practices.
(2) Authorize a comprehensive program of stormwater management
designated to preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity
of commonwealth streams; to preserve to the maximum extent
practicable natural stormwater runoff regimes and natural
course, current and cross section of water of the commonwealth;
and to protect and conserve groundwaters and groundwater
recharge areas.
§ 144-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-103
1:231
§ 144-104. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered or required to regulate land use activities
that affect runoff and surface and groundwater quality and quantity by the
authority of:
§ 144-105. Applicability.
(3) Encourage local administration and management of stormwater
consistent with the commonwealth's duty as trustee of natural
resources and the people's constitutional right to the preservation
of natural, economic, scenic, aesthetic, recreational and historic
values of the environment."
A. Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167) 32 P.S., § 680.1 et seq., as
amended, the Storm Water Management Act (hereinafter referred to as
"the Act");
B. Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.; and
C. Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as
amended, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247
(hereinafter referred to as the "MPC").
A. The following activities are regulated by this chapter:
(1) All regulated activities as defined in this chapter including, but not
limited to, new development, redevelopment, and earthdisturbance
activities that are located within the municipality shall
be subject to regulation by this chapter.
(2) Specific provisions from the previous "Chester Creek Act 167 Plan,"
adopted in 2003.
(3) When a building and/or grading permit is required for any
regulated activity on an existing parcel or approved lot created by a
subdivision and/or improved as a land development project,
issuance of the permit shall be conditioned upon adherence to the
terms of this chapter.
(4) This chapter contains the stormwater management performance
standards and design criteria that are necessary from a watershedbased
perspective. The municipality's stormwater management
conveyance and system design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet
type, collection system design and details, outlet structure design,
etc.) shall continue to be regulated by the applicable municipal
ordinance(s) and applicable state regulations, or as included in
§ 144-311 of this chapter.
B. Duty of persons engaged in a regulated activity. Notwithstanding any
provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any landowner or any
person engaged in a regulated activity, including but not limited to the
§ 144-103 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-105
1:232
§ 144-106. Exemptions and modified requirements.
alteration or development of land, which may affect stormwater runoff
characteristics, shall implement such measures as are reasonably
necessary to prevent injury to health, safety, or other property. Such
measures also shall include actions as are required to manage the
rate, volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater runoff in
a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property, and
water quality of waters of the commonwealth.
C. Phased and incremental project requirements.
(1) Any regulated activity (including but not limited to new
development, redevelopment, or earth disturbance) that is to take
place incrementally or in phases, or occurs in sequential projects
on the same parcel or property, shall be subject to regulation by
this chapter if the cumulative proposed impervious surface or earth
disturbance exceeds the corresponding threshold for exemption (as
presented in Table 106.1. Thresholds for regulated activities that
are exempt from Chapter Provisions Listed Below44).
(2) The date of adoption of this chapter shall be the starting point from
which to consider tracts as parent tracts relative to future
subdivisions, and from which impervious surface and earth
disturbance computations shall be cumulatively considered.
A. Requirements for exempt activities.
(1) An exemption from any requirement of this chapter shall not
relieve the applicant from implementing all other applicable
requirements of this chapter or from implementing such measures
as are necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare,
property and water quality.
(2) An exemption shall not relieve the applicant from complying with
the requirements for state-designated special protection waters
designated by PADEP as high quality (HQ) or exceptional value
(EV) waters, or any other current or future state or municipal water
quality protection requirements.
(3) An exemption under this chapter shall not relieve the applicant
from complying with all other applicable municipal ordinances or
regulations.
B. General exemptions. Regulated activities that: involve less than 1,000
square feet of proposed impervious surfaces and less than 5,000 square
feet of proposed earth disturbance; or are listed in § 144-106C, are
exempt from those (and only those) requirements of this chapter that
are included in the sections and articles listed in Table 106.1.
Exemptions are for the items noted in Table 106.1 only, and shall not
44.Editor's Note: Said table is located in § 144-106.
§ 144-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-106
1:233
relieve the landowner from other applicable requirements of this
chapter. Exemption shall not relieve the applicant from implementing
such measures as are necessary to protect health, safety, and welfare,
property, and water quality.
Table 106.1
Thresholds for Regulated Activities that are Exempt from
Chapter Provisions Listed Below
Ordinance
Article/Section
Activities
Listed in
§ 144-106C
<1,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Impervious
Surfaces AND
<5,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Earth
Disturbance
>1,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Impervious
Surfaces OR
>5,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed Earth
Disturbance
Article I Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
Article II Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
§§ 144-302, and
144-303,
144-311
Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
§§ 144-301,
144-304,
144-305,
144-306,
144-307,
144-308,
144-309, and
144-310
Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article IV Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article V Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article VI Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article VII Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article VIII Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
Article IX Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
Other erosion,
sediment and
pollution control
requirements
Must comply with Title 25, Chapter 102, of the Pa.
Code and other applicable state and municipal
codes, including the Clean Streams Law
§ 144-106 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-106
1:234
Table 106.1 NOTES:
• Specific activities listed in § 144-106C are exempt from the
indicated requirements, regardless of size.
• A proposed regulated activity must be less than BOTH the proposed
impervious surfaces and proposed earth disturbance thresholds to
be eligible for exemption from the requirements listed in this table.
• "Proposed impervious surface": as defined in this chapter.
• "Exempt": Regulated activities are exempt from the requirements of
listed section(s) only; all other provisions of this chapter apply.
C. Exemptions for specific activities. The following specific regulated
activities are exempt from the requirements of §§ 144-301, 144-304,
144-305, 144-306, 144-307, 144-308, 144-309, and 144-310, and
Articles IV, V, VI and VII of this chapter (as shown in Table 106.1),
unless otherwise noted below. All other conveyance and system design
standards established by the municipality in other codes or ordinances
shall be required, and all other provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(1) Emergency exemption: emergency maintenance work performed
for the protection of public health, safety and welfare. This
exemption is limited to repair of the existing facility; upgrades,
additions or other improvements are not exempt. A written
description of the scope and extent of any emergency work
performed shall be submitted to the municipality within two
calendar days of the commencement of the activity. A detailed plan
shall be submitted no later than 30 days following commencement
of the activity. If the municipality finds that the work is not an
emergency, then the work shall cease immediately and the
requirements of this chapter shall be addressed as applicable.
(2) Maintenance: any maintenance to an existing stormwater
management system, facility, BMP or conveyance made in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
Municipal Engineer or municipality.
(3) Existing landscaping: use of land for maintenance, replacement or
enhancement of existing landscaping.
(4) Gardening: use of land for gardening for home consumption.
(5) Agricultural related activities:
(a) Agricultural activities (as defined in Article II), when
performed in accordance with the requirements of 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
(b) Conservation practices (as defined in Article II) that do not
involve construction of any new or expanded impervious
surfaces.
§ 144-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-106
1:235
(6) Forest management: forest management operations, which are
consistent with a sound forest management plan as filed with the
municipality and which comply with the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection's management practices contained in
its publication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidelines
for Forestry" (as amended or replaced by subsequent guidance).
Such operations are required to have an Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Plan, which meets the requirements of 25
Pa. Code Chapter 102 and meets the erosion and sediment control
standards of § 144-303 of this chapter.
(7) Maintenance of existing paved surfaces: replacement of existing
paved surfaces shall meet the erosion and sediment control
requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102 and § 144-303 of this
chapter, and is exempt from all other requirements of this chapter
listed in § 144-106C above. Resurfacing of existing paved surfaces
is exempt from the requirements of this chapter listed above.
Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces shall comply
with all requirements of this chapter as indicated in Table 106.1.
(8) Municipal roadway shoulder improvements: Shoulder
improvements conducted within the existing roadway cross section
of municipal-owned roadways, unless an NPDES permit is required,
in which case the proposed work must comply with all
requirements of this chapter.
(9) In-place replacement of residential dwelling unit: the replacement
in the exact footprint of an existing one- or two-family dwelling
unit.
(10) In-place replacement, repair, or maintenance of residential
impervious surfaces: the replacement of existing residential patios,
decks, driveways, pools, garages, and/or sidewalks that are
accessory to an existing one- or two-family dwelling unit in the
exact footprint of the existing impervious surface.
D. Modified requirements for small projects. Regulated activities that
involve 1,000 to less than 2,000 square feet of proposed impervious
surfaces and 5,000 to less than 10,000 square feet of proposed earth
disturbance may apply the modified requirements presented in the
"Simplified Approach to Stormwater Management for Small Projects"
(Simplified Approach) (Appendix A)45 to comply with the requirements
of §§ 144-304, 144-305, 144-306, 144-307, 144-308, 144-309, and
144-310, and Articles IV, V, VI and VII of this chapter (as shown in Table
106.2).
(1) The applicant shall first contact the Municipal Engineer: to confirm
that the proposed project is eligible for use of the Simplified
Approach and is not otherwise exempt from these chapter
45.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Township offices.
§ 144-106 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-106
1:236
provisions; to determine what components of the proposed project
are to be considered as impervious surfaces; and to determine if
other known site or local conditions exist that may preclude the use
of any techniques included in the Simplified Approach.
(2) Appendix A46 includes instructions and procedures for preparation,
submittal, review and approval of documents required when using
the Simplified Approach and shall be adhered to by the applicant.
All other provisions of this chapter shall apply.
Table 106.2
Thresholds for Regulated Activities that are Eligible for
"Modified" Requirements for Chapter Provisions Listed
Below
Ordinance Article/Section
Activities Listed in § 144-106D
and/or E
Article I All provisions apply
Article II All provisions apply
§§ 144-302, and 144-303,
144-311
All provisions apply
§§ 144-301, 144-304,
144-305, 144-306, 144-307,
144-308, 144-309, and
144-310
Exempt if modified requirements
of § 144-106D and/or E are applied
Article IV Exempt if modified requirements
of § 144-106D and/or E are applied
Article V Exempt if modified requirements
of § 144-106D and/or E are applied
Article VI Exempt if modified requirements
of § 144-106D and/or E are applied
Article VII Exempt if modified requirements
of § 144-106D and/or E are applied
Article VIII All provisions apply
Article IX All provisions apply
Other erosion, sediment and
pollution control
requirements
Must comply with Title 25,
Chapter 102, of the Pa. Code and
other applicable state and
municipal codes, including the
Clean Streams Law
46.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Township offices.
§ 144-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-106
1:237
Table 106.2 Notes:
• "Modified Requirements": regulated activities listed within the
subsections of this chapter noted in Table 106.2 are eligible
for exemption only from the indicated sections and subsections
of this chapter and only if the modified requirements of
§ 144-106D and/or E are met to the satisfaction of the
municipality; all other provisions of this chapter apply.
E. Modified requirements for agricultural structures. It is the declared
policy of the commonwealth to conserve and protect and to encourage
the development and improvement of its agricultural lands for the
production of food and other agricultural products. Municipalities must
encourage the continuity, development and viability of agricultural
operations within its jurisdiction. Except as necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare, regulated activities involving
proposed new or expanded impervious surfaces associated with
agricultural activities are exempt from the requirements of §§ 144-301,
144-304, 144-305, 144-306, 144-307, 144-308, 144-309, and 144-310,
and Articles IV, V, VI and VII of this chapter (and listed in Table 106.2)
only when it has been demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
municipality that the proposed project will comply with all of the
requirements listed below. All other provisions of this chapter shall
apply. To be eligible for exemption from the chapter provisions stated
above, the proposed regulated activity shall:
(1) Be directly associated with an agricultural activity (as defined in
Article II);
(2) Include less than 10,000 square feet of proposed new or expanded
impervious surface (excluding adjoining vehicle parking and
movement areas) and not more than an additional 5,000 square
feet of adjoining vehicle parking and movement area;
(3) Be installed on a farm or mushroom operation that has a current
mushroom farm environmental management plan (MFEMP)
reviewed and deemed adequate by the Conservation District, or an
agricultural erosion and sediment control plan or conservation plan
(as defined in Article II) that complies with the requirements of 25
Pa. Code 102;
(4) Divert runoff from the proposed new or expanded impervious
surfaces (including vehicle parking and movement area) entirely
away from animal management, waste management and crop
farming areas and any other source of pollutants;
(5) Include BMP(s) that will permanently retain at least one inch of
rainfall runoff from the total area of proposed new or expanded
impervious surfaces and vehicle parking and movement areas;
§ 144-106 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-106
1:238
§ 144-107. Repealer.
Any ordinance or ordinance provision of the municipality inconsistent with
any of the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
§ 144-108. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared the intent of the governing body of the municipality that this
chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid provision, sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included
herein.
(6) Be designed so that any point of discharge of runoff from the
proposed new or expanded impervious surface (excluding vehicle
movement area):
(a) Is not directly connected to, and is not directly connected to
any constructed conveyance that is connected to, a municipal
separate storm sewer system or public roadway;
(b) Is located at least 150 feet from any municipal separate storm
sewer system or public roadway, or any constructed
conveyance connected to any municipal separate storm sewer
system or public roadway.
(7) Either:
(a) Have all proposed new or expanded impervious surfaces and
proposed vehicle parking and movement areas and BMP(s)
included within the current MFEMP or current agricultural
erosion and sediment control plan or a conservation plan for
the farm or mushroom operation; or
(b) Be constructed per design plans prepared and sealed by a
licensed professional in conformance with the PADEP "Best
Practices for Environmental Protection in the Mushroom Farm
Community" (2003 or as amended), or per design plans
prepared and sealed by a licensed professional (or
Conservation District staff person designated by NRCS) that
comply with USDA NRCS standards and specifications, and for
which completion of construction will be certified by the
licensed (or NRCS-designated design) professional responsible
for the design; and
(8) Not be eligible for exemption if an NPDES permit is required.
§ 144-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-109
1:239
§ 144-109. Compatibility with other ordinances or legal
requirements.
§ 144-110. Financial security.
For all activities requiring submittal of a stormwater management (SWM)
site plan that involve subdivision or land development, the applicant shall
post financial security to the municipality for the timely installation and
proper construction of all stormwater management facilities as required by
the approved SWM site plan and this chapter, and such financial security
shall:
§ 144-111. Waivers.
A. Approvals issued and actions taken pursuant to this chapter do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure and comply with
other required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act, law, regulation, or ordinance.
B. To the extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous or stringent
requirements for stormwater management than any other code, rule,
act, law, regulation or ordinance, the specific requirements contained in
this chapter shall take precedence.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the
municipality's requirements regarding stormwater matters that do not
conflict with the provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). The
requirements of this chapter shall supersede any conflicting
requirements in other municipal ordinances or regulations.
A. Be equal to or greater than the full construction cost of the required
facilities except to the extent that financial security for the cost of any
of such improvements is required to be and is posted with the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation in connection with a
highway occupancy permit application; and
B. Be determined, collected, applied and enforced in accordance with
Sections 509 through 511 of the MPC and the provisions of the
municipality's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(SALDO).47
A. General. The requirements of this chapter are essential and shall be
strictly adhered to. For any regulated activity where, after a close
evaluation of alternative site designs, it proves to be impracticable to
meet any one or more of the mandatory minimum standards of this
chapter on the site, the municipality may approve measures other than
those in this chapter, subject to § 144-111B and C.
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 149, Subdivision of Land.
§ 144-109 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-111
1:240
§ 144-112. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful.
B. The governing body shall have the authority to waive or modify the
requirements of one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal
enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the land in question, provided that such modification will
not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of
the chapter is observed. Cost or financial burden shall not be
considered a hardship. Modification may also be considered if an
alternative standard or approach can be demonstrated to provide equal
or better achievement of the results intended by the chapter. A request
for modification shall be in writing and accompany the SWM site plan
submission. The request shall state in full the grounds and facts on
which the request is based, the provision or provisions of the chapter
involved and the minimum modification necessary.
C. PADEP approval required. For any proposed regulated activity involving
earth disturbance equal to or greater than one acre, the municipality
may approve measures for minimum volume and infiltration control
other than those required in this chapter only after consultation with
and evaluation by PADEP that the alternate site design meets state
water quality requirements and does not conflict with state law,
including, but not limited to, the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law, 35
P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 144-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-112
1:241

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 144-201. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 144-202. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture such
as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy use
areas. This includes the work of producing crops including tillage, plowing,
disking, harrowing, planting or harvesting crops; or pasturing and raising
of livestock; and installation of conservation measures. Construction of new
buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an
application to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated
activity as defined in this chapter.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, partnership, public or private
association or corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality,
governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
Whenever used in any section prescribing or imposing a penalty, the
term "person" shall include the members of a partnership, the officers,
members, servants and agents of an association, officers, agents and
servants of a corporation, and the officers of a municipality.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied, or maintained."
F. The definitions in this chapter are for the purposes of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter and have no bearing on other municipal
regulations or ordinances.
§ 144-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-202
1:243
AS-BUILT PLANS (DRAWINGS) — Engineering or site plans or drawings
that document the actual locations, dimensions and elevations of the
improvements, and building components, and changes made to the original
design plans. The final version of these documents, or a copy of same, are
signed and sealed by a qualified licensed professional and submitted to the
municipality at the completion of the project, as per the requirements of
§ 144-502 of this chapter as "final as-built plans."
BANKFULL — The channel at the top-of-bank or point from where water
begins to overflow onto a floodplain.
BASE FLOW — Portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater; the
sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from water
diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other human activities.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to provide water quality treatment, infiltration, volume
reduction, and/or peak rate control, to promote groundwater recharge,
and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs
are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories or measures:
"structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or
measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices that
attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the site.
BUFFER — See "riparian buffer."
CARBONATE GEOLOGY or CARBONATE ROCK FORMATIONS — See
"karst."
CFS — Cubic feet per second.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial open drainage feature that conveys,
continuously or periodically, flowing water and through which stormwater
flows. Channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made
drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly
full.
CN — Curve number.
COMMONWEALTH — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Chester County Conservation District
(CCCD).
§ 144-202 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-202
1:244
CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan written by a planner certified by NRCS
that identifies conservation practices and includes site specific BMPs for
agricultural plowing or tilling activities and animal heavy use areas.
CONSERVATION PRACTICES — Practices installed on agricultural lands to
improve farmland, soil and/or water quality which have been identified in a
current conservation plan.
CONVEYANCE — A natural or man-made, existing or proposed facility,
feature or channel used for the transportation or transmission of
stormwater from one place to another. For the purposes of this chapter,
"conveyance" shall include pipes, drainage ditches, channels and swales
(vegetated and other), gutters, stream channels, and like facilities or
features.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return period."
DETENTION or TO DETAIN — Capture and temporary storage of runoff in
a stormwater management facility for release at a controlled rate.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely
shortly after any given rainfall event.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A person who seeks to undertake any regulated activities at
a site in the municipality.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The outside bark diameter of a
tree at breast height which is defined as 4.5 feet (1.37 meter) above the
forest floor on the uphill side of the tree.
DISTURBED AREA — Land area disturbed by or where an earth-disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
DRAINAGE AREA — That land area contributing runoff to a single point
(including but not limited to the point/line of interest used for hydrologic
and hydraulic calculations) and that is enclosed by a natural or man-made
ridgeline.
EARTH DISTURBANCE or EARTH-DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A
construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land,
including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations;
embankments; road maintenance; land development; building construction;
and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth
materials.
EASEMENT — A right of use granted by a landowner to allow a grantee the
use of the designated portion of land for a specified purpose, such as for
stormwater management or other drainage purposes.
§ 144-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-202
1:245
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including water/
stream channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan required by the
Conservation District or the municipality to minimize accelerated erosion
and sedimentation, and that must be prepared and approved per the
applicable requirements.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land
areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of this
commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being
a special flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of
the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided
by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the
boundary of the one-hundred-year floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence
to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the center line of the stream
and to 50 feet beyond the top of the bank of the stream on both sides.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forest lands. These include timber
inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment,
cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting,
site preparation, and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the design high-water elevation
and the elevation of the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale, or diversion
berm. The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GEOTEXTILE — A fabric manufactured from synthetic fiber that is used
to achieve specific objectives, including infiltration, separation between
different types of media (i.e., between soil and stone), or filtration.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of Westtown Township.
GRADE/GRADING —
GROUNDWATER — Water that occurs in the subsurface and fills or
saturates the porous openings, fractures and fissures of under-ground soils
and rock units.
(noun) A slope, usually of a road, channel, or natural ground, specified
in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
A.
(verb) To finish the surface of a roadbed, the top of an embankment, or
the bottom of an excavation.
B.
§ 144-202 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-202
1:246
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The replenishment of existing natural
groundwater supplies from infiltration of rain or overland flow.
HEC-HMS — The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering
Center (HEC) - Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS).
HEC-1 — The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering Center
(HEC) hydrologic runoff model.
HOTSPOTS — Areas where prior or existing land use or activities can
potentially generate highly contaminated runoff with concentrations of
pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME — The hydrologic system, cycle or balance that
sustains the quality and quantity of stormwater, stream base flow, storage,
and groundwater supplies under natural conditions.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), into four runoff potential groups.
The groups range from A soils, which are very permeable and produce little
runoff, to D soils, which are not very permeable and produce much more
runoff.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or covered
with a layer of material so that it prevents or is resistant to infiltration
of water, including but not limited to: structures such as roofs, buildings,
storage sheds; other solid, paved or concrete areas such as streets,
driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, patios, decks, swimming pools, tennis
or other paved courts; or athletic playfields comprised of synthetic turf
materials. For the purposes of determining compliance with this chapter,
compacted soils or stone surfaces used for vehicle parking and movement
shall be considered impervious. Surfaces that were designed to allow
infiltration (i.e., areas of porous pavement) will be considered on a case-bycase
basis by the Municipal Engineer, based on appropriate documentation
and condition of the material, etc.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
INFILTRATION FACILITY — A stormwater BMP designed to collect and
discharge runoff into the subsurface in a manner that allows infiltration
into underlying soils and groundwater (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, or
seepage trenches, etc.).
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A defined channel in which surface water is
absent during a portion of the year, in response to seasonal variations in
precipitation or groundwater discharge.
INVERT — The lowest surface, the floor or bottom of a culvert, pipe, drain,
sewer, channel, basin, BMP, or orifice.
KARST — A type of topography that is formed over limestone or other
carbonate rock formations by dissolving or solution of the rock by water,
and that is characterized by closed depressions, sinkholes, caves, a
§ 144-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-202
1:247
subsurface network of solution conduits and fissures through which
groundwater moves, and no perennial surface drainage features.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he or she is authorized
under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person
having a proprietary interest in the land.
LICENSED PROFESSIONAL — A Pennsylvania registered professional
engineer, registered landscape architect, registered professional land
surveyor, or registered professional geologist, or any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State and qualified by law to perform the work
required by the chapter within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LIMITING ZONE — A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or
underlying strata that includes one of the following:
MAINTENANCE — The action taken to restore or preserve the as-built
functional design of any facility or system.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or
other features;
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503 (1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (as amended).48
C.
A seasonal high water table, whether perched or regional, determined
by direct observation of the water table or indicated by other
subsurface or soil conditions.
A.
A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of
loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to fill
the voids between the fragments.
B.
A rock formation, other stratum, or soil condition that is so slowly
permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of water.
C.
48.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 144-202 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-202
1:248
MFEMP — Mushroom farm environmental management plan.
MPC — Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as
amended, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a
municipality, planning agency, or joint planning commission.
MUNICIPALITY — Westtown Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Any regulated activity involving placement or
construction of new impervious surface or grading over existing pervious
land areas not classified as redevelopment as defined in this chapter.
NOAA — National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water body
from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible,
confined, or discrete conveyances.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Water flowing in stormwater
collection facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a
rainfall event or snowmelt.
NONSTRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMPs) — See "best
management practice (BMP)."
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act,
which is delegated to PADEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously Soil
Conservation Service, SCS), an agency of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture.
PADEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PARENT TRACT — The parcel of land from which a land development or
subdivision originates, determined from the date of municipal adoption of
this chapter.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENNDOT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PENNSYLVANIA STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
MANUAL (PADEP BMP MANUAL) — Document Number 363-0300-002
(December 2006, and as subsequently amended).
PERVIOUS SURFACE or PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as
impervious surface.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Westtown
Township.
§ 144-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-202
1:249
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pennsylvania Code § 92.1.49
POST-CONSTRUCTION — Period after construction during which disturbed
areas are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and functioning, and
all proposed improvements approved by the municipality are completed.
PREDEVELOPMENT — Land cover conditions assumed to exist within the
proposed disturbed area prior to commencement of the regulated activity
for the purpose of calculating the predevelopment water quality volume,
infiltration volume, and peak flow rates as required in this chapter.
PRETREATMENT — Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide
storage or filtering, or other methods to trap or remove coarse materials
and other pollutants before they enter the stormwater system, but may
not necessarily be designed to meet the entire water quality volume
requirements of this chapter.
PROPOSED IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — All new, additional and replacement
impervious surfaces.
RAINFALL INTENSITY — The depth of accumulated rainfall per unit of
time.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration
of rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated
wastewater.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any regulated activity that involves demolition,
removal, reconstruction, or replacement of existing impervious surface(s).
REGULATED ACTIVITY — Any earth-disturbance activity(ies) or any activity
that involves the alteration or development of land in a manner that may
affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH-DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Any activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pennsylvania Code
Chapter 9250 or Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.
RETENTION or TO RETAIN — The prevention of direct discharge of
stormwater runoff into surface waters or water bodies during or after a
storm event by permanent containment in a pond or depression; examples
include systems which discharge by percolation to groundwater,
exfiltration, and/or evaporation processes and which generally have
residence times of less than three days.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment that is designed to temporarily
detain a certain amount of stormwater from a catchment area and which
49.Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of the Pa. Code was reserved 10-8-2010; see now 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 92a.
50.Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of the Pa. Code was reserved 10-8-2010; see now 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 92a.
§ 144-202 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-202
1:250
may be designed to permanently retain stormwater runoff from the
catchment area; retention basins always contain water.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that
is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of the
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example,
the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to occur on
average once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the probability of a
twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent
chance).
RIPARIAN — Pertaining to anything connected with or immediately adjacent
to the banks of a stream or other body of water.
RIPARIAN BUFFER — An area of land adjacent to a body of water and
managed to maintain vegetation to protect the integrity of stream channels
and shorelines, to reduce the impact of upland sources of pollution by
trapping, filtering, and converting sediments, nutrients, and other
chemicals, and to supply food, cover and thermal protection to fish and
other aquatic species and wildlife.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SALDO — See "Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
SCS — Soil Conservation Service, now known as the Natural Resources
Conservation Service.
SEDIMENT — Soil or other materials transported by, suspended in or
deposited by surface water as a product of erosion.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains)
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW — A flow process associated with broad, shallow water
movement on sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or
concentrated.
SITE — Total area of land in the municipality where any proposed regulated
activity, as defined in this chapter, is planned, conducted, or maintained or
that is otherwise impacted by the regulated activity.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to
a runoff parameter called curve number (CN).
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Pennsylvania
Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.
STORM FREQUENCY — See "return period."
§ 144-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-202
1:251
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any feature, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff quality, rate, or quantity. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention
and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) SITE PLAN — The plan prepared
by the applicant or its representative, in accordance with the requirements
of Article IV of this chapter, indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at a particular site in accordance with this chapter, and including
all necessary design drawings, calculations, supporting text, and
documentation to demonstrate that chapter requirements have been met,
herein referred to as "SWM site plan." All references in this chapter to
"final" or "approved" SWM site plans shall incorporate the approved SWM
site plan and all subsequent approved revisions thereto.
STREAM — A natural watercourse.
STRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — See "BMP
(best management practices)."
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
as defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31,
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247 (as amended).
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE — Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance of Westtown Township, Chester County,
Pennsylvania, as amended.51
SWALE — An artificial or natural waterway or low-lying stretch of land that
gathers and conveys stormwater or runoff, and is generally vegetated for
soil stabilization, stormwater pollutant removal, and infiltration.
SWM SITE PLAN — See "stormwater management site plan."
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TOP-OF-BANK — Highest point of elevation of the bank of a stream or
channel cross section at which a rising water level just begins to flow out of
the channel and into the floodplain.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 149, Subdivision of Land.
§ 144-202 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-202
1:252
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
WATER TABLE — The uppermost level of saturation of pore space or
fractures by groundwater. "Seasonal high water table" refers to a water
table that rises and falls with the seasons due either to natural or man-made
causes.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas.
WOODS — Any land area of at least 0.25 acre with a natural or naturalized
ground cover (excluding manicured turf grass) and that has an average
density of two or more viable trees per 1,500 square feet with a DBH
of six inches or greater and where such trees existed at any time within
three years of the time of land development application submission of the
proposed project. The land area to be considered woods shall be measured
from the outer driplines of the outer trees.
§ 144-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-202
1:253

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 144-301. General requirements.
A. Applicants proposing regulated activities in the municipality which are
not exempt under § 144-106 shall submit a stormwater management
site plan (SWM site plan) to the municipality for review and approval in
accordance with Articles III and IV. SWM site plans approved by the
municipality shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
B. The stormwater management and runoff control criteria and standards
in this chapter shall apply to the total proposed regulated activity, even
if it is to take place in stages. The measurement of impervious surfaces
shall include all of the impervious surfaces in the total proposed
regulated activity even if the development is to take place in stages.
C. No regulated activity within the municipality shall commence until:
(1) The municipality issues approval of a SWM site plan, which
demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this chapter;
and
(2) The applicant has received a letter of adequacy or approval for the
erosion and sediment control plan review by the municipality and
the Conservation District (if required), and has received all other
local, state and federal permit approvals required for the project
involving the regulated activity.
D. Neither submission of an SWM site plan under the provisions herein
nor compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall relieve any
person from responsibility for damage to any person or property
otherwise imposed by law.
E. The applicant shall design the site to minimize disturbances to land, site
hydrology, and natural resources, and to maintain the natural
hydrologic regime, drainage patterns and flow conditions. The
applicant shall apply the procedures set forth in § 144-304 for the
overall site design and for selection, location and design of features and
BMPs to be used to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
F. To the maximum extent practicable, post-construction stormwater shall
be discharged within the drainage area of the same stream or water
body receiving the runoff prior to construction of the proposed
regulated activity.
G. For regulated activities with one acre or more of proposed earth
disturbance, existing drainage peak rate discharges up to and including
the one-hundred-year storm onto or through adjacent property(ies) or
down-gradient property(ies), including diffuse drainage discharge, shall
not be altered in any manner without written permission from, and,
§ 144-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-301
1:255
where applicable as determined by the municipality an easement and
agreement with, the affected landowner(s) for conveyance of
discharges onto or through their property(ies). Such discharge shall be
subject to any applicable discharge criteria specified in this chapter.
(1) If directed by the Township, regulated activities with one acre or
less proposed earth disturbance, the applicant shall provide
written notification to the affected landowner(s) describing the
proposed regulated activity and proposed discharge(s), unless
otherwise required by the municipality.
H. Areas located outside of the site (i.e., areas outside of the regulated
activity) that drain through a proposed site are not subject to water
quality and volume control, infiltration, stream channel protection, or
peak flow rate control requirements (as presented in §§ 144-305,
144-306, 144-307, and 144-308). Drainage facilities located on the site
shall be designed to safely convey flows from outside of the site through
the site.
I. If site conditions preclude capture of runoff from limited portions of the
disturbed area for achieving water quality volume control standards,
stream channel protection standards, and the five-year and ten-year
storm event peak runoff rate reduction standards for new development
required by this chapter, the applicant shall propose alternate methods
to mitigate the bypass of the BMPs, subject to the approval of the
Municipal Engineer. In no case shall resulting peak rate be greater than
the predevelopment peak rate for the equivalent design storm.
J. For all regulated activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be
designed, implemented, operated, and maintained during the regulated
activities (i.e., during construction) as required to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter, to meet the erosion and sediment
control requirements of the municipality, if applicable, and to meet all
requirements under Title 25 of the Pa. Code and the Clean Streams
Law.52
K. For all regulated activities, permanent BMPs and conveyances shall be
designed, implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law,53 and the
Storm Water Management Act.54
L. The design of all BMPs and conveyances shall incorporate sound
engineering principles and practices in a manner that does not
aggravate existing stormwater problems as identified by the
municipality. The municipality reserves the right to disapprove any
design that would result in construction in an area affected by existing
52.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
53.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
54.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 144-301 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-301
1:256
stormwater problem(s) or continuation of an existing stormwater
problem(s).
M. Existing wetlands, either on the site or on an adjacent property, shall
not be used to meet the minimum design requirements for stormwater
management or stormwater runoff quality treatment. Stormwater
discharges to existing wetlands shall not degrade the quality or
hydrologic integrity of the wetland.
N. Hotspots runoff controls. Specific structural or pollution prevention
practices may be required, as determined to be necessary by the
Municipal Engineer, to pretreat runoff from hotspots prior to
infiltration. Following is a list of examples of hotspots:
(1) Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities;
(2) Vehicle fueling stations;
(3) Vehicle service and maintenance facilities;
(4) Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities;
(5) Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.);
(6) Industrial sites based on Standard Industrial Classification Codes;
(7) Marinas (service and maintenance areas);
(8) Outdoor liquid container storage;
(9) Outdoor loading/unloading facilities;
(10) Public works storage areas;
(11) Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials;
(12) Commercial container nursery;
(13) Contaminated sites/brownfields;
(14) Other land uses and activities as designated by the municipality.
O. Contaminated and brownfield sites. Where BMPs may contribute to the
migration of contaminants in groundwater, the water quality and runoff
volume, stream channel protection, and peak rate control standards
shall be met; however, at the Municipal Engineer's discretion, the
minimum infiltration requirement may be reduced or eliminated
commensurate with the contaminated area and the required water
quality and runoff control measures may be increased to mitigate the
reduced infiltration requirement for the contaminated area.
P. Additional water quality requirements. The municipality may require
additional stormwater control measures for stormwater discharges to
special management areas, including, but not limited to:
§ 144-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-301
1:257
(1) Water bodies listed as "impaired" by PADEP.
(2) Any water body or watershed with an approved total maximum
daily load (TMDL), specifically Goose Creek Watershed.
(a) Total phosphorous is the assigned TMDL pollutant to Westtown
Township within the Goose Creek Watershed. As such, the
Township may require additional phosphorous-reducing
measures for regulated activities within the Goose Creek
Watershed, including but not limited to:
[1] Rain gardens/bioretention.
[2] Constructed wetlands.
[3] Permanent compost filter sock.
[4] Water quality inlet filter.
(3) Areas of known existing flooding problems.
(4) Critical areas with sensitive resources (e.g., state-designated
special protection waters, cold water fisheries, carbonate geology
or other groundwater recharge areas that may be highly vulnerable
to contamination, drainage areas to water supply reservoirs, etc.).
Q. Applicants shall utilize the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual (PA BMP Manual), as amended, or other sources
acceptable to the Municipal Engineer, for testing and design standards
for BMPs, and, where there is a conflict with the provisions of this
chapter, the most restrictive applies.
R. For areas underlain by karst or carbonate geology that may be
susceptible to the formation of sinkholes and other karst features, the
location, type, and design of infiltration BMPs shall be based on a site
evaluation conducted by a qualified licensed professional and based on
the PA BMP Manual or other design guidance acceptable to the
Municipal Engineer.
S. All regulated activities located within a special flood hazard area
designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
shall comply with the Westtown Township Zoning Ordinance, § 170-401,
Floodplain District, and shall be designed to maintain the flood-carrying
capacity of the floodway such that the base flood elevations are not
increased, either upstream or downstream. The natural conveyance
characteristics of the site and the receiving floodplain shall be
incorporated into the stormwater management practices proposed for
the site.
T. Disturbance of existing ground cover during construction of the
proposed regulated activity is prohibited within fifty (75)55 feet of top-
55.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 144-301 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-301
1:258
§ 144-302. Permit requirements by other governmental entities.
The following permit or other regulatory requirements may apply to certain
regulated activities and shall be met prior to (or as a condition of) final
approval by the municipality of the SWM site plan and prior to
commencement of any regulated activities, as applicable:
of-bank of all perennial and intermittent waterways, water bodies
(lakes, ponds, etc.) and wetlands, except for activities otherwise
approved by state or local agencies (e.g., stream restoration projects,
road crossings, subsurface utility projects, etc.). At the Municipal
Engineer's discretion, and with Conservation District and PADEP
approval where necessary, the nondisturbance, buffer may be reduced
because of setback or other site constraints, but never be less than 10
feet.
U. Riparian buffer.
(1) Where a development site is traversed by perennial or intermittent
watercourses, riparian buffers shall be provided conforming to the
line of such watercourses. The riparian buffer shall be created to
extend a minimum of 75 feet to either side of the top of the bank of
the channel, unless a wider riparian buffer is required by the
provisions of Pennsylvania Code Chapter 102, as amended, in
which case the greater of the two shall apply.
(2) If the applicable rear or side yard setback is less than 75 feet, the
buffer width may be reduced to 25 feet of the setback to a minimum
of 10 feet. If an existing buffer is legally prescribed (e.g., deed
covenant, easement, etc.) and it exceeds the requirement of this
chapter, the existing buffer shall be maintained.
(3) The buffer shall be maintained with appropriate native vegetation
as defined in the appendices of the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Manual, dated December 30, 2006. Excavating,
placing fill, building structures, or making any alterations that may
adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the
riparian buffer shall be prohibited unless the proposed work is
associated with a regulated wetlands mitigation program.
(4) The buffer must be defined though a deed restriction.
(5) The riparian buffer shall be built in accordance with § 170-407 of
the Westtown Township Zoning Ordinance.
A. All regulated activities subject to permit or regulatory requirements by
PADEP under regulations at Title 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 102, or
erosion and sediment control requirements of the municipality.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by PADEP under
Title 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 105.
§ 144-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-302
1:259
§ 144-303. Erosion and sediment control.
§ 144-304. Site design process.
The applicant shall design the site to minimize the disturbances to land, site
hydrology, and natural resources, and to maintain the natural hydrologic
regime, drainage patterns and flow conditions. For regulated activities
with 10,000 or more square feet of proposed earth disturbance or 2,000
or more square feet of proposed impervious surfaces, the applicant shall
demonstrate in its SWM site plan (as required in § 144-402C) that the
design sequence, objectives and techniques described below were applied
to the maximum extent practicable in the site design of the regulated
C. Any BMP or conveyance that would be located in or adjacent to surface
waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands, subject to permit by
PADEP under Title 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 105.
D. Any BMP or conveyance that would be located on or discharge to a state
highway right-of-way, or require access to or from a state highway and
be subject to approval by PennDOT.
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers, or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by PADEP under Title 25
Pennsylvania Code Chapter 105.
A. No regulated activity within the municipality shall commence until:
(1) The municipality receives documentation that the applicant has
received:
(a) A "letter of adequacy" from the Conservation District or other
approval from PADEP in compliance with Title 25 Chapter 102
of the Pennsylvania Code of an erosion and sediment control
plan for construction activities, if applicable;
(b) A PADEP NPDES Construction Activities Permit as required
under Title 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 92a, if applicable;
(c) Evidence of any other permit(s) or approvals required for the
regulated activities; and
(2) An erosion and sediment control plan has been approved by the
municipality, if required.
B. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit(s), as required by PADEP regulations, shall be available on the
site at all times.
C. Additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be applied
where infiltration BMPs are proposed, at a minimum including those
required in § 144-306M.
§ 144-302 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-304
1:260
activity while complying with all other requirements of this chapter. The site
design shall:
A. First, identify and delineate all existing natural resources and natural
and man-made hydrologic features listed in § 144-402C(8) that are
located within the site, or receive discharge from, or may be impacted
by the proposed regulated activity.
B. Second, provide a prioritized listing of these resources and features to
identify:
(1) Those to be incorporated into the site design in a manner that
provides protection from any disturbance or impact from the
proposed regulated activity;
(2) Those to be protected from further disturbance or impact but for
which the proposed regulated activity will provide improvement to
existing conditions;
(3) Those that can be incorporated into and utilized as components of
the overall site design in a manner that protects or improves their
existing conditions while utilizing their hydrologic function within
the limits of their available capacity (i.e., for infiltration,
evapotranspiration, or reducing pollutant loads, runoff volume or
peak discharge rates, etc.) to reduce the need for or size of
constructed BMPs; and
(4) Those that may be considered for alteration, disturbance or
removal.
C. Third, develop the site design to achieve the following:
(1) Recognize and incorporate the priorities identified in § 144-304B as
the basis for the proposed site layout, grading, construction, and
permanent ground cover design;
(2) Minimize earth disturbance (both surface and subsurface);
(3) Maximize protection of or improvement to natural resources and
special management areas;
(4) Minimize the disturbance of natural site hydrology, in particular
natural drainage features and patterns, discharge points and flow
characteristics, natural infiltration patterns and characteristics,
and natural channel and floodplain conveyance capacity;
(5) Incorporate natural hydrologic features and functions identified in
§ 144-304B into the site design to protect and utilize those features
and their hydrologic functions to reduce the need for or size of
constructed BMPs;
(6) Maximize infiltration and the use of natural site infiltration
features, patterns and conditions, and evapotranspiration features;
§ 144-304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-304
1:261
(7) Apply selective grading design methods to provide final grading
patterns or preserve existing topography in order to evenly
distribute runoff and minimize concentrated flows;
(8) Minimize the cumulative area to be covered by impervious surfaces
and:
(a) Minimize the size of individual impervious surfaces;
(b) Separate large impervious surfaces into smaller components;
(c) Disconnect runoff from one impervious surface to another; and
(d) Utilize porous materials in place of impervious wherever
practicable;
(9) Minimize the volume and peak discharge rates of stormwater
generated;
(10) Avoid or minimize stormwater runoff pollutant loads and receiving
stream channel erosion;
(11) Locate infiltration and other BMPs:
(a) At or as near to the source of generation as possible; and
(b) At depths that are as shallow as possible;
(12) Prioritize the selection and design of BMPs as follows:
(a) Nonstructural and vegetation BMPs; then
(b) Structural (surface and subsurface) BMPs;
(13) For flow volumes requiring conveyance from the source of
generation to a BMP for management, give preference to open
channel conveyance techniques that provide infiltration and water
quality benefits, and landscaped-based management in common
open space areas, where practicable; and
(14) Consider additional guidance for incorporating natural hydrology
into the site and BMP designs, methods and techniques that
support the objectives of § 144-304B and C. Appendix B presents
additional discussion of natural hydrology site design and sources
of information for "Conservation Design," "Low Impact Design,"
and "Sustainable Design."56
D. The procedures set forth above shall be utilized to the maximum extent
practicable for the overall site design and selection, location and design
of features and BMPs to be used to comply with the requirements of
§§ 144-305, 144-306, 144-307 and 144-308.
56.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Township offices.
§ 144-304 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-305
1:262
§ 144-305. Water quality and runoff volume requirements.
To control post-construction stormwater impacts from regulated activities
and meet state water quality requirements, BMPs shall be provided in
the site design that replicate predevelopment stormwater infiltration and
runoff conditions, such that post-construction stormwater discharges do not
degrade the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of the receiving
waters. The applicant shall comply with the following water quality and
runoff volume requirements for all regulated activities, including all new
development and redevelopment activities:
A. The post-construction total runoff volume shall not exceed the
predevelopment total runoff volume for all storms equal to or less than
the two-year, twenty-four-hour duration precipitation (design storm).
The water quality and runoff volume to be managed shall consist of any
runoff volume generated by the proposed regulated activity over and
above the predevelopment total runoff volume and shall be captured
and permanently retained or infiltrated on the site. Permanent
retention options may include, but are not limited to, reuse,
evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration.
B. For modeling purposes, the predevelopment ground cover conditions
shall be determined using the corresponding ground cover assumptions
presented in § 144-309D of this chapter.
C. The design of the facility outlet shall provide for protection from
clogging and unwanted sedimentation.
D. BMPs that moderate the temperature of stormwater shall be used to
protect the temperature of receiving waters.
E. Water quality improvement shall be achieved in conjunction with
achieving the infiltration requirements of § 144-306. The infiltration
volume required under § 144-306 may be included as a component of
the water quality volume. If the calculated water quality and runoff
volume is greater than the volume infiltrated, then the difference
between the two volumes shall be managed for water quality and runoff
volume control through other techniques or practices but shall not be
discharged from the site.
F. Runoff from the disturbed area shall be treated for water quality prior
to entering existing waterways or water bodies. If a stormwater
management practice does not provide water quality treatment, then
water quality BMPs shall be utilized to provide pretreatment prior to
the runoff entering the stormwater management practice.
G. The municipality may require additional water quality and runoff
control measures for stormwater discharging to special management
areas such as those listed in § 144-301P.
§ 144-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-305
1:263
§ 144-306. Infiltration requirements.
Providing for infiltration consistent with the natural hydrologic regime
is required to compensate for the reduction in the recharge that occurs
when the ground surface is disturbed or impervious surface is created
or expanded. The applicant shall achieve the following infiltration
requirements:
H. When the regulated activity contains or is divided by multiple drainage
areas, the water quality and runoff volume shall be separately
addressed for each drainage area.
I. Weighted averaging of runoff coefficients shall not be used for manual
computations or input data for water quality and runoff volume
calculations.
J. Areas located outside of the site (i.e., areas outside of the regulated
activity) may be excluded from the calculation of the water quality and
runoff volume requirements.
K. Water quality and volume control practices shall be selected and
designed to meet the criteria of § 144-304C that apply to water quality
and volume control.
A. Wherever possible, infiltration should be designed to accommodate the
entire water quality and runoff volume required in § 144-305.
B. For regulated activities involving new development, the volume of a
minimum of one inch of runoff from all proposed impervious surfaces
shall be infiltrated.
C. For regulated activities involving redevelopment, whichever is less of
the following volume options shall be infiltrated:
(1) The volume of a minimum of one inch of runoff from all proposed
impervious surfaces; or
(2) The total water quality and runoff volume required in § 144-305 of
this chapter.
D. If the requirements of § 144-306B or C cannot be physically
accomplished, then the applicant shall be responsible for
demonstrating with data or calculations to the satisfaction of the
Municipal Engineer why this infiltration volume cannot be physically
accomplished on the site (i.e., shallow depth to bedrock or limiting
zone, open voids, steep slopes, etc.) and what alternative volume can be
infiltrated; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of runoff
volume shall be infiltrated.
E. Only if a minimum of at least 0.5 inch infiltration requirement cannot be
physically accomplished on the site, shall a waiver from § 144-306 be
considered by the municipality.
§ 144-305 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-306
1:264
F. If site conditions preclude capture of runoff from portions of the
impervious surfaces, the infiltration volume for the remaining area shall
be increased an equivalent amount to offset the loss.
G. When a project contains or is divided by multiple watersheds, the
infiltration volume shall be separately addressed for each watershed.
H. Existing impervious surfaces located in areas outside of the site (i.e.,
outside of the regulated activity) may be excluded from the calculation
of the required infiltration volume.
I. A detailed soils evaluation of the site shall be conducted by a qualified
professional and at a minimum shall address soil permeability, depth to
bedrock, and subgrade stability. The general process for designing the
infiltration BMP shall be conducted by a qualified licensed professional
and shall be consistent with the PA BMP Manual (as amended) (or other
guidance acceptable to the Municipal Engineer) and in general shall:
(1) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made
features within the site to determine general areas of suitability for
infiltration practices. In areas where development on fill material is
under consideration, conduct geotechnical investigations of
subgrade stability; infiltration may not be ruled out without
conducting these tests.
(2) Provide field tests such as double ring infiltrometer or other
hydraulic conductivity tests (at the elevation of the proposed
infiltration surface) to determine the appropriate hydraulic
conductivity rate. Standard septic/sewage percolation tests are not
acceptable for design purposes.
(3) Design the infiltration facility for the required retention
(infiltration) volume based on field-determined infiltration capacity
(and apply safety factor as per applicable design guidelines) at the
elevation of the proposed infiltration surface.
(4) On-lot infiltration features are encouraged; however, it shall be
demonstrated to the Municipal Engineer that the soils are
conducive to infiltration on the identified lots.
J. Infiltration BMPs shall be selected based on suitability of soils and site
conditions and shall be constructed on soils that have the following
characteristics:
(1) A minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the BMP and
the top of the limiting zone. Additional depth may be required in
areas underlain by karst or carbonate geology. (See § 144-306N.)
(2) An infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional stormwater
volume and drain completely as determined by field tests
conducted by the applicant.
§ 144-306 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-306
1:265
(3) The infiltration facility shall completely drain the retention
(infiltration) volume within three days (72 hours) from the end of
the design storm.
K. All infiltration practices shall:
(1) Be selected and designed to meet the criteria of § 144-304C that
are applicable to infiltration;
(2) Be set back at least 100 feet upgradient and 10 feet down gradient
from all buildings and features with subgrade elements (e.g.,
basements, foundation walls, etc.), unless otherwise approved by
the Municipal Engineer.
(3) For any infiltration practice that collects runoff from shared or
multiple features and that is located within 50 feet of a building or
feature with subgrade elements (e.g., basements, foundation walls,
etc.), the bottom elevation shall be set below the elevation of the
subgrade element.
(4) Be consistent with the protocols written in the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, December 2006
or latest version thereof.
L. Infiltration facilities shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be
located to avoid introducing contaminants to groundwater:
(1) When a hotspot is located in the area draining to a proposed
infiltration facility, an evaluation of the potential of groundwater
contamination from the proposed infiltration facility shall be
performed, including a hydrogeologic investigation (if necessary)
by a qualified licensed professional to determine what, if any,
pretreatment or additional design considerations are needed to
protect groundwater quality.
(2) When located within a "wellhead protection area" of a public water
supply well, infiltration practices shall be in conformance with the
applicable approved source water protection assessment or source
water protection plan.
(3) The applicant shall provide appropriate safeguards against
groundwater contamination for land uses that may cause
groundwater contamination should there be a mishap or spill.
M. During site construction, all infiltration practice components shall be
protected from compaction due to heavy equipment operation or
storage of fill or construction material. Infiltration areas shall also be
protected from sedimentation. Areas that are accidentally compacted
or graded shall be remediated to restore soil composition and porosity.
Adequate documentation to this effect shall be submitted to the
Municipal Engineer for review. All areas designated for infiltration shall
§ 144-306 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-306
1:266
§ 144-307. Stream channel protection requirements.
For regulated activities involving new development with one or more acres
of earth disturbance, the applicant shall comply with the following stream
channel protection requirements to minimize stream channel erosion and
associated water quality impacts to the receiving waters:
not receive runoff until the contributory drainage area has achieved
final stabilization.
N. Where sediment transport in the stormwater runoff is anticipated to
reach the infiltration system, appropriate permanent measures to
prevent or collect sediment shall be installed prior to discharge to the
infiltration system.
O. Where roof drains are designed to discharge to infiltration practices,
they shall have appropriate measures to prevent clogging by unwanted
debris (for example, silt, leaves and vegetation). Such measures shall
include but are not limited to leaf traps, gutter guards and cleanouts.
P. All infiltration practices shall have appropriate positive overflow
controls.
Q. No sand, salt or other particulate matter may be applied to a porous
surface material for winter ice conditions.
R. The following procedures and materials shall be required during the
construction of all subsurface facilities:
(1) Excavation for the infiltration facility shall be performed with
equipment that will not compact the bottom of the seepage bed/
trench or like facility.
(2) The bottom of the bed and/or trench shall be scarified prior to the
placement of aggregate.
(3) Only clean aggregate with documented porosity, free of fines, shall
be allowed.
(4) The tops, bottoms and sides of all seepage beds, trenches, or like
facilities shall be covered with drainage fabric. Fabric shall be
nonwoven fabric acceptable to the Municipal Engineer.
(5) Stormwater shall be distributed throughout the entire seepage
bed/trench or like facility and provisions for the collection of debris
shall be provided in all facilities.
A. The peak flow rate of the post-construction two-year, twenty-four-hour
design storm shall be reduced to the predevelopment peak flow rate of
the one-year, twenty-four-hour duration precipitation, using the SCS
Type II distribution.
§ 144-306 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-307
1:267
§ 144-308. Stormwater peak rate control requirements.
The applicant shall comply with the following peak flow rate control
requirements for all regulated activities including those that involve new
development and redevelopment that are not located in the Chester Creek
watershed.
B. To the maximum extent practicable, and unless otherwise approved by
the Municipal Engineer, the post-construction one-year, twenty-fourhour
storm flow shall be detained for a minimum of 24 hours and a
maximum not to exceed 72 hours from a point in time when the
maximum volume of water from the one-year twenty-four-hour storm is
stored in a proposed BMP (i.e., when the maximum water surface
elevation is achieved in the facility). Release of water can begin at the
start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the orifice is at the invert of the
proposed BMP).
C. For modeling purposes, the predevelopment ground cover conditions
shall be determined using the corresponding ground cover assumptions
presented in § 144-309D of this chapter.
D. The minimum orifice size in the outlet structure to the BMP shall be
three inches in diameter unless otherwise approved by the Municipal
Engineer, and a trash rack shall be installed to prevent clogging. For
sites with small drainage areas contributing to the BMP that do not
provide enough runoff volume to allow a twenty-four-hour attenuation
with the three-inch orifice, the calculations shall be submitted showing
this condition.
E. When the calculated orifice size is below three inches, gravel filters (or
other methods) are recommended to discharge low-flow rates subject to
the Municipal Engineer's satisfaction. When filters are utilized,
maintenance provisions shall be provided to ensure filters meet the
design function.
F. All proposed stormwater facilities shall make use of measures to extend
the flow path and increase the travel time of flows in the facility.
G. When a regulated activity contains or is divided by multiple drainage
areas, the peak flow rate control shall be separately addressed for each
drainage area.
A. Post-construction peak flow rates from any regulated activity shall not
exceed the predevelopment peak flow rates as shown for each of the
design storms specified in Table 308.1.
§ 144-307 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-308
1:268
Table 308.1
Peak Rate Control Standards
(Peak flow rate of the post-construction design storm shall be
reduced to the peak flow rate of the corresponding
predevelopment design storm shown in the table.)
Predevelopment Design Storm
Post-Construction
Design Storm
Frequency
(24-Hour Duration)
New Development
Regulated Activities
Redevelopment
Regulated Activities
2-year 1-year 2-year
5-year 5-year 5-year
10-year 10-year 10-year
25-year 25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year 100-year
B. For modeling purposes, the predevelopment ground cover conditions
shall be determined using the corresponding ground cover assumptions
presented in § 144-309D of this chapter.
C. For regulated activities involving only redevelopment, no peak flow rate
controls are required when and only if the total proposed impervious
surface area is at least 20% less than the total existing impervious
surface area to be disturbed by the regulated activity. In all cases where
this requirement is not met, the redevelopment regulated activity shall
achieve the peak flow rate controls presented in Table 308.1, using the
redevelopment ground cover assumptions presented in § 144-309D.
D. Only the area of the proposed regulated activity shall be subject to the
peak flow rate control standards of this chapter. Undisturbed areas for
which the discharge point has not changed are not subject to the peak
flow rate control standards.
E. Areas located outside of the site (i.e., areas outside of the regulated
activity) that drain through a proposed site are not subject to peak flow
rate control requirements. Drainage facilities located on the site shall
be designed to safely convey flows from outside of the site through the
site.
F. When a regulated activity contains or is divided by multiple drainage
areas, the peak flow rate controls shall be separately addressed for
each drainage area.
G. The effect of structural and nonstructural stormwater management
practices implemented as part of the overall site design may be taken
§ 144-308 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-308
1:269
§ 144-309. Calculation methodology.
into consideration when calculating total storage volume and peak flow
rates.
H. Regulated activities located within the Chester Creek watershed shall
achieve the applicable peak flow release rate control requirements
presented in the approved PA Act 167 Plan for that watershed in Table
308.2 below and as presented in the Chester Creek Watershed Release
Rate Map in Appendix F57 of this chapter.
Table 308.2
Peak Rate Control Standards for Stormwater Management
Districts Within the Chester Creek Watershed
District Control Criteria
100% Post-development peak discharge for all design storms
must be no greater than predevelopment peak
discharges.
75% Post-development peak discharge for all design storms
must be no greater than 75% of the predevelopment
peak discharges.
50% Post-development peak discharge for all design storms
must be no greater than 50% of the predevelopment
peak discharges.
I. Regulated activities located within the Chester Creek Watershed shall
achieve the applicable peak flow release rate control requirements
presented in the approved PA Act 167 Plan for that watershed
presented in the Chester Creek Watershed Release Rate Map in
Appendix F58 of this chapter.
A. Stormwater runoff from all regulated activity sites with a drainage area
of greater than five acres shall be calculated using a generally accepted
calculation technique(s) that is based on the NRCS Soil Cover Complex
Method. Table 309.1 summarizes acceptable computation methods. The
method selected for use shall be based on the individual limitations and
suitability of each method for a particular site. The use of the Rational
Method to estimate peak discharges for drainage areas greater than
five acres shall be permitted only upon approval by the Municipal
Engineer.
57.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Township offices.
58.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Township offices.
§ 144-308 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-309
1:270
Table 309.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for SWM Site Plan
Method Developed By Applicability
TR-20
(or commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is
desirable or necessary
TR-55
(or commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans where
limitations described in
TR-55 are met
HEC-1/HEC-HMS U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers
Applicable where use of a
full hydrologic computer
model is desirable or
necessary
Rational Method
(or commercial
computer package
based on Rational
Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For sites up to five acres, or
as approved by the
municipality
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved by
the municipality
B. All calculations using the Soil Cover Complex Method shall use the
appropriate design rainfall depths for the various return period storms
consistent with this chapter. Rainfall depths used shall be obtained
from NOAA Atlas 14 values consistent with a partial duration series.
When stormwater calculations are performed for routing procedures or
infiltration, water quality and runoff volume functions, the duration of
rainfall shall be 24 hours.
C. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times of concentration (duration) and storm
events with rainfall intensities obtained from NOAA Atlas 14 partial
duration series estimates, or the latest version of the PennDOT
Drainage Manual (PDM Publication 584). Times of concentration shall
be calculated based on the methodology recommended in the
respective model used. Times of concentration for channel and pipe
flow shall be computed using Manning's Equation.
D. The applicant shall utilize the following ground cover assumptions for
all predevelopment water quality and runoff volume, infiltration volume
and peak flow rate calculations:
§ 144-309 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-309
1:271
(1) For regulated activities involving new development, the following
ground cover assumptions shall be used:
(a) For areas that are woods (as defined in Article II of this
chapter), predevelopment calculations shall assume ground
cover of "woods in good condition."
(b) For all other areas (including all impervious surfaces),
predevelopment calculations shall assume ground cover of
"meadow."
(2) For regulated activities involving redevelopment, the following
ground cover assumptions shall be used:
(a) For areas that are woods (as defined in Article II of this
chapter), predevelopment calculations shall assume ground
cover of "woods in good condition."
(b) For areas that are not woods or not impervious surfaces,
predevelopment calculations shall assume ground cover of
"meadow."
(c) For areas that are impervious surfaces, predevelopment
calculations shall assume at least 20% of the existing
impervious surface area to be disturbed as "meadow" ground
cover.
(3) The following additional ground cover assumptions shall apply to
regulated activities within the Chester Creek Watershed:
(a) Redevelopment projects within the Chester Creek Watershed
shall meet peak discharge requirements based on the adjusted
runoff control number (RCN) or "C" value illustrated by Figure
C-1 in Appendix C.59
(b) For the purposes of predevelopment flow rate determination,
undeveloped land shall be considered as "meadow" good
condition, type "B" soils, (RCN=58, Rational "C"=0.12) unless
the natural ground cover generates a lower curve number or
Rational "C" value (i.e., forest). If a proposed development
meets the definition of redevelopment as defined in this
chapter, the applicant may adjust the predevelopment RCN or
"C" value based on the curves presented in Figure B-3.
(c) Runoff characteristics of off-site areas that drain through a
proposed regulated activity shall be based on actual existing
conditions, and shall be assumed to not have any controls
implemented on future development (i.e., no release rate
restrictions).
59.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Township offices.
§ 144-309 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-309
1:272
(4) The applicant shall determine which stormwater standards apply to
the proposed regulated activity as follows:
(a) Stormwater standards for new development shall apply to all
proposed regulated activities that involve only new
development activities as defined in this chapter.
(b) Stormwater standards for redevelopment shall apply to all
proposed regulated activities that involve only redevelopment
activities as defined in this chapter.
(c) At the discretion of the Municipal Engineer, regulated
activities that involve a combination of both new development
and redevelopment activities, as defined in this chapter, may
either:
[1] Apply the stormwater standards (redevelopment or new
development) that are associated with the activity that
involves the greatest amount of land area; or
[2] Apply the redevelopment and new development
stormwater standards to the corresponding
redevelopment and new development portions of the
proposed regulated activity.
E. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both predevelopment and proposed
(post-construction) conditions to be used in the Soil Cover Complex
Method shall be obtained from Table C-1 in Appendix C60 of this
chapter.
F. Runoff coefficients (C) for both predevelopment and proposed (postconstruction)
conditions for use in the Rational Method shall be
obtained from Table C-2 in Appendix C61 of this chapter.
G. Weighted averaging of runoff coefficients shall not be used for manual
computations or input data for water quality and runoff volume
calculations.
H. Hydraulic computations to determine the capacity of pipes, culverts,
and storm sewers shall be consistent with methods and computations
contained in the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic Design
Series Number 5 (Publication No. FHWA-NHI-01-020 HDS No. 5, as
amended). Hydraulic computations to determine the capacity of open
channels shall be consistent with methods and computations contained
in the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic Engineering Circular
Number 15 (Publication No. FHWA-NHI-05-114 HEC 15, as amended).
Values for Manning's roughness coefficient (n) shall be consistent with
Table C-3 in Appendix C62 of the chapter.
60.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Township offices.
61.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Township offices.
62.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Township offices.
§ 144-309 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-309
1:273
§ 144-310. Other requirements.
I. Runoff calculations shall include the following assumptions:
(1) Average antecedent moisture conditions (for the Soil Cover
Complex Method only, for example, TR-55, TR-20).
(2) A Type II distribution storm (for the Soil Cover Complex Method
only, for example, TR-55, TR-20).
A. Any BMP intended to hold standing water for four days or longer shall
be designed to incorporate biologic controls consistent with the West
Nile Guidance found in Appendix D,63 PADEP document 363-0300-001
"Design Criteria - Wetlands Replacement/Monitoring" (as amended) (or
contact the Pennsylvania State Cooperative Wetland Center or the Penn
State Cooperative Extension Office for design information).
B. Any stormwater basin required or regulated by this chapter designed to
store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen embankment shall be
designed to provide an emergency spillway to safely convey flow up to
and including the one-hundred-year proposed conditions. The height of
embankment shall provide a minimum one foot of freeboard above the
maximum pool elevation computed when the facility functions for the
one-hundred-year proposed conditions inflow. Should any BMP require
a dam safety permit under PA Chapter 105 regulations, the facility shall
be designed in accordance with and meet the regulations of PA Chapter
105 concerning dam safety. PA Chapter 105 may require the safe
conveyance of storms larger than one-hundred-year event.
C. Any drainage conveyance facility and/or channel not governed by PA
Chapter 105 regulations shall be designed to convey, without damage to
the drainage facility or roadway, runoff from the twenty-five-year storm
event. Larger storm events (fifty-year and one-hundred-year storms)
shall also be safely conveyed in the direction of natural flow without
creating additional damage to any drainage facilities, nearby
structures, or roadways.
D. Conveyance facilities to or exiting from stormwater management
facilities (i.e., detention basins) shall be designed to convey the design
flow to or from the facility.
E. Roadway crossings or structures located within designated floodplain
areas shall be able to convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design
storm consistent with Federal Emergency Management Agency
National Flood Insurance Program Floodplain Management
Requirements.
F. Any facility located within a PennDOT right-of-way shall comply with
PennDOT minimum design standards and permit submission and
approval requirements.
63.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Township offices.
§ 144-309 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-310
1:274
§ 144-311. Other conveyance and system design standards.
G. Adequate erosion protection and energy dissipation shall be provided
along all open channels and at all points of discharge. Design methods
shall be consistent with the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic
Engineering Circular Number 11 (Publication No. FHWA-IP-89-016, as
amended) and the PADEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (Publication No. 363-2134-008, as amended), or other
design guidance acceptable to the Municipal Engineer.
A. Design criteria. The criteria behind the design of stormwater
management facilities is that "the peak rate of runoff after development
shall not exceed the peak rate prior to development." The stormwater
system design shall be based on the following methodology:
(1) Storm sewers shall be designed to carry a storm of twenty-five-year
frequency. When determined applicable by the Township Engineer,
an overflow system shall be provided to carry flow to the proposed
stormwater management basin or system discharge point when the
capacity of the storm drain pipe system is exceeded. The overflow
system shall have sufficient capacity to carry the difference
between the one-hundred-year and the twenty-five-year peak flow
rates.
(2) Detention and retention basins shall be designed to control the
peak flow of storms of two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and onehundred-
year frequency and of twenty-four-hour duration.
(3) Basins shall be designed to pass a storm of one-hundred-year
frequency through the outlet structure without failure of the basin
embankment.
(4) The entire contributory drainage area shall be taken into account in
basin and storm sewer system capacity design.
B. Storm sewer system.
(1) Storm sewer design shall meet the requirements of PennDOT
Publication 408 Construction Specifications, latest edition and
PennDOT Publication 72 Standards for Roadway Construction,
latest edition.
(2) Storm sewers shall be reinforced concrete when constructed within
rights-of-way of streets.
(3) All inlets shall be precast concrete, PennDOT type and shall have
bicycle-safe-type grate.
(4) Inlets shall have a minimum two-inch drop from all inlet pipe invert
elevations to most shallow outlet pipe invert elevation.
(5) Storm sewer design shall take into account the time of
concentration. Time of concentration calculations shall be provided
§ 144-310 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-311
1:275
for all drainage areas in which the time of concentration exceeds
five minutes.
(6) Calculations shall be provided to show the flow in the system, pipe
size, allowable flow, actual flow and velocity.
(7) Storm sewers shall have a minimum grade of 0.5%.
(8) Storm sewers shall have a minimum inside diameter of 15 inches.
(9) Storm sewers shall have a minimum cover of 24 inches, unless
compliance with PennDOT and manufacturers' specifications can
be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer.
(10) A minimum one foot of freeboard between the hydraulic grade line
(HGL) of the design storm and the ground elevation shall be
provided throughout all proposed storm sewer conveyance
systems.
(11) Velocity within the storm sewer system shall be no less than three
feet per second and no greater than 11 feet per second for the
design storm peak flow.
(12) Storm sewer profiles shall be provided for all systems and shall
show all applicable design information including, but not limited to,
pipe size, material, slope, invert and grate/ground elevations, and
cover.
C. Detention/retention basins. All basins shall be designed and
constructed to include, but not be limited to, the following standards:
(1) Berm constructed of earth of a clay base with no topsoil and a
cutoff trench key continuous along the berm base. Construction
details and sequence shall indicate that compaction tests shall be
performed by the applicant and observed by the Township
Engineer, or assigned representative thereof. Trench key shall be of
95% compaction or greater.
(2) The top of the berm shall be a minimum of 10 feet. The sides shall
have a maximum slope of three horizontal to one vertical (3:1).
(3) The bottom of the basin shall have a minimum slope of 2% and any
channel shall have a minimum slope of 0.5%.
(4) The riser shall be precast concrete, box inlet or equivalent with
grate top and shall be built into the berm whenever possible.
(5) The barrel shall be concrete pipe with anti-seep collars with a
minimum projection of two feet beyond the pipe. Anti-seep collar
design calculations shall be provided.
(6) Emergency spillway shall be constructed of concrete/grass pavers
or riprap protection. Protection shall extend down the basin slopes
§ 144-311 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-311
1:276
at the spillway location. Calculations shall be provided to ensure
adequate protection is provided.
(7) Basin barrel outfall shall have an end wall or flared end section
with properly designed riprap or energy dissipators.
(8) Surface stormwater storage must be drained complete within 72
hours of the end of the design storm rain event.
D. Retention basins shall be defined with provisions for draining the
permanent pond.
E. Subsurface retention basin/recharge systems shall be designed in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, latest edition, and the following criteria:
(1) A sump shall be provided between the impervious area and the
inground facility to collect and trap sediment and debris before
reaching the inground facility.
(2) Runoff into the facility shall be evenly distributed through a series
of level, perforated PVC or HDPE pies with Class 2 perforations.
(3) The distribution pipe shall be encased in a bed of AASHTO No. 1
coarse aggregate completed envelope (top, sides and bottom) by
PennDOT Class 1 geotextile.
(4) The facility shall be designed to completely drain within 72 hours,
and infiltration rates used to design the facility shall be determined
by field testing conducted in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, latest addition.
(5) The facility shall be provided with an emergency overflow device.
An operations and maintenance program shall be developed for the
facility and provided to the homeowner for implementation.
F. Individual berms or in-ground basins may be used where practical. Title
plan shall contain a note that facilities are permanent and shall be
maintained by the property owner.
G. Landscaping; drainage channels and retention areas. All storm
drainage channels and retention areas whether existing or proposed
shall be graded and planted to effectively naturalize areas so as to
become an integral and harmonious part of the landscape by contour
and type of plant material employed.
§ 144-311 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-311
1:277

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 144-401. General requirements.
For any regulated activity, unless exempt per the provisions of § 144-106:
§ 144-402. SWM site plan contents.
The SWM site plan shall consist of a general description of the project
including items described in § 144-304, calculations, maps, and plans. A
note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and erosion and
sediment control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of the computations
and erosion and sediment control plan shall refer to the associated maps
by title and date. All SWM site plan materials shall be submitted to the
municipality in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat, and well
organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall not be accepted for review
and shall be returned to the applicant. The following items shall be included
in the SWM site plan:
A. Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
B. No regulated activity shall commence until the municipality issues
written approval of a SWM site plan, which demonstrates compliance
with the requirements of this chapter and, if required, a letter of
adequacy has been issued by the Conservation District for an erosion
and sediment control plan.
C. The preliminary or final approval of subdivision and/or land
development plans, and the issuance of any building or occupancy
permit shall not proceed until the applicant has received written
approval of a SWM site plan from the municipality.
D. The SWM site plan approved by the municipality shall be on site
throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
A. For regulated activities with less than 2,000 square feet of proposed
impervious surfaces and less than 10,000 square feet of proposed earth
disturbance, the required contents of the SWM site plan are reduced. At
a minimum, the SWM site plan for these regulated activities shall
include all items required by all applicable requirements of the
Simplified Approach to Stormwater Management for Small Projects. All
other regulated activities shall comply with the requirements of this
section.
B. General.
(1) A general description of the proposed project;
(2) A listed of all regulatory approvals required for the proposed
project and the status of the review and approval process for each.
§ 144-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-402
1:279
Final approval or adequacy letters must be submitted to the
municipality prior to (or as a condition of) the municipality's issuing
final approval of the SWM site plan. Proof of application or
documentation of required permit(s) or approvals for the programs
listed below shall be part of the SWM site plan, if applicable:
(a) NPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction
activities;
(b) PADEP permits as needed:
[1] PADEP joint permit application.
[2] Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management).64
[3] Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management).65
(c) PennDOT highway occupancy permit;
(d) Erosion and sediment control plan letter of adequacy; and
(e) Any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations.
(3) A statement, signed by the applicant, acknowledging that any
revision to the approved SWM site plan shall be submitted to and
approved by the municipality, and that a revised erosion and
sediment control plan shall be submitted to, and approved by, the
Conservation District or municipality (as applicable) for a
determination of adequacy prior to construction of the revised
features.
(4) The following signature block signed and sealed by the qualified
licensed professional responsible for the preparation of the SWM
site plan:
"I (name), on this date (date of signature), hereby certify to the
best of my knowledge that the SWM site plan meets all design
standards and criteria of the Westtown Township Code, Chapter
144, Stormwater Management." [Note: include signature, name,
discipline of professional license, and license stamp or seal here.]
C. Maps or plan sheets. Map(s) or plan sheets of the site shall be
submitted on minimum twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch sheets and
shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements for recording
at the Chester County Office of the Recorder of Deeds and the
requirements of the operation and maintenance (O&M) plan and O&M
agreement (Article VII). If the SALDO has additional or more stringent
criteria than this chapter, then the SALDO criteria shall also apply.
Unless otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer, the contents of
the maps or plan sheets shall include, but not be limited to:
64.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
65.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 106.
§ 144-402 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-402
1:280
(1) A location map, with a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet or
greater, showing the site location relative to highways, municipal
boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks.
(2) The name of the project, tax parcel number(s), and the names,
addresses and phone numbers of the owner of the property, the
applicant, firm preparing the plan.
(3) Signature and seal of the qualified licensed professional(s)
responsible for preparation of the maps and plan sheets.
(4) The date of SWM site plan submission and revision date, as
applicable.
(5) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet.
(6) A North arrow.
(7) Legal property boundaries, including:
(a) The total project property boundary and size with distances
marked to the nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(b) Boundaries, size and description of purpose of all existing
easements and deed-restricted areas of the project property,
with distances marked to the nearest foot and bearings to the
nearest degree.
(8) Existing natural resources and natural or man-made hydrologic
features that are located within the site or receiving discharge
from, or that may otherwise be impacted by, the proposed
regulated activity, including but not limited to:
(a) All existing natural resources, hydrologic features and
drainage patterns including natural waterways, water bodies,
wetlands, streams (intermittent and perennial), ponds, lakes,
vernal pools, etc., natural infiltration areas and patterns, areas
of significant natural evapotranspiration, and other water
features and aquatic resources.
(b) Any existing man-made drainage features, BMPs, conveyances,
facilities, open channels, swales, drainage patterns, or other
flood, stormwater or drainage control features.
(c) For the site, discharge points and locations and concentrated
flows and their drainage areas.
(d) For named waters, show names and their watershed
boundaries within the site.
(e) Special management areas (as per § 144-301P).
§ 144-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-402
1:281
(f) For the water bodies, streams and wetlands identified in
§ 144-402C8(a), label or otherwise show the following
attributes, if applicable:
[1] The designated use as determined by PADEP (25 Pa. Code
Chapter 93);
[2] Impairments listed on the PADEP "Integrated List" (as
updated) and the listed source and cause of impairment;
[3] Name, date, and target pollutant(s) for any approved total
maximum daily load (TMDL); and
[4] Drainages to water supply reservoirs.
(g) Areas that are part of the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity
Inventory (PNDI) and a list of potential impacts and clearances
received (for regulated activities involving one acre or more
proposed earth disturbance).
(h) Woods, vegetated riparian buffers and other areas of natural
vegetation.
(i) Topography using contours (with elevations based on
established bench marks) at intervals of two feet. In areas of
slopes greater than 15% five-foot contour intervals may be
used. The datum used and the location, elevation and datum of
any bench marks used shall be shown.
(j) Areas classified by the municipality as steep slopes.
(k) Soil names and boundaries, general type of soils with
hydrologic soil group noted, and in particular note areas most
conducive to infiltration BMPs, such as Groups A and B, etc.,
estimated permeabilities in inches per hour, and location and
other results of all soil tests and borings.
(l) If present, areas with underlying carbonate geologic units,
existing sinkholes, subsidence or other karst features, and any
associated groundwater recharge areas with increased
vulnerability to contamination.
(m) Any contaminated surface or subsurface areas of the site.
(n) Water supply wells.
[1] Location of existing well(s) on the project property and
delineation of the(ir) recharge area(s) (if known), or a fiftyfoot
diameter assumed recharge area;
[2] Location of existing well(s) within 50 feet beyond the
boundary of the project property boundary (if public water
supply is proposed for the regulated activity); and
§ 144-402 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-402
1:282
(o) Current FEMA one-hundred-year floodplain boundaries,
elevations, and floodway boundaries for any special flood
hazard areas on or within 100 feet of the property.
(p) Boundaries of riparian buffer(s) as required by the Westtown
Stormwater Management Ordinance § 144-301U.
(q) Boundaries of a seventy-five-foot construction nondisturbance
buffer to protect stream (intermittent and perennial), wetlands
and other water bodies during construction of the proposed
regulated activity.
(9) Location of the proposed regulated activity, limits of earth
disturbance (disturbed area), and BMPs and conveyances relative
to the location of existing natural resources and hydrologic
features and special management areas resulting from the site
design process of § 144-304.
(10) Description of existing and proposed ground cover and land use
including the type and total area.
(11) Existing and proposed man-made features including roads, paved
areas, buildings, and other impervious and pervious surfaces on the
project property (or an appropriate portion of the property as
determined in consultation with the Municipal Engineer) and
within the proposed disturbed area, and including the type and
total area of the following:
(a) Existing impervious surfaces;
(b) Existing impervious surfaces proposed to be replaced;
(c) Existing impervious surfaces to be permanently removed and
replaced with pervious ground cover;
(d) New or additional impervious surfaces; and
(e) Percent of the site covered by impervious surfaces for both the
existing and proposed post-construction conditions.
(12) The total extent of the upstream area draining through the site.
(13) All BMPs, conveyances and other stormwater management
facilities shall be located on the plan sheets, including design
drawings, profile drawings, construction details, materials to be
used, description of functions, etc.
(14) Complete delineation of the flow paths used for calculating the
time concentration for the predevelopment and post-construction
conditions shall be included.
(15) The location of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
on-lot wastewater facilities (including subsurface tanks and leach
§ 144-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-402
1:283
fields), and water supply lines within the site and within 50 feet
beyond the proposed limits of earth disturbance.
(16) A grading plan, including all areas of proposed earth disturbance
and the proposed regulated activity and delineating the boundary
or limits of earth disturbance of the site. The total disturbed area of
the site shall be noted in square feet and acres.
(17) Proposed final grade elevations and contours at intervals of two
feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater than 15%), five-foot contour
intervals may be used.
(18) For each proposed BMP and conveyance included in the SWM site
plan (including any to be located on any property other than the
property being developed by the applicant), the following shall be
included on the SWM site plan map or plan sheets:
(a) Identification of the person responsible for ongoing
inspections, operation, repair, and maintenance of the BMP or
conveyance after completion of construction.
(b) Delineation of the land area, structures, impervious surfaces,
and conveyances draining to and from the BMP or conveyance.
(c) Easements, as per the requirements of Article VII, that shall
include:
[1] Boundaries labeled with distances shown in feet and
bearings to the nearest degree;
[2] Notes or other documentation, as needed, to grant the
municipality the right of access to all BMPs and
conveyances for the purposes of inspection and
enforcement of the requirements of this chapter, and any
applicable O&M plans and O&M agreements;
[3] Notes or other documentation, as needed, to grant the
municipality the right of access to all roadways necessary
to access all BMPs and conveyances, where roadways are
not to be dedicated to the municipality;
[4] Notes or other documentation as needed to grant the
owner of any BMP or conveyance the right of access for
the purpose of inspection, operation, maintenance, and
repair of the BMP or conveyance that is to be owned,
operated and maintained by a person other than the
municipality, and other than the owner of the property on
which the BMP or conveyance is located;
[5] A minimum ten-foot-wide perimeter (or other width as
determined in consultation with the Municipal Engineer)
around all BMPs and conveyances;
§ 144-402 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-402
1:284
[6] Sufficient vehicular ingress to and egress from a public
right-of-way or roadway, as determined in consultation
with the Municipal Engineer; and
[7] Accompanying notes or other documentation as needed,
and in accordance with Article VII, describing the type,
purpose and total area of easements, who the easement is
granted to, and the rights, duties and obligations of the
parties with respect to every BMP or conveyance.
(d) Boundaries of land areas (if any) for which deed restrictions
are required for the purpose of protecting and prohibiting
disturbance to a BMP or conveyance, indicating the area to
which the restriction applies with distances shown in feet and
bearings to the nearest degree, and a written description of the
type, purpose and nature of the restriction.
(e) Other items that may be needed to comply with all other
requirements of Article VII.
D. A written description of the following information shall be included in
the SWM site plan:
(1) Existing features, conditions, natural resources, hydrologic
features, and special management areas [as listed in
§ 144-402C(8)];
(2) How the site design achieves the requirements of § 144-304, and, if
applicable, where they could not be achieved and why;
(3) The overall stormwater management design concept for the project
and how the site design achieves the requirements of §§ 144-301
through 144-311 of Article III;
(4) Proposed features and conditions, proposed erosion and sediment
control features, proposed BMPs, conveyances, and any other
stormwater facilities;
(5) A description of the effect of the project (in terms of flow alteration
and runoff volumes, water quality and peak flows, etc.) on existing
natural resources, hydrologic features and special management
areas, adjacent and down-gradient properties, and any existing
municipal or other stormwater conveyance system(s), that may be
affected by or receive runoff from the regulated activity (whether
located within or outside of the area of the regulated activity), and
specifics of how erosion, water quality and flow impacts will be
avoided or otherwise mitigated;
(6) Proposed nonpoint source pollution controls and justification and
confirmation that the proposed project will not result in any
increased pollutant loadings to any existing stream or stream
impairment identified by PADEP, or to any receiving water body;
§ 144-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-402
1:285
(7) Expected project time schedule; and
(8) Description of construction stages or project phases, if so
proposed.
E. A detailed site evaluation conducted by a qualified licensed professional
for projects proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography, and other environmentally sensitive areas, such as
contaminated sites and brownfields, as described in § 144-301O and R
of this chapter.
F. Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation, such as
hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations, assumptions, BMP
loading ratios, etc., consistent with the guidelines and criteria
presented in the PA BMP Manual (as amended) or other guidance
acceptable to the Municipal Engineer, and used in the design of the
BMPs, conveyances and other features proposed to be utilized for
stormwater management, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate
that the requirements of this chapter have been met, specifically
including the requirements in § 144-301 and §§ 144-304 through
144-309.
G. Inspections, operation and maintenance requirements. The following
documents shall be prepared and submitted to the municipality for
review and approval as part of the SWM site plan, in accordance with
the requirements of Article VII, for each BMP and conveyance included
in the SWM site plan (including any to be located on any property other
than the property being developed by the applicant);
(1) An O&M plan;
(2) An O&M agreement;
(3) Any easement agreements that are needed to ensure access,
inspection, maintenance, operation, repair and permanent
protection of any permanent BMP(s) and conveyances associated
with the regulated activity;
(4) Any written deed, deed amendment or equivalent document (if
needed) to be recorded against a subject property, as shown on the
SWM site plan maps or plan sheets, or recorded plan sheets for the
purpose of protecting and prohibiting disturbance to a BMP or
conveyance; and
(5) Written approval, easement agreements, or other documentation
for discharges to adjacent or down-gradient properties when
required to comply with § 144-301G and Article VII of this chapter.
H. An erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as prepared
for and submitted to the Conservation District and/or municipality. A
letter of adequacy from the Conservation District, if applicable, must be
§ 144-402 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-402
1:286
§ 144-403. SWM site plan submission.
A complete SWM site plan that complies with all applicable provisions of
§ 144-402 shall be submitted to the municipality for review and approval, as
follows:
§ 144-404. SWM site plan review.
submitted to the municipality prior to (or as a condition of) the
municipality's final approval of the SWM site plan.
I. A highway occupancy permit from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT) District Office must be submitted to the
municipality prior to (or as a condition of) the municipality's final
approval of the SWM site plan when utilization of a PennDOT storm
drainage system is proposed.
A. The SWM site plan shall be coordinated with the applicable state and
federal permit process and the municipal SALDO review process. All
permit approvals or letters of adequacy not yet received by the
applicant at the time of submittal of the SWM site plan to the
municipality must be submitted to the municipality prior to (or as a
condition of) the municipality's final approval of the SWM site plan.
B. For projects that require SALDO approval, the SWM site plan shall be
submitted by the applicant as part of the preliminary plan submission
where applicable for the regulated activity.
C. For regulated activities that do not require SALDO approval, the SWM
site plan shall be submitted by the applicant for review in accordance
with instructions from the municipality.
D. The number of copies of the SWM site plan to be submitted by the
applicant for review shall be in accordance with instructions from the
municipality.
E. The corresponding review fee shall be submitted to the municipality
simultaneously with the SWM site plan, per the municipality's fee
schedule.
F. Any submissions to the municipality that are found to be incomplete
shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the applicant
within 45 calendar days with a notification in writing of the specific
manner in which the submission in incomplete.
G. Financial security, per the requirements of § 144-110, shall be
submitted to the municipality prior to approval of the SWM site plan.
A. The SWM site plan shall be submitted to the municipality for review by
the Municipal Engineer for consistency with this chapter and the
respective PA Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan(s). The Municipal
Engineer will review the SWM site plan for any subdivision or land
§ 144-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-404
1:287
development for compliance with this chapter and the municipal
SALDO provisions not otherwise superseded by this chapter.
B. If applicable, the applicant shall have received a "letter of adequacy"
from the Conservation District or other PADEP approval for the
proposed regulated activity prior to (or as a condition of) final approval
by the municipality.
C. The Municipal Engineer will notify the applicant and the municipality in
writing, within 45 calendar days, whether the SWM site plan is
consistent with the requirements of this chapter. If the SWM site plan
involves a subdivision and land development plan, the notification shall
occur within the time period allowed by the MPC (as amended). If a
longer notification period is provided by other statute, regulation, or
ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by the municipality.
(1) If the Municipal Engineer determines that the SWM site plan is
consistent with this chapter, the Municipal Engineer shall forward
a letter of consistency to the municipality, who shall then forward a
copy to the applicant.
(2) The municipality may approve the SWM site plan with conditions
reasonably defined to make the SWM site plan compliant with the
terms of this chapter, and, if so, shall provide the conditions for
approval in writing.
(3) If the Municipal Engineer determines that the SWM site plan is
inconsistent or noncompliant with this chapter, the Municipal
Engineer will forward a letter to the municipality, with a copy to the
applicant citing the reason(s) and specific chapter sections for the
inconsistency or noncompliance. Inconsistency or noncompliance
may be due to inadequate information to make a reasonable
judgment as to compliance with this chapter. Any SWM site plans
that are inconsistent or noncompliant may be revised by the
applicant and resubmitted in accordance with § 144-406 when
consistent with this chapter. Resubmission will commence a new
municipal review and notification time period.
D. The municipality will not grant final approval to any proposed
subdivision, land development, or regulated activity specified in this
chapter if the SWM site plan has been found to be inconsistent with this
chapter.
E. All required permits from PADEP shall be obtained and submitted to the
municipality prior to (or as a condition of) final approval of any
proposed subdivision, land development, or other regulated activity by
the municipality.
F. No building permits for any regulated activity will be approved by the
municipality if the SWM site plan has been found to be inconsistent
with this chapter, as determined by the Municipal Engineer. All
§ 144-404 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-404
1:288
§ 144-405. Revision of SWM site plans.
required permits from PADEP shall be obtained prior to issuance of a
building permit.
G. The municipality's approval of a SWM site plan shall be valid for a
period not to exceed five years commencing on the date that the
municipality approved the SWM site plan. If stormwater management
facilities included in the approved SWM site plan have not been
constructed, or if constructed, as-built plans of these facilities have not
been approved within this five-year time period, then the applicant may
seek reinstatement of approval of the expired SWM site plan. If the
municipality determines that the expired SWM site plan is consistent
and compliant with current regulations and requirements, then the
expired SWM site plan will be reinstated; otherwise, it will be rejected.
The applicant will be prohibited from conducting any regulated activity
until a reinstated or newly approved SWM site plan is obtained in
accordance with § 144-406 of this chapter.
H. All or portions of the final approved SWM site plan shall be recorded (as
"record plans") per the instructions of the municipality.
I. Upon completion of construction, the applicant shall be responsible for
completing final as-built plans of all BMPs, conveyances, or other
stormwater management facilities included in the approved SWM site
plan as per the requirements of § 144-502 of this chapter.
J. Time extension requests. If the applicant shall be unable to complete
the work or required submission within the specified time, the applicant
shall, within 10 days prior to expiration of the required date, present in
writing to the Township a request for an extension of time, setting forth
therein the reasons for the requested extension. If, in the discretion of
the Township Engineer, such an extension is warranted, he/she may
grant additional time for the completion of the work. Where the
Township Engineer determines that the extension of time is infeasible,
the Township Engineer in coordination with the Township may deny the
request.
A. A submitted SWM site plan under review by the municipality shall be
revised and resubmitted for any of the following reasons; the revised
SWM site plan shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 144-403 and
subject to review as specified in § 144-404 of this chapter.
(1) A change in stormwater management BMPs, conveyances, facilities
or techniques;
(2) Relocation or redesign of stormwater management BMPs,
conveyances, or facilities; or
(3) Soil or other site conditions are not as stated on the SWM site plan
as determined by the Municipal Engineer, and the new conditions
necessitate design changes.
§ 144-404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-405
1:289
§ 144-406. Resubmission of inconsistent or noncompliant SWM site
plans.
Any SWM site plan deemed inconsistent or noncompliant may be revised
and resubmitted with the revisions addressing the Municipal Engineer's
concerns documented in writing. The submission shall be addressed to
the municipality in accordance with § 144-403 of this chapter, distributed
accordingly, and be subject to review as specified in § 144-404 of this
chapter. The applicable municipal review fee shall accompany a
resubmission of a SWM site plan previously determined to be inconsistent
or noncompliant.
B. A revision to an approved SWM site plan shall be submitted to the
municipality, accompanied by the applicable municipal review fee.
§ 144-405 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-406
1:290
ARTICLE V
Performance and Inspection of Regulated Activities; Final As-Built
Plans
§ 144-501. Performance and inspection of regulated activities.
§ 144-502. Final as-built plans.
A. All regulated activities shall be conducted, operated and maintained in
accordance with the requirements set forth in Articles III, VII, and VIII
of this chapter. When a SWM site plan is required by this chapter, all
regulated activities shall be performed in accordance with the
requirements of the final approved SWM site plan.
B. The Municipal Engineer or other municipal designee shall be provided
access to the site to inspect all phases of the erosion and sediment
control measures and installation of the permanent BMPs and
conveyances at such times as deemed appropriate by the Municipal
Engineer or other municipal designee.
C. Periodic inspections may be made by the Municipal Engineer or other
designee during construction. A set of design plans approved by the
municipality shall be on file and available for viewing at the site
throughout the duration of the construction activity.
D. Inspections, including but not limited to a final inspection, of all
constructed BMPs, conveyances, or other stormwater facilities, and
related improvements may be conducted by the Municipal Engineer or
other designee to confirm compliance with this chapter and with the
final approved SWM site plan prior to the issuance of any occupancy
permit, use permit, or other form of final approval of the project by the
municipality.
E. Upon completion of construction, every permanent stormwater BMP,
conveyance or other stormwater facility constructed or used as part of
the regulated activity shall be operated, maintained and inspected by
the landowner, or other designated person, in accordance with the
O&M plan and O&M agreement approved by the municipality.
F. The municipality or its designee may periodically inspect any
permanent stormwater BMP, conveyance or facility for compliance with
this chapter, an approved O&M plan, or an approved O&M agreement,
per the provisions of Article IX. The municipality may inspect at any
time it has reason to believe a violation exists. The municipality may
pursue enforcement for violations consistent with the provisions of
Article IX.
A. For regulated activities involving one acre or more of earth
disturbance, the applicant shall provide to the municipality final as-built
plans (signed and sealed by a qualified licensed professional) of all
§ 144-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-502
1:291
BMPs, conveyances, other stormwater facilities, and related
improvements shown in the final approved SWM site plan.
B. The final as-built plans shall include the following for all BMPs,
conveyances, other stormwater facilities and related improvements:
(1) The location, elevations, dimensions, and as-built conditions of all
BMPs, conveyances, other stormwater facilities, and related
improvements, including topographic contours and all typical
details for storm drainage and conveyance systems, stormwater
management facilities and impervious surfaces (existing, proposed,
or constructed) included in the approved SWM site plan; and
(2) Explanation of any discrepancies or variations from the final
approved SWM site plan, other related approved construction
plans, calculations and specifications (and approved revisions
thereto).
C. All areas of the regulated activity draining to BMPs must be stabilized
prior to submittal of the as-built plans.
D. After receipt of the as-built plans by the municipality, the municipality
or its designee may review the as-built plans for consistency with this
chapter, the final approved SWM site plan, other related approved
construction plans, and subsequent approved revisions thereto, as well
as actual conditions at the site, and the municipality may conduct a final
inspection, as per § 144-501D.
E. The as-built plans must be received, reviewed and determined to be
acceptable by the municipality prior to:
(1) Close out of the drainage permit or other close out of the project by
the municipality;
(2) Release of the financial security or other performance guarantee;
and
(3) Dedication of the stormwater facilities to the municipality, or
conveyance to a homeowners' association, or other person
responsible for operation, maintenance and repair.
F. Final occupancy permit(s) or use permit or other final approval to use
or operate the constructed improvement may not be issued by the
municipality until the final as-built plans have been accepted.
G. Upon final acceptance of the final as-built plans by the municipality, the
applicant shall review and, if required by the municipality, revise and
re-record the O&M plan and the O&M agreement to reflect the final asbuilt
conditions and information for each permanent BMP or
conveyance, in accordance with the requirements of Article VII.
H. All or portions of the final as-built plans shall be recorded if required by
the municipality.
§ 144-502 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-502
1:292
ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 144-601. SWM site plan review and inspection fees established.
§ 144-602. Expenses covered by fees; review fees.
A. The Board of Supervisors, by resolution, shall establish a review and
inspection fee schedule based on the size of the regulated activity and
based on the municipality's costs for reviewing SWM site plans, O&M
plans and agreements and as-built plans, and conducting inspections
pursuant to § 144-501. The municipality shall periodically update the
review and inspection fee schedule to ensure that review costs are
adequately reimbursed. The applicant shall be responsible for
reimbursing the Township for all of the Township's costs incurred in
reviewing the application and accompanying plans and documents,
including the Township Engineer and Solicitor fees. The cost of
inspections will be billed to the applicant as inspections are completed
at a rate as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
B. All fees listed in § 144-602A shall be paid by the applicant at the time of
SWM site plan submission.
A. The fees required of the applicant by this chapter shall at a minimum
cover:
(1) Administrative costs;
(2) The review of the SWM site plan by the municipality, the Municipal
Engineer, the Solicitor, and other municipal consultants;
(3) Coordination and meetings with the applicant;
(4) The inspection of erosion and sediment control measures, BMPs,
conveyances and other related improvements during construction;
(5) Review of project communications, reports, and additional
supporting information;
(6) Other site inspections;
(7) The final inspection upon completion of the BMPs, conveyances,
and other stormwater management facilities and related
improvements presented in the SWM site plan; and
(8) Review of final as-built plan submission and revised calculations,
and inspections as needed.
B. The applicant shall also reimburse all expenses incurred by the
municipality for any additional work or municipal consultant fees
required to enforce any permit provisions regulated by this chapter,
correct violations, and ensure proper completion of remedial actions.
§ 144-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-602
1:293
C. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review fee,
the applicant shall follow procedures contained in Section 503 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247, as reenacted and amended.
§ 144-602 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-602
1:294
ARTICLE VII
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Responsibilities and Easements
§ 144-701. General requirements for protection, operation and
maintenance of stormwater BMPs and conveyances.
The following shall apply to all regulated activities in accordance with the
requirements of the subsequent sections of this Article VII.
A. Continuing operations and maintenance responsibilities of all
permanent BMPs, conveyances, or other stormwater management
facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the municipality along with
the SWM site plan. The municipality may require an offer of a
dedication of such facilities as part of the requirements for approval of
the SWM site plan. Such a requirement is not an indication that the
municipality will accept the facilities. The municipality reserves the
right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance responsibility
for any portion of or all of the BMPs, conveyances or other stormwater
controls and facilities.
B. An operation and maintenance (O&M) plan shall be submitted to the
municipality for review and approval for all existing and proposed
permanent BMPs and man-made conveyances or other stormwater
facilities identified in the SWM site plan. Multiple BMPs or conveyances
may be addressed by a combined O&M plan where all such facilities are
similar in O&M requirements and ownership.
C. The O&M plan(s) and O&M agreement(s) shall name the person
identified in the SWM site plan who shall be the owner of and be
responsible for ongoing inspections, operation, repair, and maintenance
of each BMP or conveyance following completion of construction.
D. For any BMP or man-made conveyance (including any to be located on
any property other than the property being developed by the applicant)
to be owned by a person other than the municipality:
(1) An O&M agreement shall be submitted to the municipality for
review and approval; and
(2) The O&M plan shall be attached to, incorporated within, and
recorded as a public record along with a fully executed O&M
agreement, all of which shall be recorded as a restrictive covenant
that runs with the land and shall be binding upon the landowner
and any heirs, administrators, successors in interest or assigns of
the landowner.
E. The following shall be provided for all BMPs and conveyances
(including any to be located on any property other than the property
being developed by the applicant) by an O&M or other agreement or by
otherwise establishing covenants, easements, deed restrictions, or by
dedication to the municipality:
§ 144-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-701
1:295
§ 144-702. Operation and maintenance plans.
The following items shall be included in the O&M plan, unless otherwise
approved by the Municipal Engineer:
(1) Permanent protection of the BMP or conveyance from disturbance
or alteration;
(2) Right of entry and access for the municipality for inspection and
enforcement of this chapter (including § 144-903G) and any
applicable O&M plan or O&M agreement; and
(3) Right of entry and access for the person owning the BMP or
conveyance and responsible for fulfilling the O&M requirements
when that person is not the municipality and is different from the
owner of the property on which the BMP or conveyance is located
(such as may be applicable for § 144-301G of this chapter).
F. All O&M and other agreements, covenants, easements and deed
restrictions shall:
(1) Be submitted to the municipality for review and approval;
(2) Be recorded as a public record, upon approval, against each
parcel(s) which is part of the SWM site plan or otherwise contains
any BMP or conveyance comprising part of the regulated activity
which is the subject of an O&M agreement; and
(3) Run with the land and be binding upon the landowner, its heirs,
administrators, successors in interest, and assigns.
G. The materials, documents and content required by this Article VII may
be prepared in conjunction with and incorporated with similar
materials, documents and content required for other permit or approval
applications, such as those required by PADEP for the post-construction
stormwater management plan.
A. For regulated activities with less than 2,000 square feet of proposed
impervious surfaces and less than 10,000 square feet of proposed earth
disturbance, the required contents of the operation and maintenance
plan are reduced. At a minimum, the operation and maintenance plan
for these regulated activities shall include all applicable requirements
of the Simplified Approach to Stormwater Management for Small
Projects. All other regulated activities shall comply with the
requirements of this section.
B. A plan sheet(s) or map(s) showing each BMP and man-made
conveyance and which shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Property(ies) identification (owner name and address; and property
address and/or lot and/or tax parcel number, etc.), property
boundaries and tax parcel number of the land parcel on which the
BMP or conveyance is located.
§ 144-701 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-702
1:296
(2) Name, address, phone number, date prepared, signature and seal
of the licensed professional responsible for preparation of the plan
sheet or map.
(3) Clear identification of the location, dimensions, and function of
each BMP or conveyance covered by the O&M plan.
(4) The location of each BMP and conveyance relative to roadways,
property boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks and existing
natural drainage features such as streams, lakes, ponds, or other
bodies of water within the immediate vicinity of, or receiving
discharge from, the BMP or conveyance.
(5) Delineation of the land area, structures, impervious surfaces and
conveyances draining to and from the BMP.
(6) Representative elevations and/or topographic contours at intervals
of two feet, or other as acceptable to the Municipal Engineer.
(7) Other features including FEMA floodplain and floodway
boundaries, sinkholes, etc. located within the immediate proximity
of each BMP and conveyance.
(8) Locations of areas of vegetation to be managed or preserved that
function as a BMP or conveyance.
(9) The locations of all surface and subsurface utilities, on-lot waste
water facilities, sanitary sewers, and waterlines within 20 feet of
each BMP or conveyance.
(10) The following as it pertains to any easements, covenants and deed
restrictions established for each applicable BMP or conveyance:
(a) Boundaries delineated with bearings and distances shown that
encompass the BMP or conveyance and that includes a ten-foot
perimeter area surrounding these features and sufficient
vehicular ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way and
roadway;
(b) Labels specifying the type and purpose of the easement,
covenant, or deed restriction and who it benefits; and
(c) Labels with reference to any corresponding easement
agreement, covenant, deed restriction or other document to be
recorded.
(11) The plan sheet or map shall be prepared at sufficient scale for
municipal review, and ultimately for the use by the person
responsible for operation and maintenance, and shall also be
prepared at a legible scale that meets the requirements for
recordation along with (and as an attachment to) the O&M
agreement and O&M plan at the Chester County Office of the
Recorder of Deeds.
§ 144-702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-702
1:297
C. The following information shall be included in the O&M plan and
written in a manner consistent with the knowledge and understanding
of the person who will be responsible for the maintenance activities:
(1) The name and address of the following:
(a) Property(ies) on which each BMP or conveyance is located;
(b) Owner of the property;
(c) Owner of each stormwater BMP or conveyance who is
responsible for implementation of the O&M plan;
(d) Person responsible for maintaining adequate liability
insurance and payment of taxes; and
(e) Person preparing the O&M plan.
(2) A description of each BMP and conveyance and how the BMPs and
conveyances are intended to function.
(3) A description of actions necessary to operate, inspect, and maintain
each BMP or conveyance, including but not limited to:
(a) Lawn care, vegetation maintenance, landscaping and planting;
(b) Clean out of accumulated debris and sediment (including from
grates, trash racks, inlets, etc.); and
(c) Other anticipated periodic maintenance and repair.
(4) The following statement shall be included:
"The landowner acknowledges that, per the provisions of the
municipality's Stormwater Management Ordinance, it is unlawful
to modify, remove, fill, landscape, alter or impair the effectiveness
of, or place any structure, other vegetation, yard waste, brush
cuttings, or other waste or debris into any permanent stormwater
management BMP or conveyance described in this O&M plan or
to allow the BMP or conveyance to exist in a condition which does
not conform to this O&M plan, without written approval from the
municipality."
(5) Inspection and maintenance schedules.
(6) Explanation of the purpose and limitations of any easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions associated with any BMP or
conveyance that are to be recorded against the property.
D. A statement that no BMP or man-made conveyance may be used by the
owner or others for any purpose other than its intended stormwater
control function, or, if approved by the Municipal Engineer, a statement
of specific allowable uses of the BMP (i.e., recreational benefits that
§ 144-702 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-702
1:298
§ 144-703. Operation and maintenance agreements.
may be associated with certain BMPs owned by a homeowners'
association, or allowable uses by an individual residential landowner).
E. A statement that establishes a reasonable time frame for remedy of
deficiencies found by the owner during their inspections.
F. Language needed to fulfill the requirements of § 144-705B, C, and D of
this chapter.
A. An O&M agreement shall be required for any BMP or man-made
conveyance to be owned by a person other than the municipality, and
the agreement shall:
(1) Be between the owner of the BMP or conveyance and the
municipality, and shall be substantially the same as the O&M
agreement in Appendix E;66
(2) Incorporate the approved O&M plan(s) for all BMPs or
conveyances to be covered by the O&M agreement;
(3) Set forth the rights, duties and obligations of the owner of the BMP
or conveyance and the municipality, and be consistent with the
approved O&M plan(s);
(4) Be recorded as a deed restriction or restrictive covenant that runs
with the land and shall be binding upon the landowner, its heirs,
administrators, successors in interest, and assigns;
(5) Be submitted to the municipality for review prior to approval of the
SWM site plan;
(6) Upon approval by the municipality, be signed by the designated
owner of the BMP or conveyance and submitted for signature by
the municipality; and
(7) When fully executed, be recorded by the landowner at the Chester
County Office of the Recorder of Deeds following municipal
approval of the O&M plan and prior to the start of construction.
B. Other items or conditions may be required by the municipality to be
included in the O&M agreement where determined necessary by the
municipality to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance
of all permanent BMPs and conveyances.
C. After approval of the final as-built plans per the requirements of Article
V, the applicant shall review and, if necessary and if required by the
municipality, revise and rerecord the O&M plan and O&M agreement to
reflect the final as-built conditions of each BMP and conveyance if
66.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Township offices.
§ 144-702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-703
1:299
§ 144-704. Easements and deed restrictions.
different from the information included in the original recorded
documents.
A. Easements shall be established in connection with any regulated
activity for all permanent BMPs and conveyances that will not be
dedicated to or otherwise owned by the municipality (including any to
be located on any property other than the property being developed by
the applicant), and shall be in general conformance with the form
easement agreement which can be obtained from the Township
Solicitor. This agreement shall:
(1) Include all land area occupied by each BMP or conveyance;
(2) Include a ten-foot-wide perimeter (or other width as determined in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer) surrounding the
feature(s);
(3) Provide sufficient vehicular ingress and egress from a public rightof-
way and roadway;
(4) Permanently protect every BMP and conveyance from disturbance
or alteration where not otherwise protected by a recorded O&M
agreement, covenant, deed restriction or other means;
(5) Grant the municipality the right, but not the duty, to access every
BMP and conveyance from a public right-of-way or public roadway
to conduct periodic inspections and to undertake other actions that
may be necessary to enforce the requirements of this chapter, or of
any applicable O&M plan or O&M agreement; where roadways will
not be dedicated to the municipality, the municipality shall be
granted access to the private roadways as necessary to access
every BMP and conveyance;
(6) Grant the owner of each BMP and conveyance the right to access,
inspect, operate, maintain, and repair the BMP or conveyance
when the feature is to be owned, operated and maintained by a
person other than the municipality and other than the owner of the
parcel on which it is located;
(7) Be shown, with bearings and distances noted, on the SWM site plan
map/plan sheets, O&M plan map/plan sheets, final as-built plans,
and be signed and sealed by a qualified licensed professional;
(8) Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the easement
shall run with the land and bind the landowner granting the
easement, its heirs, administrators, successors in interest and
assigns, into perpetuity; and
(9) Be recorded at the Chester County Office of the Recorder of Deeds
following municipal approval and prior to the start of construction.
§ 144-703 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-704
1:300
B. For any BMP or conveyance to be owned by a person other than the
municipality or the landowner owning the parcel upon which a BMP or
conveyance is located, an easement agreement shall be prepared and
executed between the landowner and the owner of the BMP or
conveyance which shall:
(1) Describe the ownership interests of all parties to the easement
agreement, including the ownership of the BMP or conveyance;
(2) Include a written legal (metes and bounds) description of the
easement area, with reference to a recorded plan sheet showing
the legal boundaries of the easement area (or an accompanying
plan sheet/map), signed and sealed by a qualified licensed
professional;
(3) Grant an easement from the landowner to the owner of each BMP
and conveyance, establishing the right and obligation to occupy,
access, inspect, operate, maintain, and repair the BMP or
conveyance;
(4) Include a description of the purpose of the easement and the
responsibilities of the parties involved;
(5) Incorporate by reference or be recorded with, the corresponding
O&M plan and O&M agreement;
(6) Restrict the landowner's use of the easement area of the parcel on
which the BMP or conveyance is located, consistent with the rights
granted to the owner of the BMP or conveyance;
(7) Be submitted to the municipality for review and approval prior to
approval of the SWM site plan;
(8) Upon approval by the municipality, be signed by the owner of the
BMP(s) or conveyance(s) and the landowner and submitted for
signature by the municipality;
(9) Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the easement will
run with the land affected by the easement and that the easement
agreement is binding upon the parties to the easement agreement,
their heirs, administrators, successors in interest and assigns, into
perpetuity;
(10) Contain additional provisions or information as required by the
municipality; and
(11) When fully executed, be recorded by the landowner at the Chester
County Office of the Recorder of Deeds against all parcels affected
by the terms of the easement agreement, within 45 calendar days
of the municipality's approval of the corresponding O&M plan.
C. For any BMP or conveyance which is designed to receive runoff from
another parcel or parcels and which is owned by the landowner of the
§ 144-704 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-704
1:301
parcel upon which the BMP or conveyance is located, in addition to any
easement or easement agreement required pursuant to § 144-704A or
B, an easement agreement shall be prepared and executed between the
landowner of the parcel or parcels draining to the BMP or conveyance
and the owner of the BMP or conveyance. This easement agreement
shall:
(1) Describe the ownership interests of all parties to the easement
agreement, including the ownership of all affected parcels and of
the BMP or conveyance;
(2) Provide for the grant of a drainage easement from the owner of the
BMP or conveyance to the landowner of the parcel(s) draining to
the BMP, which shall extend from the shared parcel boundary(ies)
to the receiving BMP and shall include the connecting flow path(s)
or conveyance;
(3) Include a written legal (metes and bounds) description of the
easement area, with reference to a recorded plan sheet showing
the legal boundaries of the easement area (or an accompanying
plan sheet/map), signed and sealed by a licensed professional.
(4) Incorporate by reference or be recorded with the corresponding
O&M plan and O&M agreement;
(5) State that the purpose of the easement agreement is to ensure the
continuous right of the discharging parcel to discharge onto the
parcel containing the BMP and into the BMP or conveyance;
(6) Restrict the BMP or conveyance owner's use of the easement area
of the parcel upon which the BMP or conveyance is located,
consistent with the purpose of the easement granted;
(7) Establish the duty and responsibility of the landowner of the parcel
or parcels draining to the BMP or conveyance to maintain the
existing drainages on the discharging parcel or parcels as designed
and constructed to discharge to the receiving BMP;
(8) Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the easement will
run with the land and will bind all parties to the easement
agreement, their heirs, administrators, successors in interest and
assigns, into perpetuity;
(9) Be submitted to the municipality for review and approval prior to
approval of the SWM site plan;
(10) Contain all additional provisions or information as the municipality
may require upon review; and
(11) Be executed by the parties to the easement agreement and
recorded at the Chester County Recorder of Deeds Office against
the draining parcel(s) and the parcel upon which the BMP or
§ 144-704 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-704
1:302
§ 144-705. Other post-construction responsibilities.
conveyance is located within 45 calendar days of the municipality's
approval of the corresponding O&M Plan.
D. For any area(s) shown on the SWM site plan maps/plan sheets or asbuilt
plan sheets as requiring, or area(s) that is otherwise determined to
require, deed restriction(s) for the purpose of protecting and
prohibiting disturbance to a BMP or conveyance, such deed restrictions
will be incorporated into a written deed, restrictive covenant, or
equivalent document. The deed or other document shall:
(1) Include a clear and understandable description of the purpose,
terms and conditions of the restricted use;
(2) Include the written legal description (metes and bounds
description) of the area to which the restrictions apply that is
consistent with the boundary shown on the O&M plan sheets and
SWM site plan maps/plan sheets;
(3) Make reference to any corresponding O&M plan(s) and O&M
agreement(s);
(4) Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the terms of the
restriction run with the land and shall be binding upon the
landowner, its heirs, administrators, successors in interest, and
assigns;
(5) Be submitted to the municipality for review and approval prior to
approval of the SWM site plan;
(6) Upon approval by the municipality, be signed by the landowner and
owner of the BMP or conveyance and submitted to the
municipality; and
(7) Be fully executed and recorded at the Chester County Office of the
Recorder of Deeds within 45 calendar days of the municipality's
approval of the O&M plan.
A. The provisions of § 144-804 of this chapter shall apply to any permanent
BMP or conveyance that is constructed as part of an approved SWM
site plan or covered by an approved O&M plan.
B. The person responsible for the operation and maintenance of a BMP or
conveyance shall make records of the installation and of all
maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least five
years. These records shall be submitted to the municipality, if
requested.
C. Upon final inspection, the municipality shall inform the person
responsible for the operation and maintenance whether the submission
of periodic (annual or other frequency) inspection and maintenance
reports will be required.
§ 144-704 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-705
1:303
§ 144-706. Municipal Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and
Maintenance Fund.
D. The owner of each BMP and conveyance shall keep on file with the
municipality the name, address, and telephone number of the person
responsible for maintenance activities and implementation of the O&M
plan. In the event of a change, new information shall be submitted in
writing by the BMP or conveyance owner to the municipality within 30
working days of the change.
A. Persons installing stormwater controls or BMPs shall be required to pay
a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater Control and BMP
Operation and Maintenance Fund to help cover the costs of periodic
inspections and maintenance expenses. The amount of the deposit shall
be determined as follows:
(1) If the BMP or conveyance is to be privately owned and maintained,
the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections performed
by the municipality, as estimated by the Municipal Engineer, for a
period of five years. This is to be paid in a manner specified by the
municipality. After that period of time, inspections will be
performed at the expense of the municipality.
(2) If the BMP or conveyance is to be owned and maintained by the
municipality, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for
maintenance and inspections for five years. The municipality will
establish the estimated costs utilizing information submitted by the
applicant.
(3) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to present
worth of the annual series values. The municipality shall determine
the present worth equivalents, which shall be subject to the
approval of the governing body.
B. If a BMP or conveyance is proposed that also serves as a recreational
facility (e.g., ball field or lake), the municipality may reduce or waive
the amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the value of
the land for public recreational purpose.
C. If at some future time, a BMP or conveyance (whether publicly or
privately owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or
other storage facility, the unused portion of the maintenance fund
deposit will be applied to the cost of abandoning or demolishing the
facility and connecting to the storm sewer system or other facility. Any
amount of the deposit remaining after the costs of abandonment or
demolition will be used for inspection, maintenance, and operation of
the receiving stormwater management system.
D. If a BMP or conveyance is accepted by the municipality for dedication,
the municipality may require persons installing the BMP or conveyance
to pay a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater Control and
§ 144-705 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-706
1:304
BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund to help cover the costs of
operations and maintenance activities. The amount may be determined
as follows:
(1) The amount shall cover the estimated costs for operations and
maintenance for five years, as determined by the municipality; and
(2) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
E. The municipality may require applicants to pay a fee to the Municipal
Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund to
cover:
(1) Long-term maintenance of BMP(s) or conveyance(s); and
(2) Stormwater-related problems which may arise from the land
development and earth disturbance.
§ 144-706 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-706
1:305

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 144-801. Prohibited discharges.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the municipality's separate storm
sewer system or the waters of the commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the
municipality's separate storm sewer system or the waters of the
commonwealth that are not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
(1) As provided in § 144-801C below; and
(2) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined by
the municipality to be significant contributors to pollution to the
municipality's separate storm sewer system or to the waters of the
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities;
(2) Potable water sources including waterline and fire hydrant
flushings;
(3) Irrigation drainage;
(4) Air-conditioning condensate;
(5) Springs;
(6) Water from crawl space pumps;
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used;
(8) Diverted stream flows;
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(10) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains;
(11) Lawn watering;
(12) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater;
(14)Water from individual residential car washing; and
§ 144-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-801
1:307
§ 144-802. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 144-801C
above:
§ 144-803. Roof drains and sump pumps.
(15) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
D. In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges
identified in § 144-801C significantly contribute pollutants to the
municipality's separate storm sewer system or to the waters of the
commonwealth, or is notified of such significant contribution of
pollution by PADEP, the municipality will notify the responsible person
to cease the discharge.
E. Upon notice provided by the municipality under § 144-801D, the
discharger shall, within a reasonable time period, as determined by the
municipality consistent with the degree of pollution caused by the
discharge, cease the discharge.
F. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter a separate storm sewer system,
and any connections to the separate storm sewer system from indoor
drains and sinks.
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to a separate storm sewer system, which has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the
municipality.
A. Roof drains and sump pump discharges shall not be connected to
streets, sanitary sewers, or roadside ditches/swales.
B. Roof drain, sump pump, foundation and footing drain discharges:
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, shall discharge to infiltration
or vegetative BMPs, or to vegetated or other areas with adequate
capacity;
(2) May be connected to streets, storm sewers, or roadside ditches
only if determined necessary or acceptable by the Municipal
Engineer; and
(3) Shall be considered in stormwater management calculations to
demonstrate that conveyance and receiving facilities have
adequate capacity.
§ 144-801 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-804
1:308
§ 144-804. Alteration of BMPs.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, alter, or impair the
effectiveness of any stormwater BMPs, conveyances, facilities, areas or
structures unless the activity is part of an approved maintenance
program, without the written approval of the municipality.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, additional
vegetation, yard waste, brush cuttings, or other waste or debris into a
BMP or conveyance, or within a stormwater easement, that would limit
or alter the functioning of the stormwater BMP or conveyance, without
the written approval of the municipality.
§ 144-804 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-804
1:309

ARTICLE IX
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§ 144-901. Public nuisance.
§ 144-902. Right of entry.
§ 144-903. Enforcement.
A. Any regulated activity conducted in the violation of any provision of this
chapter is hereby deemed a public nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
C. A separate violation will be found to exist for each section of this
chapter found to have been violated.
D. To the extent that the municipality does not enforce any provision of
this chapter, such action or inaction shall not constitute a waiver by the
municipality of its rights of future enforcement hereunder.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized officers or
agents of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon any
property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operation and maintenance of all erosion and sediment
controls and permanent stormwater BMPs, conveyances, or other
stormwater facilities both during and after completion of a regulated
activity, or for compliance with any requirement of this chapter.
B. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on or in any BMP, conveyance or other stormwater
facility in the municipality such devices as are necessary to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges from such BMP or
conveyance, or other stormwater facilities.
C. Failure of the landowner or representative to grant access to the
municipality within 24 hours of notification, verbal or written, is a
violation of this chapter.
A. The Municipal Engineer or other designee is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. The municipal
governing body may delegate enforcement duties, including the initial
determination of ordinance violation and service of notice, if notice is
given, to such other officers or agents as the municipality shall deem
qualified for that purpose.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the landowner of the real property on
which any regulated activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has
occurred to comply with the applicable terms and conditions of this
chapter.
§ 144-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-903
1:311
C. All municipal inspections for compliance with the approved SWM site
plan shall be the responsibility of the municipality or its designee.
D. During any stage of the work of any regulated activity, if the Municipal
Engineer or other designee determines that the erosion and sediment
control measures, permanent BMPs, conveyances or other stormwater
facilities are not being installed or maintained in accordance with the
approved SWM site plan, the municipality may suspend or revoke any
existing permits or other approvals until the deficiencies are corrected
or until a revised SWM site plan is submitted and approved, if and as
determined to be necessary by the Municipal Engineer or other
designee.
E. In the event that the Municipal Engineer or other designee finds that a
person has violated a provision of this chapter, or fails to conform to the
requirements of any permit or approval issued by the municipality, or
any O&M plan or O&M agreement approved by the municipality, the
municipality may order compliance by written notice of the violation to
the landowner.
F. Such notice may, without limitation, require the following remedies:
(1) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) Elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) Abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs
and/or forfeiture of financial security;
(6) Implementation of stormwater controls, BMPs, and conveyances;
and
(7) Operation, maintenance or repair of BMPs, conveyances or other
stormwater facilities.
G. Such notice shall set forth the nature of the violation(s), citing to
specific sections of this chapter which have not been met, and establish
a time limit for commencement of correction and completion of
correction of the violation(s). The notice shall provide for a right of the
landowner's appeal to the municipal governing body in accordance with
§ 144-906 of this chapter. Said notice shall further advise that, if
applicable, should the violator fail to take the required action within the
established deadline, possible sanctions, clearly described, may be
imposed, or the work may be done by the municipality or designee, and
the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
§ 144-903 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-903
1:312
§ 144-904. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
§ 144-905. Violations and penalties.
H. Failure to comply within the time specified in such notice shall also
subject such person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such
penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the
municipality from pursuing any and all other remedies available in law
or equity.
A. Any building, land development, or other permit or approval issued by
the municipality may be suspended or revoked by the municipality for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit or approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other law or
regulation applicable to the regulated activity;
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity that constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, or endangers the life, health, safety, or property of
others; or
(4) Failure to correct a violation within the allowed time period allowed
per notice given by the municipality.
B. Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit, unless there is immediate
danger or threat of such danger to life, public health or property, at the
request of the applicant, the municipality's governing body shall
schedule a hearing on the violation and proposed revocation or
suspension, pursuant to public notice. The expense of a hearing shall be
the applicant's responsibility.
C. A suspended permit or approval may be reinstated by the municipality
when:
(1) The Municipal Engineer or other designee has inspected and
approved the corrections to the BMPs, conveyances or other
stormwater facilities, or the elimination of the hazard or nuisance;
and
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
D. A permit or approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot
be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit or approval in
accordance with this chapter.
A. Any person violating or permitting the violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $300/day and not more
than $1,000/day for each violation, recoverable with costs. The
establishment of a violation for purposes of setting fines or penalties for
such violation shall be in accordance with a citation to a Magisterial
§ 144-903 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-905
1:313
§ 144-906. Appeals.
§ 144-907. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect and be in full force and effect five days from
and after the date of its final passage and adoption.
District Judge with jurisdiction and venue over the location of the
violation, and such an action will be subject to the procedures provided
for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules
of Criminal Procedure. A separate offense shall arise for each day or
portion thereof a violation is found to exist and may be determined for
each section of this chapter which is found to have been violated.
B. In addition, the municipality may, through its solicitor, institute
injunctive, mandamus, or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other legal or
equitable forms of remedy or relief. Such relief may include costs, fees,
and charges, including the municipality's attorney's fees (charged at
the hourly rate approved by the governing body of the municipality) and
costs, as may be permitted by law.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the municipality
shall have the right at any or all times deemed necessary by the
Municipal Engineer or designee to enter upon any property within the
municipality to inspect and, upon determination of a violation of this
chapter, to correct the violation, with all expenses associated with
correcting the violation to be charged to the property owner
responsible for the violation.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Municipal Engineer or other
designee relative to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the
municipality's governing body within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality's governing
body relative to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the County
Court of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place
within 30 days of the municipality's decision.
§ 144-905 WESTTOWN CODE § 144-907
1:314
Chapter 146
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Broadband and telecommunications — See
Ch. 53.
Building construction — See Ch. 57.
Sewers — See Ch. 132.
§ 144-907 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-907
1:315

ARTICLE I
Excavations
[Adopted 6-3-1974 by Ord. No. 74-2]
§ 146-1. Permit required.
In accordance with the provisions of § 1156 of Article XI of the Second Class
Township Code,67 as amended, no railroad or street railway shall hereafter
be constructed upon any Township road, nor shall any railroad or street
railway crossings, nor any gas line, water pipe, electric conduits, or other
piping, be laid upon or in, nor shall any telephone, telegraph, or electric
light or power poles, or any coal tipples or any other obstructions be erected
upon or in, any portion of a Township road except under such conditions,
restrictions and regulations relating to the installation and maintenance
thereof as may be prescribed by permits granted by the Township for such
purpose.
§ 146-2. Permit application.
The application for a permit shall be upon a form prescribed by the
Township and submitted to the Township in triplicate. The application shall
be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the Schedule of Fees set forth
by the Department of Transportation for highway occupancy permits and
restoration charges. In addition, the applicant shall submit three copies of
a sketch showing such dimensions as the location of the intended facility,
width of the traveled roadway, right-of-way lines and a dimension to the
nearest intersecting street.
§ 146-3. Issuance of permit.
A permit shall be issued to the applicant after all the aforementioned
requirements have been met.
§ 146-4. Notice of completion.
Upon completion of the work, the applicant shall give written notice thereof
to the Township.
§ 146-5. Inspection; correction of defects; costs.
Upon completion of the work authorized by the permit, the Township shall
inspect the work and, when necessary, enforce compliance with the
conditions, restrictions and regulations prescribed by the permit. Where
any settlement or defect in the work occurs, if the applicant shall fail to
rectify such settlement or other defect, within 60 days after written notice
from the Township to do so, the Township may do the work and shall impose
upon the applicant the cost thereof, together with an additional 20% of such
cost.
67.Editor's Note: Former § 1156 of Article XI of the Second Class Township Code was repealed
11-9-1995 by P.L. 350, No. 60, § 1. See now 53 P.S. § 67322.
§ 146-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-6
1:317
§ 146-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
§ 146-6 WESTTOWN CODE § 146-6
1:318
ARTICLE II
Sidewalk Maintenance and Repair and Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 12-3-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-6; amended in its entirety
3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-1]
§ 146-7. Obligation of abutting-property owner.
§ 146-8. Repairs.
A. The owner of each property within the Township abutting upon a
sidewalk open to the public for pedestrian traverse or located, in the
whole or in part, within the right-of-way of a public or private street on
which the property abuts shall keep said sidewalk, together with any
portion of the property paved and used as a sidewalk or public walk,
immediately in front of the property, and in case of corner lots with
public walks on both sides of the lot, in good order and repair and, at all
times, clear of all obstruction to safe and convenient passage, including
the accumulation of snow or ice.
B. Snow or ice shall be removed within 24 hours of cessation of the
snowfall.
A. Conformance. Every owner of property shall, on notice from the
Township Office within the time period noted in such notice, cause the
construction or reconstruction sidewalk in front of and/or alongside of
such property to conform to all applicable requirements of this article.
B. Repair required. Every owner of property shall, on notice from the
Township Office within the time period noted in such notice, repair the
sidewalk in front of and/or alongside of such property in the manner
stipulated in such notice.
C. Deterioration. Deterioration shall include cracking, gouging, scaling,
vehicular, fire damage/and or surface disintegration. Surface
disintegration is a deterioration of the concrete resulting in an irregular
surface with depressions greater than 1/2 inch in depth.
D. Repairs allowed. Minor cracks, holes or deteriorated sections of
sidewalk may be repaired with concrete non-shrink sealant materials
installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer specifications
when less than 25% of an individual section of sidewalk has
deteriorated.
E. Replacement or repair required. All concrete work involving sidewalks
and to be installed or repaired shall meet the requirements of Westtown
Subdivision of Land Ordinance § 149-916 repeated as follows:
§ 146-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-8
1:319
§ 146-9. Notice of violation.
If the owner of any property neglects at any time to perform the duties
herein described, the Township Board of Supervisors or its designee may
serve written notice upon him/her requiring him/her to perform the
All materials entering into the construction of sidewalks and the
method of construction shall be in accordance with PennDOT
Specifications Publication 408, except that the compacted thickness of
the aggregate bed shall be four inches. Sidewalks across driveways
and driveway aprons shall be constructed with six inches of concrete
reinforced with six by six welded wire fabric placed two inches from
the finished surface. Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four
feet and be located four feet behind the curb line unless approved
otherwise. (As amended 7-22-2002 by Ordinance No. 2002-5).
F. When one or more of the following conditions exist, the section of
sidewalk shall be reconstructed or repaired as applicable and as
determined and approved by the Township Code Enforcement Officer in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
(1) More than 25% of sidewalk is deteriorated.
(2) A section of sidewalk is out of vertical alignment with an adjacent
section by 1/4 inch or more.
(3) A section of sidewalk having a crack width of 1/2 inch at any one
point greater than one foot in length shall be replaced or filled with
non-shrink concrete sealant materials installed in strict accordance
with the manufacturer's specifications.
(4) A sidewalk with a reverse grade or which is settled so as to cause
the ponding of water and/or formation of ice shall be replaced.
(5) No surface gutters shall be permitted on newly constructed
sidewalks. All sidewalks shall be not less than four inches in
thickness and the surface shall have a one-fourth-inch pitch per
linear foot ascending from the outside face of the curb.
(6) In replacing sidewalks, the replaced sections shall conform in size
to that which is being replaced. All new concrete shall conform to
ASTM Designation F1637-95 (Standard Practice for Safe Walking
Surfaces).
(7) A sidewalk which is more than one inch out of horizontal and/or
vertical alignment from the required topographical alignment or
grade shall be replaced.
(8) Deteriorated sidewalks which constitute a hazard to pedestrian
travel shall be barricaded to prevent pedestrian travel upon notice
and shall be repaired within 10 days from receipt of notice from
Westtown Township.
§ 146-8 WESTTOWN CODE § 146-9
1:320
necessary maintenance or repair. The notice shall specify the time by which
said maintenance or repair shall be commenced and the time by which it
shall be completed. The notice provided for in this section may be served on
the property owner by leaving the same at his place of residence or, if such
place of residence is unknown to the Township, by posting the same on the
abutting property.
§ 146-10. Performance and assessment of costs upon continued
violation.
If such property owner fails to comply with the requirements of the notice
described in the preceding section within the time period specified therein,
the Township Board of Supervisors or its designee may make the necessary
repairs, perform the necessary maintenance, or remove any obstruction,
and the cost of the same, together with a penalty to defray administrative
expenses in the amount of 10% of the said cost, shall be paid by the property
owner and may be assessed and collected by the Township as and in the
manner of a municipal lien or by any other appropriate legal action.
§ 146-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-10
1:321
Chapter 149
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 57.
Erosion, sediment control and grading — See
Ch. 80.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 84.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 87.
Sewers — See Ch. 132.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 146.
Trees — See Ch. 158.
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 146-10 WESTTOWN CODE § 146-10
1:322
ARTICLE I
Purpose; Scope; Interpretation
§ 149-100. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Westtown Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
§ 149-101. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to assure sites suitable for building purposes
and human habitation, to provide for the harmonious development of the
Township of Westtown and to provide for adequate open spaces, smooth
flow of traffic, light and air, and for the proper distribution of population,
thereby creating conditions favorable to the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of Westtown Township.
§ 149-102. Relationship to Comprehensive Plan and zoning
regulations.
This chapter is adopted to promote an orderly plan of development in
accordance with the Westtown Township Comprehensive Plan and Chapter
170, Zoning.
§ 149-103. Scope.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, any subdivision and/or land
development shall be in conformity with this chapter and all standards and
specifications adopted as a part of such chapter.
§ 149-104. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
to meet the above-stated purposes. Where the provisions of this chapter
impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or
regulations, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where the
provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulations impose greater
restrictions than those of this chapter, the provisions of such statute,
ordinance or regulation shall prevail.
§ 149-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-104
1:323

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 149-200. Word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall
be construed throughout this chapter to have the meaning herein indicated.
The singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the
singular. Words used in the present or past tenses shall include the future
tense. The words "person," "applicant," "subdivider" and "owner" shall
include a corporation, unincorporated association and a partnership, or
other legal entity, as well as an individual. The word "building" shall include
the word "structure" and shall be construed as if followed by the phrase
"or part thereof." The word "watercourse" shall include channel, canal,
creek, ditch, dry run, spring and stream. The words "should" and "may" are
permissive; the words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and directive.
§ 149-201. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates
otherwise, the following words and/or phrases have the meaning indicated
below:
ACT — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as
amended and reenacted by Act 170 of 1988, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., and any
subsequent amendments thereto.
ALLEY — See "service street."
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, including heirs, successors and
assigns, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an application for subdivision
or land development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application whether
preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of
construction or development, including but not limited to an application for
a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plan, for the approval
of a development plan, for the approval of a flexible development or for a
change of zoning.
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded entirely by streets; by streets and
a watercourse; by streets and a railroad; by streets and the corporate
boundaries of the Township; or by streets and public land, or any
combination of the above.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Westtown Township.
BUILDING — Any structure which is erected on the ground and
permanently anchored thereto, consisting of at least two walls and a roof,
A. If a word is not defined in this chapter, but is defined in the Zoning
Chapter, then the definition in the Zoning Chapter shall apply to this
Subdivision and Land Development Chapter. [Added 7-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-5]
§ 149-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-201
1:325
and designed, intended or arranged for the housing, sheltering, enclosure
or structural support of persons, animals or property of any kind. Any
manufactured home or similar structure constructed off-site prior to
placement on the ground is a building.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line parallel to the street line at a
distance therefrom equal to the depth of the minimum front yard required
for the district in which the lot is located.[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-5]
CARTWAY — The paved area of a road right-of-way, including width
intended for vehicular movement and on-street parking, but not including
shoulders.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by the lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of the street center lines.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The document adopted July 2, 2001, as the
Growth Management Plan/Comprehensive Plan for the Township of
Westtown by the Board of Supervisors.[Amended 8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-5; 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
CROSSWALK (INTERIOR WALK) — A publicly or privately owned right-ofway
for pedestrian use extending from a street into a block or across a block
to another street.
CUL-DE-SAC — See definition under "streets."
dbh — Diameter of a tree at breast height, usually measured at 3.5 feet from
the ground surface.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Minimum standards for the layout by which a
subdivision or land development is developed.
DETENTION BASIN — A structure designed to retard surface runoff for a
period of time sufficient to cause the deposition of sediment and to reduce
the velocity and rate of surface flows leaving a site, thus preventing further
erosion.[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission from a landowner who makes or causes to be made the
improvements associated with a subdivision or land development. The
developer may also be the subdivider as defined herein.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of manufactured homes, streets, and other paving, utilities,
filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling operations, and the
subdivision of land.
DRAINAGE — The flow of water or liquid waste and the method of directing
such flow, whether natural or artificial.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted to use private land to
facilitate drainage as deemed necessary by the Township within which the
§ 149-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-201
1:326
owner shall erect no permanent structures, but may use the land in any
other way not inconsistent with the grantee's rights.
DRIVEWAY — A private strip of land intended for use as a means of
vehicular or pedestrian access to an individual lot. No more than three
dwelling units may share access via the use of a common
driveway.[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
DWELLING UNIT — A building or entirely self-contained portion thereof
containing food preparation and bathroom facilities, for occupancy by only
one family including any domestic servants living on the premises with
no enclosed space, other than vestibules, entrance or other hallways or
porches, in common with any other dwelling unit.
EARTHMOVING ACTIVITY — Land disturbance activity resulting in the
movement of earth or stripping of vegetative cover from the earth.
EASEMENT — A permanent right granted for limited use of private land,
normally for a public purpose (e.g., utility, drainage, public access). The
owner of the property shall have the right to make any other use of the land
which is not inconsistent with the rights of the grantee.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and duly appointed on a yearly basis to act
as consulting engineer for the Township.
EROSION — The movement of soil by the action of wind, water, climate and/
or construction-related activities.
FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT — Development in conformance with the
"flexible development procedure" established in Chapter 170, Zoning, as
authorized by Article VII, Planned Residential Development, of the
Municipalities Planning Code.68
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream
or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; an area
subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of geologic structures and
rock or soil interstices which have the capacity to store water.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES — The definition in the Zoning Chapter shall
apply.[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
IMPROVEMENTS — Buildings, for public or quasi-public use; grading;
paving; streets; streetlights and signs; fire hydrants; water mains; sanitary
sewers; storm drains and other drainage facilities; public utilities; curbs;
sidewalks; crosswalks; bridges; culverts; monuments; retaining walls; and
landscaping, as proposed or required.[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-5]
68.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10701 et seq.
§ 149-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-201
1:327
IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS — Minimum standards for the
construction of the required improvements such as listed under the
definition of "improvements" above and other items required to render the
land suitable for the use proposed.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct the flow of
rain into storage in geologic structures, e.g., french drains, seepage pits.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he/she is authorized
under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person
having a proprietary interest in land.
LOT — A parcel of land, undivided by any street or dedicated future street
right-of-way. Such parcel shall be separately described by metes and
bounds, the description of which is recorded in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Chester County by deed description or is described by an approved
subdivision plan recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Chester
County.
LOT AREA — The acreage contained within the property lines of a lot, as
defined in the deed or as shown on an approved subdivision plan. Such
acreage shall be exclusive of the following:
Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
A.
Those activities described in § 503(1.1) of the Act69 shall not be
considered land developments for purposes of this chapter.
B.
Any area used for gas, oil, natural gas, electric, or communications
transmission facilities, whether below or above ground, that do not
serve the lot or lots traversed.
A.
69.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 149-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-201
1:328
LOT, CORNER — The definition in the Zoning Chapter shall
apply.[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
LOT, INTERIOR — The definition in the Zoning Chapter shall
apply.[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
LOT LINE — A property boundary line of any lot held in single and separate
ownership, except that, in the case of any lot abutting a street, the lot line
for such portion of the lot as abuts such street shall be deemed to be the
same as the street line, and shall not be the center line of the street, or
any other line within the street line even though such may be the property
boundary line.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line abutting any street and coinciding with
any street line. In the case of a corner lot, each of the two (or more) streetabutting
lot lines shall be considered a front lot line. In the case of an
interior lot, the front lot line shall be the line most parallel and closest to
the street line at the end of the access strip; all other lines shall be side or
rear lot lines.
LOT LINE, REAR — A lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
lines; if the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length, or if the lot forms
a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line 10 feet
in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the
front lot line. In the case of a corner lot, any lot line that is neither a front
lot line nor a side lot line. Every lot shall include one rear yard.[Amended
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line not a front or rear lot line.[Amended
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot situated between and having frontage
on two public streets with vehicular access solely from the street with the
lesser highway functional classification.
LOT WIDTH — The definition in the Zoning Chapter shall apply.[Amended
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
MARKER — A metal pipe or pin of at least 1/2 inch diameter and at least 24
inches in length.
MONUMENT — A stone or concrete monument with a flat top at least four
inches across and at least 36 inches in length. The monument shall be
Any area within a street or other transportation right-of-way, existing or
proposed.
B.
C. Any area within a permanent drainage easement.
Every lot created by subdivision shall have a contiguous and
uninterrupted area equal to 75% of the minimum lot area required by
the applicable zoning district which is unencumbered by wetlands, onehundred-
year floodplains, steep slopes and/or stormwater management
basins/facilities. [Added 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
D.
§ 149-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-201
1:329
tapered so that the dimensions at the bottom are at least two inches greater
than the top to minimize movement caused by frost.
MULTIPLE DWELLING or MULTIPLE-DWELLING BUILDING — A building
containing more than one dwelling unit.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — See "Act."
OFFICIAL MAP — Map adopted by Westtown Township in accordance with
the provisions of Article IV of the Municipalities Planning Code.70
OFF-SITE SEWER SERVICE — The disposal of sewage by use of a sanitary
sewer system served by a central sewage treatment plan approved by all
governmental agencies having jurisdiction over such matters. (See also
"sanitary sewage disposal.")
OFF-SITE WATER SERVICE — A safe, adequate and healthful supply of
water to more than one user from a common source approved by all
governmental agencies having jurisdiction over such matters.
ON-SITE SEWER SERVICE — The disposal of sewage by use of septic
systems, or other safe and healthful means within the confines of the lot
on which the use is located, approved by all governmental agencies having
jurisdiction over such matters.[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
ON-SITE WATER SERVICE — A safe, adequate and healthful supply of water
to a single user from a private well approved by all governmental agencies
having jurisdiction over such matters.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — Area or areas of land and/or water substantially
free of structures and paved areas, permanently restricted for common
enjoyment and recreational use by residents of a development and possibly
the general public, including agricultural activities as permitted by Chapter
170, Zoning, but not including individually owned private yards.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point
and time resulting from a predetermined storm.
PLAN, CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT — A plan prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor showing the construction details of streets,
drains, sewers, bridges, culverts, stormwater management structures and
other required improvements and for erosion and sediment
control.[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision or development plan or
plat, prepared for official recording as required by statute, which includes
all information required under Article VII of this chapter.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Westtown Township Planning
Commission.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision or development plan, in
lesser detail than a final plan, which includes all information required under
Article VI of this chapter.
70.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10401 et seq.
§ 149-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-201
1:330
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale,
indicating salient features of a tract, its surroundings and the general
layout of a proposed subdivision or land development and which includes all
information required under Article V of this chapter.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper generally circulated in Westtown Township. Such
notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature
of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall be
no more than 30 days or less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
RESUBDIVISION — Any revision of an approved final or recorded plan,
limited to changes in lot lines.
RETENTION BASIN — A reservoir or other feature formed from soil or
other material which is designed to permanently retain or to recharge to the
groundwater a certain amount of stormwater from a drainage area in order
to reduce the velocity, volume and rate of peak flows.[Amended 7-22-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-5]
REVIEW — An examination of the sketch plan, preliminary plan and/or
final plan by planning agencies and consultants so assigned to determine
compliance with this chapter and the administrative regulations, design
standards and improvement specifications.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication,
prescription or condemnation, and intended to be occupied or currently
occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or
gas pipeline, water line, sanitary or storm sewer, and other similar uses;
and, generally, the right of one to pass over the property of another.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, COMMUNITY — A sanitary sewage
collection system in which sewage is carried from the individual lots by a
system of pipes to a treatment facility within the immediate community, i.e.,
community on-lot disposal system (COLDS).
SANITARY SEWERAGE DISPOSAL, PUBLIC — A sanitary sewage collection
system in which sewage is carried from individual lots by a system of pipes
to a treatment and disposal plant.
EXISTING RIGHT-OF-WAY — The legal road right-of-way as established
by the commonwealth or other appropriate governing authority and
currently in existence.
A.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right-of-way deemed necessary to
provide adequate width in this chapter and Chapter 170, Zoning, for
future circulation improvements. The future right-of-way shall be
measured equal distance from the center line of the existing cartway.
B.
CARTWAY — The paved area of a road right-of-way including width
intended for vehicular movement and on-street parking, but not
including shoulders.
C.
§ 149-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-201
1:331
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral and/or organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by water.
SEPTIC TANK — A covered watertight settling tank in which sewage is
putrefied and decomposed through bacterial action.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The required length of roadway visible to the driver
of a passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view
is obstructed by traffic. Sight distance measurement shall be made from
a point 3.5 feet above the center line of the road surface to a point 0.5
feet above the center line of the road surface (see §§ 149-905, 149-906 and
149-908).
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST — A field test conducted to determine the
suitability of the soil for on-site sanitary sewage disposal facilities by
measuring the absorptive capacity of the soil at a given location and depth.
STEEP SLOPES — That ground area of a lot or tract of ground whose
vertical change in grade, measured against the horizontal measurement, is
equal to or greater than 15%.[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
STORM SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries intercepted surface runoff,
street wash and other waters or drainage, but excludes domestic sewage
and industrial waste.
STORMWATER — Water which surfaces, flows or collects during and
subsequent to rain or snowfall.
STREET — A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way (i.e., not limited
to the cartway) intended for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian
circulation to provide access to more than one lot. The word "street"
includes thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, court, expressway, highway,
road, place, lane, way and alley. Streets are further classified according to
the functions they perform.
STREET CLASSIFICATIONS —
ARTERIAL HIGHWAY — A street serving the heaviest volumes of traffic
(comparatively high-speed and long-distance) in the Township,
including all facilities classified as main and secondary highways by
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation; providing the highest
degree of vehicular mobility; and/or involving controls on access.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street designed and located to provide
means of access to traffic off minor (local) streets and to provide access
for through traffic between residential neighborhoods and districts
within the Township to major streets and/or a street used for access to
nonresidential properties, i.e., commercial, industrial, professional, etc.
B.
MINOR STREET (LOCAL STREET) — A street intended to serve and
provide access to the properties abutting thereon and not connecting
with other streets in such a manner as to encourage through traffic.
C.
CUL-DE-SAC — A minor street with access at only one end and which
is terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
D.
§ 149-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-201
1:332
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot. The street
line shall be the same as the future right-of-way line as defined by this
chapter and Chapter 170, Zoning.
STREET, PRIVATE — A street not offered or not required to be offered for
dedication.
STRUCTURE — Any form or arrangement of building materials involving
the necessity of providing proper support, bracing, anchorage or other
protection. Such arrangement shall have a permanently fixed location in or
on the ground. Structures include but are not limited to buildings, open
sheds and similar enclosures with less than four walls and/or a roof, signs,
fences or walls over six feet in height, detached aerials and antennas,
porches, platforms, tennis and handball courts, swimming pools, tanks and
towers.
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, copartnership or corporation (or agent
authorized thereby) which undertakes the subdivision of land, as defined
by these regulations, as the owner, lessee or equitable owner (or agent
authorized thereby) of the land being subdivided.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a single lot, tract or parcel of land into two
or more lots, tracts or parcels of land, for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or
devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development. The
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more
than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or
residential dwellings, shall be exempted from this definition.
SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of Westtown Township.
SURVEYOR — A land surveyor licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers and/or carries surface
water runoff across the ground.
TILE FIELD — A system of open jointed or perforated pipes laid in the upper
strata of the soil to distribute sewage effluent into the soil for absorption
and evaporation.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Westtown.
TREE MASS — A grouping of more than three trees of the same or different
variety to be treated as one unit.
WATERSHED — An area bounded peripherally by a water parting and
draining ultimately to a particular watercourse or body of water.
SERVICE STREET (ALLEY) — A minor right-of-way providing secondary
vehicular access to the side or rear of two or more properties. Permitted
only in small lot single-family detached development, service streets
are intended to be private streets owned and maintained by a
homeowners' association or private landowner.
E.
§ 149-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-201
1:333
WETLANDS — Those areas inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands are also
those areas defined and regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection, United State Army Corps of Engineers, and the United States
Department of Fish and Wildlife.
YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building or other
structures or use.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending the full width of the lot along the
front lot line and extending in depth from the front lot line to the
nearest point of any part of a structure on the lot. On a corner lot, the
Zoning Officer shall have the authority to determine which lot line is the
front lot line based on the predominant pattern in the area. [Amended
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
A.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full width of the lot along the rear
lot line and extending in depth from the rear lot line to the nearest point
of any part of a structure on the lot.
B.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending the full depth of the lot along a side lot
line and extending in width from such side lot line to the nearest point
of any part of a structure on the lot.
C.
§ 149-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-201
1:334
ARTICLE III
Application Procedures
§ 149-300. Land and use requirements.
§ 149-301. Compliance.
A. All proposed subdivisions and/or land developments shall comply with
the existing zoning regulations applicable to the land, and no parcel of
land shall be created, either by inclusion or exclusion from a proposed
subdivision, which cannot be properly utilized for a permitted use
under the existing zoning regulations.
B. Land subject to hazards to life, health or property, such as may arise
from fire, floods, disease or other cause, shall not be subdivided for
building purposes or developed unless the hazards have been
eliminated or unless the plans show adequate safeguards against them.
C. No subdivision or land development shall be approved unless the
applicant has demonstrated to the Township an adequate method of
sewage disposal and water supply.
D. No basement, cellar or slab foundation shall be constructed in a
floodplain.
E. Proposed developments shall be coordinated with existing nearby
neighborhoods with particular reference to street layout, future
extensions of utilities and street rights-of-way so that the community as
a whole may develop harmoniously.
F. Consideration shall be shown for all existing natural features such as
large trees, tree masses, steep slopes, floodplains, wetlands, open
space and other environmentally sensitive areas and for other
community assets. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
G. All individual on-site sewer systems shall be located on the lot they shall
serve.
A. Except as described in Subsection B below, no subdivision of any lot,
tract or parcel of land shall be effected and no street, alley, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, water main or other facilities in connection
therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public
use or travel, or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting
or to abut thereon, except in strict accordance with the provisions of
these regulations.
B. The subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of
more than 10 acres that does not involve any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwellings shall be exempted from the
subdivision approval requirements of this chapter. The applicant shall
submit a site plan to the Township showing the area affected by such
lease. The Township may require a deed restriction or conservation
§ 149-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-301
1:335
§ 149-302. Applicability.
The following transactions require approval:
§ 149-303. Resubdivision procedure.
easement to ensure that any future street, access or construction of
nonagricultural buildings will require approval under this chapter.
[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
C. All proposed subdivision and/or land development plans shall be
reviewed by the Westtown Township Planning Commission, the Chester
County Planning Commission and the Township Engineer, and shall be
approved or disapproved by the Board of Supervisors in accordance
with the procedures specified in this chapter. Any application not
processed as required shall be null and void.
A. Any division of land with new streets or easements.
(1) Where zoning boundaries are divided by a public street, the zoning
districts shall be considered noncontiguous. [Added 7-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-5]
B. The splitting of a lot or tract of ground into two or more lots where
there are no new streets or easements.
C. Realignment of lot lines for any purpose.
D. Mortgage on less than the whole tract of land.
E. The divisions of parcels of land owned by the same owners on either
side of a private or public road (or separated by the construction of a
public road) and/or parcels of land made up of two or more individual
parcels that have been bought or secured separately, perhaps even
from a different source and at different times, so long as they are
contiguous, shall be considered a single parcel of ground.
F. Divisions of interest for the future, anything that establishes a future
pattern of action, that by all normal processes establishes a de facto
division; or anything that locates or establishes the need for future
property lines, easements and/or rights-of-way.
G. Division of use and division of possession of property by long-term lease
rather than by deed (such as ninety-nine-year lease).
H. A land development as defined in this chapter.
I. Any other activity required to comply with this chapter by Chapter 170,
Zoning.
A. The Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the Township
Engineer and/or Planning Commission, shall be solely responsible for
review and approval of resubmissions involving lot line changes. If
§ 149-301 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-303
1:336
§ 149-304. Waiver.
Where a request is clearly consistent with the purpose and intent of this
chapter, the Board of Supervisors shall have the authority to waive or
modify any portion or section of this chapter where the applicant proves, to
the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors, any of the following:
§ 149-305. Modification of requirements for flexible development.
[Added 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
major street changes or other modifications to easements or rights-ofway
are involved, the County Planning Commission shall be notified and
its recommendations considered.
B. In making any alterations, the following shall be observed:
(1) No lot or tract of land shall be created that is smaller than the
minimum dimensions required by Chapter 170, Zoning.
(2) No lot shall be created which does not abut a street.
(3) The character of the area shall be maintained.
C. In every case, the applicant shall prepare a record plan and submit said
plan for the endorsements of the Township Engineer and/or Planning
Commission and the Board of Supervisors, identifying the previous
record plan, and shall record the revised plan.
A. The requirement would pose an undue and unreasonable hardship on
the owner and on the development of the land; or
B. The modification or waiver would clearly be in the public interest by
showing that the development would clearly be superior to what would
occur if the provision was strictly enforced; or
C. The requirement shall not apply because of the peculiar individual
characteristics of a particular area of land; or
D. The applicant agrees to use an alternative standard specification which
is acceptable to the Township.
A. In addition to the authority granted in § 149-304, the Board of
Supervisors shall have the authority to modify specific requirements of
this chapter for a flexible development in any of the following cases:
(1) To result in a higher quality site design, including a design that is
more pedestrian-friendly, encourages lower speed traffic on
residential streets and/or promotes patterns of development
similar to traditional villages.
(2) To minimize adverse impacts upon important natural features,
scenic views and historic buildings.
§ 149-303 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-305
1:337
B. Any modification under this § 149-305 shall be offered to the Planning
Commission and Township Engineer for review and approved in writing
by the Board of Supervisors. Any request shall be in writing and shall
state the specific modification that is requested, the section number
involved and the reasons for the request.
C. Allowed modifications. A modification under this section may include,
but is not limited to the following:
(1) Reduction in the minimum horizontal curve radius of streets to
promote lower speed traffic.
(2) Variations in the design of cul-de-sac street ends.
(3) Reduction of street cartway widths, considering the expected
traffic volumes, on-street parking and traffic speeds.
(4) Provisions for alleys to provide rear access to properties.
(5) Modification of § 149-910B. to allow reduced grading in a street
right-of-way to preserve trees.
(6) Allowance of roadside drainage swales without curbing where
curbing is not necessary for stormwater management reasons.
(7) Variations in landscaping and buffer yard requirements that still
achieve a similar effect to what would otherwise be required.
(8) Allowance of shared driveways where necessary to minimize
impacts upon natural resources and to manage traffic access onto
through streets.
(9) Allowance of flag lots where necessary to minimize impacts upon
natural resources.
D. Deferral of submission requirements. For an application for a flexible
development, an applicant may defer the submittal of the following
specific detailed engineering information until the final plan submission
if the applicant commits to not construct any improvements, conduct
any grading nor remove any trees until after final plan approval. This
deferral is intended to promote greater flexibility by an applicant in
responding to Township concerns during the preliminary plan stage,
because adjustments in the layout can be accommodated before all the
detailed and expensive engineering has been completed.
(1) This deferral of submission requirements may include detailed road
profiles, detailed road data, detailed utility profiles, detailed
grading plans, detailed stormwater calculations and improvement
construction details. This deferral shall not affect the conservation
design process of § 170-1617 of the Zoning chapter.
(2) In place of submitting this information at the preliminary plan
stage, an applicant shall submit sufficient information at the
§ 149-305 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-305
1:338
preliminary plan stage to prove the feasibility of proposed
development. This shall include proving the ability of all final plan
stages to fully function in a coordinated manner, even if all stages
are not completed.
(3) Such commitment by the applicant shall be in writing in a legally
binding manner that is acceptable to the Township Solicitor and
shall be binding upon all of the applicant's successors and assigns.
§ 149-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-305
1:339

ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 149-400. Enforcement.
The Board of Supervisors shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
Board of Supervisors and Planning Commission shall keep a record of all
their findings, decisions and recommendations relative to all subdivision
and/or land development plans filed with them for review. Such records
shall be retained as required by the Retention and Disposition Schedule for
Pennsylvania municipalities.
§ 149-401. Township review.
All subdivision and/or land development applications shall be reviewed in
accordance with all provisions of this chapter.
§ 149-402. Fees.
The Board of Supervisors, by resolution, shall establish a schedule of fees
and collection procedures for all applications, reviews, inspections, filings
and legal costs.
§ 149-403. Agreements, performance guaranties and escrow
accounts.
Before the final plan is signed by the Board of Supervisors, the applicant
shall submit an agreement, subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, providing for, but not limited to, the following, where
applicable:
A. The Township Planning Commission shall review all sketch, preliminary
and final plans. All plans (with the exception of some sketch plans at the
discretion of the Planning Commission) shall be submitted by the
Planning Commission to the Chester County Planning Commission and
Township Engineer for their review and recommendations. Written
reports from these and all other reviewing agencies or persons shall be
considered by the Planning Commission in making its final decision for
approval or denial. Written notice of the Planning Commission's action,
with all other review reports attached, shall be sent to the Board of
Supervisors.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall review all sketch, preliminary and final
plans. The Board's review shall take into consideration all
recommendations of the Planning Commission and other reviewing
agencies or persons.
A. In accordance with the approved final plan, the applicant will lay out
and construct all streets and other improvements, including, but not
limited to, grading, paving, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, fire
hydrants, water mains, street signs, shade trees, storm and sanitary
§ 149-400 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-403
1:341
sewers, stormwater management structures, landscaping, traffic
control devices, open space areas, and erosion and sediment control
measures.
B. The applicant agrees to tender a deed or deeds of dedication to the
Township for all streets, easements, sanitary and storm sewers,
sidewalks, manholes, inlets, pumping stations and other appurtenances
constructed as public improvements.
C. The applicant shall sign a tri-party agreement with a financial
institution and the Township guaranteeing and securing completion of
the improvements listed in Subsection A, except as provided for in
Subsection E, within one year of the date of the approved plan.
(1) The applicant may choose the financial institution, provided the
institution is authorized to conduct business within the
commonwealth and stipulates that it will submit to Pennsylvania
jurisdiction and Chester County venue in the event of legal action.
(2) The applicant shall deposit with the Township an escrow account in
an amount equal to 110% of the cost of the improvements, based on
a construction cost estimate prepared by a bona fide contractor
and reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer, whose
decision shall be final.
(3) If the improvements are not completed within the one-year period,
the Township shall have the right to withdraw the escrow funds to
complete the improvements, or shall require the financial security
be increased by an additional 10% for each succeeding year beyond
the first posting date of the security or to an amount not exceeding
110% of the cost of completing the required improvements as
reestablished.
(4) During the improvements installation the applicant may request
release of escrow funds for payment to the contractor for
completion of, or portions of, the improvements. Requests shall be
in writing to the Board of Supervisors who will authorize the
Township Engineer to review and certify, in writing, within 45 days,
that the work has been completed in accordance with the approved
final plan. The Township Engineer shall not be bound to the amount
requested, but shall certify his independent evaluation of the
proper amount for release. In addition, the Board may require
retention of 10% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid
improvements as per Subsection C(3) of this section. Upon
certification by the Township Engineer, the Board shall authorize
release of the funds by the financial institution to the applicant.
D. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
Board of Supervisors may authorize submission of final plans by section
or stage of developments, subject to such requirements or guaranties
as it finds essential for the protection of any finally approved section of
§ 149-403 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-403
1:342
§ 149-404. Recording of final plan.
Within 90 days of the Board's execution of the subdivision and land
development agreement and performance guaranty, the final title plans
shall be recorded by the applicant in the office of the Recorder of Deeds
of Chester County and the required number of copies of the final plan
bearing the stamp of the Recorder of Deeds shall be submitted to Westtown
Township.
§ 149-405. Commencement of development.
No construction or land disturbance activities (not including soil or
percolation testing, well drilling or similar engineering or surveying
activities) shall be commenced until the final plan has been recorded in
compliance with § 149-404.
§ 149-406. Construction required.
The applicant shall construct all streets, together with all other
improvements, including, but not limited to, grading, paving, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, streetlights, fire hydrants, water mains, street signs, shade trees,
storm drainage facilities, sanitary sewers, landscaping, traffic control
devices, open space and restricted areas, and erosions and sediment control
measures in conformance with the final plan as approved. All construction
shall conform to the applicable provisions of the PennDOT Specifications
408, and/or the latest revision hereto, and other applicable regulations. See
Article IX of this chapter.
§ 149-407. Inspections; cease-and-desist order. [Amended
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
the development, and consistent with the terms of the Municipalities
Planning Code.
E. If water mains along with apparatus or facilities related thereto are to
be installed under the jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and
regulations of a public utility separate and distinct from the Township,
financial security to assure proper completion and maintenance thereof
shall be posted in accordance with the regulations of the controlling
public utility and shall not be included within the financial security as
otherwise required by this section. A copy of this agreement shall be
filed with the Township. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
A. The construction or installation of all improvements shall at all times be
subject to inspection by representatives of the Township. If such
inspection reveals that work is not in accordance with approved plans
and specifications, that construction is not being done in a workmanlike
manner, or that erosion or sediment controls are failing to prevent
accelerated erosion or waterborne sediment from leaving the site of
construction, the said representative is empowered to require
§ 149-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-407
1:343
§ 149-408. Maintenance guaranty.
corrections to be made and to issue a cease-and-desist order which may
include any or all of the following sanctions:
(1) That all site work shall cease and desist except what is necessary to
make corrections (whether on or off site).
(2) That all construction on any lots for which a building permit has
been issued shall cease.
(3) That no further building permits for any lots shall be issued.
(4) That no lot in the subdivision shall be conveyed or placed under
agreement of sale.
B. The said cease-and-desist order shall be rescinded upon determination
by the Township that the said defects or deviations from the plan
requirements have been corrected.
C. No underground pipes, structures, subgrades or base course shall be
covered until inspected and approved by the Township. A minimum of
seven inspections by the designated representative shall be required.
These inspections shall occur at the following stages of construction:
(1) Upon completion of rough grading, but prior to placing the topsoil,
installation of permanent drainage or other site improvements, or
establishing covers.
(2) Upon excavation and compaction of subgrade.
(3) Upon excavation, installation and compaction of drainage
structures, sewage or water supply systems.
(4) Before placing stone base course, or before initial layer of
screening.
(5) Before binder course.
(6) Before final course.
(7) Final inspection.
D. The applicant shall notify the designated representative of the
Township at least 24 hours in advance of completion of any construction
operations requiring inspections.
A. Where completion of the required improvements is a condition of
approval, the Board shall require the posting of financial security to
secure the structural integrity of the improvements and the functioning
of the improvements in accordance with the design and specifications
as depicted on the final plan. The security shall be in the form as is
authorized for the deposit of the performance guaranty, as described in
§ 149-403 hereof, shall be for a term of 18 months from the date of
§ 149-407 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-408
1:344
§ 149-409. As-built plans.
Within 30 days after completion and Township approval of subdivision and/
or land development improvements as shown on final plans, and before
Township acceptance or dedication of such improvements, the applicant
shall submit to the Board a corrected copy of said plans showing actual
dimensions and conditions of streets and all other improvements, certified
by a professional engineer to be in accordance with actual construction.
§ 149-410. Release from performance guaranty.
acceptance or dedication, and shall be in an amount equal to 15% of the
actual costs of installation of improvements.
B. Where maintenance of stormwater retention facilities or private streets
is to be the responsibility of individual lot owners, a homeowners'
association or similar entity, or an organization capable of carrying out
the maintenance responsibilities, the Board shall require that
maintenance responsibilities be set forth in perpetual covenants or
deed restrictions binding on the landowner's successors in interest and
may further require that an additional maintenance fund be established
in a reasonable amount.
A. When the applicant has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, he/she shall notify the Township, in writing, of the
completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof
to the Township Engineer. The Township shall, within 10 days after
receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the Township Engineer to
inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The Township Engineer shall
thereupon file a written report with the Township, and shall promptly
mail a copy of the same to the applicant. The report shall be written and
mailed within 30 days after receipt by the Township Engineer of the
aforesaid authorization from the Township; said report shall be detailed
and shall indicate approval or rejection of said improvements, either in
whole or in part. If said improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not
be approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineer, said report
shall contain a statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
B. The Township shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the action of the
Township with regard to approval, nonapproval or rejection of
improvements.
C. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the Township, the applicant shall proceed to complete
those improvements as directed and, upon completion, the same
procedure of notification as outlined herein shall be followed.
D. The applicant shall be responsible for maintenance of all subdivision or
land development improvements until such improvements are offered
for dedication and are accepted by the Township. In addition, 10% of
the performance guaranty shall be held back by the Township until the
§ 149-408 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-410
1:345
§ 149-411. Dedication and acceptance of improvements.
applicant has posted a maintenance guaranty as provided for in
§ 149-408 and as-built plans are verified and accepted by the Township.
E. Partial release of the performance guaranty during the period of
construction shall be authorized as per § 149-403.
A. Conditions of acceptance of streets and other improvements. The
Township shall have no obligation to take over and make public any
street, open space or other improvement in or abutting a subdivision
unless:
(1) All the required improvements shown on the approved plan(s) have
been constructed and certified by the Township Engineer.
(2) At least 50% of all the lots along the street have been occupied by
completed buildings or unless a petition (signed by at least 50% of
the property owners along the frontage of the street in question)
requesting that the street and other improvements be taken over
and made public is filed with the Township along with an executed
deed of dedication in a form acceptable to the Township Solicitor.
(3) It is established to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that
there is a need for the improvements to be taken over and made
public.
B. Dedication and acceptance of public improvements. Upon completion of
any public improvements shown on an approved subdivision plan and
within 90 days after approval of such public improvements as herein
provided, the applicant shall submit a written offer of such public
improvements for dedication to the Township. Said offer shall include a
deed of dedication covering said public improvements together with
satisfactory proof establishing the applicant's clear title to said
property. Such documents are to be filed with the Township Secretary
for review by the Township Solicitor.
C. Township responsibility to accept. The Township shall have no
responsibility with respect to any street or other improvements,
notwithstanding the use of the same by the public, unless the street or
other improvements are accepted resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
D. The Board may require that certain subdivision and land development
improvements remain undedicated, with maintenance the responsibility
of individual lot owners, a homeowners' association or similar entity, or
an organization capable of carrying out maintenance responsibilities.
§ 149-410 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-411
1:346
ARTICLE V
Sketch Plan
§ 149-500. Submission of sketch plan.
§ 149-501. Review of sketch plan.
The Township Planning Commission shall review the sketch plan and
recommend such changes and modifications as it deems advisable. The
Planning Commission reserves the right to submit the sketch plan to the
Chester County Planning Commission for a courtesy review.
§ 149-502. Sketch plan requirements.
A. All applicants are encouraged to submit a sketch plan for any proposed
subdivision and/or land development.
B. The submittal of a sketch plan is very strongly encouraged because it
can save applicant's substantial expense. If a sketch plan is submitted,
it can often identify important issues early in the process, before an
applicant has completed expensive detailed engineering. As a result, it
can often allow an applicant to avoid the time and expense involved in
redesigning a project after submittal of a preliminary plan. Before
submitting a sketch plan, applicants are strongly encouraged to ask for
an informal meeting with the Township staff to discuss major issues.
Submission of a sketch plan shall not constitute official submission of a
plan to the Township. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
C. Three copies of the sketch plan shall be submitted to the Township.
A. The sketch plan of a proposed subdivision shall be legibly drawn.
B. The sketch plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Tract boundaries, accurately labeled.
(2) Key map.
(3) North point
(4) Written and graphic scales.
(5) Watercourses, floodplain, tree masses, wetlands, soil types and
other significant physical features including contours at ten-foot
intervals. (USGS Quad mapping is acceptable.)
(6) Existing and proposed general street and lot layout.
(7) Name and address of applicant and/or property owner and tax
parcel number.
(8) Proposed conceptual stormwater management, water supply and
sewage facilities.
§ 149-500 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-502
1:347
(9) Existing and proposed structures and features including parking
areas, open spaces areas, etc.
(10) A comparison of existing and proposed zoning.
§ 149-502 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-502
1:348
ARTICLE VI
Preliminary Plan
§ 149-600. Submission of preliminary plans.
A. Official submission of the preliminary plan shall consist of, but not be
limited to, the following:
(1) One copy of the application for review of preliminary subdivision or
land development plan and of the information sheet.
(2) A minimum of 16 copies of the preliminary plan and of all other
required plans. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(3) Two copies of the stormwater management calculations.
[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(4) Copies of supplementary studies as determined by the Township.
(5) Required fees.
(6) Site visit. Applicants are strongly encouraged to grant permission
for Township officials to conduct an on-site walk of the property
early in the process. [Added 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
B. All parts of the preliminary submission shall conform to the most recent
administrative regulations adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
B.1. An electronic submission is required in either .DXF or .DWG format for
all land development applications and for subdivisions applications of
five lots or greater. This submission may be on a compact disc (CD).
[Added 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(1) The electronic submission shall be prepared using standard fonts
to meet commonly accepted drafting and engineering industry
standards for layers, but shall, as a minimum, include descriptive
information layers containing the following:
(a) Lot lines (no text).
(b) Right-of-way lines (no text).
(c) Street center lines (no text).
(d) Edge of pavement lines/curblines.
(e) Easements; separate layers for water, sanitary sewer and
stormwater, which must be further separated for dedicated vs.
private deed restricted areas. All easement areas must be
clearly labeled.
(f) Floodplains; separate layers for FEMA and calculated
floodplains.
(g) Utilities; separate layers for water and sanitary sewer.
§ 149-600 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-600
1:349
§ 149-601. Review of preliminary plan.
In order to ensure a thorough review, the Township reserves the right
to require the applicant to supply one or more applicable supplementary
studies (outlined in Article VIII of this chapter). As required, the
supplementary studies shall become a part of the official submission and
review of the plan.
(h) Stormwater facilities; separate layer for dedicated facilities
and privately owned easement facilities, i.e., swales, basins,
etc.
(2) The electronic submission shall not include external references.
C. If the preliminary plan and all supporting data comply in all respects
with the requirements for final plans (see Article VII), the Township
may, in the case of small subdivisions involving no new streets or
limited development of land, proceed to final action at the first
consideration of the plan if a written request for final approval is made
by the applicant and agreed to by the Board of Supervisors.
D. Copies of the preliminary plan and all required supplementary data,
application and fees shall be initially and officially submitted to the
Subdivision Administrator who shall determine if the submission is
complete. If the submission is complete it will be presented at the next
meeting of the Board of Supervisors. The plans shall then be
transmitted to the Township Planning Commission which shall then
transmit the plan to the County Planning Commission, the Township
Engineer and such other persons or agencies as appropriate.
E. Within 10 days of receipt of the application, the Subdivision
Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing that the submission is
complete and that the ninety-day review period will begin on the date of
the next formal Planning Commission meeting or that the plan is
incomplete and cannot be accepted.
A. Planning Commission.
(1) The Planning Commission shall review the plan and
recommendations of the County Planning Commission, Township
Engineer and all other persons or agencies as appropriate.
(2) At least 10 days prior to the last regular meeting of the Board of
Supervisors occurring within the specified review period for the
plan, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall send written
notice of action along with the written recommendations of all
other reviewing agencies and persons and the reasons therefor to
the Board and the applicant.
B. Board of Supervisors.
§ 149-600 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-601
1:350
§ 149-602. Preliminary plan requirements.
(1) When recommendations regarding a preliminary plan have been
officially submitted to the Board of Supervisors, such plan shall be
placed on its agenda for review and action.
(2) The Board shall review the preliminary plan and the written reports
of the Township Planning Commission, Township Engineer and
County Planning Commission, and shall require or recommend
such changes and modifications as it shall deem necessary or
advisable in the public interest or it may deny approval. The Board
shall communicate its decision, in writing, to the applicant, with a
copy to the Planning Commission and any other person(s)
requesting such notice, within 15 days of the making of such
decision. The Board shall act upon all applications within 90 days
as computed in the Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247),71 as
amended, unless a request for extension has been received from
the applicant and approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(3) The Board shall designate a copy of the preliminary plan as the
official copy. This copy shall include all necessary corrections and
additions as required by the Board and shall be retained in the
Township files.
A. The preliminary plans shall be presented as follows:
(1) The preliminary plans of a proposed subdivision and/or land
development shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one
inch equals 50 feet or larger.
(2) The original drawing, and all submitted prints thereof, shall be
made on sheets no larger than 30 inches by 42 inches. If the entire
proposed development cannot be shown on a single sheet, an
overall key plan shall be submitted at an appropriate scale. The key
plan shall show by number each plan sheet and its relationship to
other plan sheets.
B. The preliminary plans shall include, but not be limited to, the following
identification information:
(1) Name of the proposed subdivision, Township, county and state.
(2) North point, graphic scale, written scale, the date the original
drawing was completed, and the date of each revision with the
location and a clear and concise description of the changes made in
each revision.
(3) Name and address of record owner and applicant and source(s) of
title to the land being developed, as shown by the records of the
County Recorder of Deeds.
71.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 149-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-602
1:351
(4) Name, address, Pennsylvania license number, signature and seal of
the registered engineer or surveyor responsible for the plan. No
engineer or surveyor shall sign or seal plans that contain
information that they are not qualified to design or produce.
(5) The names of all abutting or adjacent property owners, if any, with
the deed book and page numbers and unified parcel index number.
[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(6) A key map, for the purpose of locating the property being
subdivided, showing the relation of the property, differentiated by
tone or pattern, to adjoining property and to all streets, roads,
municipal boundaries and recorded subdivision plans existing
within 1,000 feet of any part of the property. In addition, the
approximate distance to the nearest existing street shall be shown,
and a title, scale and North point shall be indicated. The key map
shall also show approximate locations of important natural features
on the subject property and adjoining lots, such as creeks, onehundred-
year floodplain and very steeply sloped areas. [Amended
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(7) The total tract boundary lines of the property being developed, with
accurate distances to hundredths of a foot and bearings to the
nearest second. These boundaries shall be balanced and closed
with an error closure not less than one foot in 10,000 feet;
provided, however, that the boundary(ies) of adjoining additional
unplatted land of the subdivider (i.e., between separately
submitted plan sections) are not required to be based upon field
survey, and may be calculated. Existing and proposed monuments
shall be indicated, along with a statement of the total area of the
property being developed. In addition, the engineer or surveyor
shall certify to the accuracy of the survey and that the drawn plan
is in conformance with all Township chapters. [Amended
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(8) Location and elevation of the bench mark to which contour
elevations refer. Where reasonable and practical, datum used shall
be USGS (United States Geodetic Survey) from a known,
established bench mark. All subdivisions and/or land developments
shall have an actual field run or aerial topography.
(9) Precautionary and prohibitive slope areas and floodplain shall be
noted as defined by Chapter 170, Zoning.
(10) Location and ownership of all existing sewer lines, water lines, fire
hydrants, utility transmission lines, culverts, bridges, railroads,
watercourses, trees, wetlands (or certification that none are
present), soils, easements, rights-of-way and other significant manmade
or natural features within the proposed subdivision and
within 50 feet from the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
§ 149-602 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-602
1:352
(11) All existing buildings, structures and other significant structures
including parking areas, recreational areas, open space, etc.
(12) All existing streets, including streets of record (recorded but not
constructed), on or abutting the tract, including names, right-ofway
widths, cartway (pavement) widths and approximate grades.
(13) A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots. A
statement of restriction of any type which exists or will exist as
covenants in the deed(s) for all lots contained wholly or in part in
the development and, if covenants are recorded, including the deed
book and page number.
(14) A legend indicating existing features and proposed features.
C. The preliminary plan shall show the full plan of the proposed
development including, but not limited to:
(1) Streets.
(a) Location and width of all streets and rights-of-way, with a
statement of any conditions governing their use.
(b) Suggested street names.
(c) Conceptual designs of any bridges or culverts which may be
required. Such designs shall meet all applicable requirements
of the Department of Environmental Protection and/or the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and shall be
subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
(d) Typical street cross-section drawings(s) for all proposed
streets shall be shown.
(e) Preliminary profile sheets for all proposed streets within the
tract. Such profiles shall show at least the following
information, properly labeled:
[1] Existing (natural) profile along both right-of-way edges
and along the center line of each street.
[2] Proposed finished grade of the center line, or proposed
finished grade at the top of both curbs.
[3] The length of all vertical curves.
[4] Existing and proposed sanitary sewer mains and
manholes.
[5] Existing and proposed storm sewer facilities and drainage
improvements.
[6] The profile sheets shall be legibly drawn at one of the
following scales:
§ 149-602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-602
1:353
1 inch = 10 feet horizontal and 1 inch = 1 foot vertical;
or
1 inch = 20 feet horizontal and 1 inch = 2 feet vertical;
or
1 inch = 40 feet horizontal and 1 inch = 4 feet vertical;
or
1 inch = 50 feet horizontal and 1 inch = 5 feet vertical.
(f) The following data for the cartway edges (curblines) and rightof-
way lines of all recorded (except those which are to be
vacated) and/or proposed streets, within or abutting the
property.
[1] The length (in feet and hundredths of a foot) of all straight
lines and of the radius and the arc (or chord) of all curved
lines (including curved lot lines).
[2] The width (in feet) of the cartway, existing right-of-way and
of the ultimate right-of-way, and (in degrees, minutes and
quarters of a minute) of the delta angle of all curved lines,
including curved lot lines.
(g) A note shall be added to the drawings indicating the need for a
PennDOT highway occupancy permit (if applicable). A state
highway occupancy permit is required pursuant to Section 420
of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428) known as the
"State Highway Law,"72 before access to a state highway is
permitted. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(2) Lots.
(a) Lot numbers and a statement of the total number of lots.
(b) Lot lines with approximate dimensions and approximate size of
each lot.
(c) The proposed building setback line for each lot, and, where
applicable, the proposed placement of each building.
(3) Utilities and easements.
(a) Utility easement locations.
(b) Conceptual location, size and invert elevation of all sanitary
and storm sewers and location of all manholes, inlets and
culverts with the material of each indicated, and any proposed
connections with existing facilities. (These data may be on a
separate plan.) (NOTE: All construction of sanitary sewers
72.Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-101 et seq.
§ 149-602 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-602
1:354
shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications
adopted by Westtown Township and the plan shall be so noted.)
(c) The location of on-site sewage and water facilities.
(d) Size and location of water mains and fire hydrants.
(e) All easements or rights-of-way, public or private, and any
limitations on such easement or rights-of-way shall be shown
and accurately identified on the plan.
(4) Supplementary data.
(a) A statement noting current and expected traffic conditions.
(b) A statement noting water and sewer needs and verification of
the availability of both.
(c) A statement noting method and ownership of sewage disposal,
water supply, streets and other utilities.
(d) A statement noting use(s) for each section of the development.
(e) A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots and
parcels.
(f) Parks, playgrounds, open space and other areas dedicated or
reserved for public use, with any conditions governing such
use and notation of ownership.
(g) Where applicable, the location and width of all buffer areas.
(h) A statement noting proposed signage and lighting for the
development.
(i) Full documentation of any proposed homeowners' association,
covenants or other such proposed association and/or
restrictions governing the subdivision and/or land
development.
(j) Full documentation of required existing and proposed zoning
data. Where applicable, a statement listing variances, special
exceptions or conditional use approvals and any qualifying
conditions shall be included.
(k) Where applicable, a statement listing waivers requested and/or
approved shall be included.
(l) If the plan involves the splitting off of one or more lots from a
larger tract, a sketch plan showing a possible subdivision of the
entire tract, for informational purposes only, shall be provided.
Said plan will not be binding upon either the Township or the
applicant, but is to show how the proposed "splitting off"
affects future subdivision of the tract.
§ 149-602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-602
1:355
D. The preliminary plan shall include the following plans in accordance
with Article VIII of this chapter:
(1) Conservation plan in accordance with § 149-801.
(2) Landscape plan in accordance with § 149-802.
(3) Stormwater management plan in accordance with § 149-803.
E. The preliminary plan shall include all supplementary studies in
accordance with Article VIII of this chapter as required by the
Township.
§ 149-602 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-602
1:356
ARTICLE VII
Final Plan
§ 149-700. Submission of final plan.
A. Within 60 days after approval of the preliminary plan, a final plan and
all necessary supplementary data shall be officially submitted to the
Township. However, an extension of time may be granted at the option
of the Board of Supervisors upon written request of the applicant.
A1. An electronic submission is required in either .DXF or .DWG format for
all land development applications and for subdivision applications of
five lots or greater. This submission may be on a compact disc (CD).
[Added 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(1) The electronic submission shall be prepared using standard fonts
to meet commonly accepted drafting and engineering industry
standards for layers, but shall, as a minimum, include descriptive
information layers containing the following:
(a) Lot lines (no text).
(b) Right-of-way lines (no text).
(c) Street center lines (no text).
(d) Edge of pavement lines/curblines.
(e) Easements; separate layers for water, sanitary sewer and
stormwater, which must be further separated for dedicated vs.
private deed restricted areas. All easement areas must be
clearly labeled.
(f) Floodplains; separate layers for FEMA and calculated
floodplains.
(g) Utilities; separate layers for water and sanitary sewer.
(h) Stormwater facilities; separate lays for dedicated facilities and
privately owned easement facilities, i.e., swales, basins, etc.
(2) The electronic submission shall not include external references.
(3) The electronic submission shall be converted by the applicant to
state plane coordinate system.
B. Official submission of the final plan to the Township shall consist of:
(1) A minimum of 16 copies of the title plan, construction plan,
stormwater management plan, and all required supplementary
material. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(2) The above shall include all corrections and/or additions that were
required under the preliminary plan approval.
§ 149-700 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-700
1:357
§ 149-701. Review of final plan.
C. All parts of the final submission shall conform to the most recent
administrative regulations adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
D. Within 10 days of receipt of the application, the Subdivision
Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing that the submission is
complete and that the ninety-day review period will begin on the date of
the next formal Planning Commission meeting or that the plan is
incomplete and will not be accepted.
A. Planning Commission.
(1) The Planning Commission shall review the plan and the
recommendations of the County Planning Commission, Township
Engineer and such other persons or agencies as appropriate.
(2) At least 10 days prior to the last meeting of the Board of
Supervisors occurring within the specified review period for the
plan, the written comments and recommendation of the Planning
Commission along with the written recommendations and
comments of all other reviewing agencies and persons shall be
forwarded to the Board of Supervisors and to the applicant.
B. Board of Supervisors.
(1) When a written report on a final plan has been officially submitted
to the Board of Supervisors by the Planning Commission, such plan
shall be placed on the agenda of the Board of Supervisors for
review and action.
(2) The Board shall review the final plan and the written reports of the
Township Planning Commission, Township Engineer, County
Planning Commission and all other reviewing agencies and shall
require or recommend such changes and modifications as it shall
deem necessary or advisable in the public interest. The Board shall
communicate its decision, in writing, to the applicant with a copy to
the Planning Commission and any other person or group of persons
requesting such notice.
(3) One copy of the final plan including all corrections and/or additions
required by the Board shall be retained in the Township files and
designated as the official copy until such time as a copy of the
recorded plan is received by the Township.
(4) The final plan as finally approved, with the appropriate
endorsement of the Board and the Township Engineer, shall be
distributed as follows:
(a) Two copies retained by Westtown Township.
§ 149-700 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-701
1:358
§ 149-702. Final plan requirements.
(b) A minimum of eight copies given to the applicant for recording.
Three of these copies are to be returned to Westtown Township
with the stamp of the Chester County Recorder of Deeds.
(5) If the final plan is not recorded within 90 days of endorsement as
required by § 149-404, the applicant must resubmit the final plan to
be re-endorsed by the Board of Supervisors.
A. The final plan shall be presented as follows:
(1) The final plan of a proposed subdivision and/or land development
shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50
feet or larger.
(2) The original drawing and all submitted prints thereof shall be made
on sheets no larger than 30 inches by 42 inches. If the proposed
development cannot be shown on a single sheet, an overall key plan
shall be submitted at an appropriate scale. The key plan shall show
by number each plan sheet and its relationship to other plan sheets.
(3) Signature blocks shall be provided on the right-hand side, if
possible, following the format established by the Township.
B. The final plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following
identification information:
(1) Name of proposed subdivision, Township, county and state.
(2) North point, graphic scale, written scale, and date, including the
month, day and year that the original drawing of the final plan was
completed, the month, day and year that the original drawing was
revised, for each revision, and a clear and concise description and
location of the change made in each revision.
(3) Name and address of record owner and applicant and the source(s)
of title to the land being developed, as shown by the records of the
County Recorder of Deeds unified parcel index numbers of the
property(ies) being developed or subdivided. [Amended
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(4) The name, address, Pennsylvania license number, signature and
seal of the registered engineer or surveyor responsible for the plan.
No engineer or surveyor shall sign or seal plans that contain
information that they are not qualified to design or produce.
(5) The names of all abutting or adjacent property owners, if any, with
the deed book and page numbers and unified parcel index
numbers. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(6) A key map, for the purpose of locating the property being
subdivided, showing the relation of the property, differentiated by
§ 149-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-702
1:359
tone or pattern, to adjoining property and to all streets, roads,
municipal boundaries and recorded subdivision plans existing
within 1,000 feet of any part of the property. In addition, the
approximate distance to the nearest street shall be shown, and a
title, scale and North point shall be indicated.
(7) The total tract boundary lines of the area being developed with
accurate distances to hundredths of a foot and bearings to the
nearest second. These boundaries shall be balanced and closed
with an error closure not less than one foot in 10,000 feet;
provided, however, that the boundary(ies) adjoining additional
unplatted land of the subdivider for example, between separately
submitted final plan sections are not required to be based upon
field survey, and may be calculated. Existing and proposed
monuments shall be indicated, along with a statement of the total
area of the property being developed. In addition, the engineer or
surveyor shall certify to the accuracy of the survey and that the
drawn plan is in conformance with Township chapters. [Amended
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(8) Location and elevation of the bench mark to which contour lines
refer. Where reasonable and practical, datum used shall be USGS
(United States Geodetic Survey) from a known, established bench
mark. All subdivisions and/or land developments shall have an
actual field run or aerial topography.
(9) Precautionary and prohibitive slope areas and floodplain shall be
noted as defined by Chapter 170, Zoning.
(10) Location and ownership of all existing sewer lines, water lines, fire
hydrants, railroads, watercourses, trees, wetlands (or certification
that none are present), soils, easements, rights-of-way and other
significant man-made, historical or natural features within the
proposed subdivision and within 50 feet from the boundaries of the
proposed subdivision.
(11) All existing buildings, structures or significant features including
parking areas, recreational areas, open space, etc.
(12) All existing streets, including streets of record (recorded but not
constructed), on or abutting the tract, including names, right-ofway
widths, cartway (pavement) widths and approximate grades.
(13) All straight lot lines and chords and radii of curved lot lines,
defined (in feet and hundredths of a foot) by distances, and (in
degrees, minutes and quarters of a minute) either by magnetic
bearings or by angles of deflection from other lot and street lines.
(14) A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots. A
statement of restrictions of any type which exist or will exist as
covenants in the deed(s) for all lots contained wholly or in part in
§ 149-702 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-702
1:360
the development and, if covenants are recorded, including the deed
book and page number.
(15) Location, size and invert elevation of all sanitary and storm sewers
and location of all manholes, inlets and culverts with the material of
each indicated, and any proposed connections with existing
facilities. (These may be on a separate plan.) (NOTE: All
construction of sanitary sewer systems must be in accordance with
the standards and specifications as adopted by Westtown Township
and the plan shall be so noted.)
(16) If the development proposes a new street intersection(s) with a
state highway, the appropriate highway occupancy permit(s) shall
be obtained from PennDOT. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-5]
(17) Certification of ownership, acknowledgment of plan and offer to
dedicate, where applicable, shall be lettered on the plan, and shall
be signed and notarized by the owner(s) of the property.
(18) Streets shall have the following:
(a) Location and width of all streets and rights-of-way, with a
statement of any conditions governing their use.
(b) Suggested street names.
(c) Final design of any bridges or culverts which may be required.
Such designs shall meet all applicable requirements of the
Department of Environmental Protection and/or the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and shall be
subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
(d) Typical street cross-section drawing(s) for all proposed streets.
Cross-section drawings may be shown either on the final plan
or on the profile sheets.
(e) Profile sheets for all proposed streets within the tract. Such
profiles shall show at least the following information, properly
labeled:
[1] Existing (natural) profile along both right-of-way edges
and along the center line of each street.
[2] Proposed finished grade of the center line.
[3] The length of all vertical curves.
[4] Existing and proposed sanitary sewer mains and
manholes.
[5] The profile sheets shall be legibly drawn at one of the
following scales:
§ 149-702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-702
1:361
1 inch = 10 feet horizontal and 1 inch = 1 foot vertical;
or
1 inch = 20 feet horizontal and 1 inch = 2 feet vertical;
or
1 inch = 40 feet horizontal and 1 inch = 4 feet vertical;
or
1 inch = 50 feet horizontal and 1 inch = 5 feet vertical.
(f) The following data for the cartway edge (curblines) and rightof-
way lines of all recorded (except those which are to be
vacated) and/or proposed streets, within or abutting the
property.
[1] The length (in feet and hundredths of a foot) of all straight
lines and of the radius and the arc (or chord) of all curved
lines (including curved lot lines.
[2] The width (in feet) of the cartway, existing right-of-way and
of the ultimate right-of-way, and (in degrees, minutes and
quarters of a minute) of the delta angle of all curved lines,
including curved lot lines.
(19) Lot numbers, property addresses, gross and net area of all lots,
expressed in acres or square feet, the proposed building setback
lines, and, where applicable, the proposed placement of each
building shall be shown. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-5]
(20) All requirements of the preliminary plan including necessary
corrections and/or additions required for the preliminary plan
approval shall be shown.
(21) Utilities and easements.
(a) Utility easement locations.
(b) Sanitary and storm sewers. See Subsection B(15) above.
(c) The location of on-site sewage and water facilities.
(d) Size and location of water mains and fire hydrants.
(e) All easements or rights-of-way, public or private, and any
limitations on such easements or rights-of-way shall be shown
and accurately identified on the plan.
(22) A legend indicating existing features and proposed features.
C. The final plan shall be accompanied by the following supplementary
data:
§ 149-702 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-702
1:362
(1) All offers of dedication, and covenants governing the reservation
and maintenance of undedicated open space, shall bear the
certificate of approval of the Township Solicitor as to their legal
sufficiency.
(2) Such private deed restrictions, including building setback lines, as
may be imposed upon the property as a condition of sale, together
with a statement of any restrictions previously imposed which may
affect the title to the land being developed.
(3) Whenever the applicant proposes to establish or continue a street
which is not offered for dedication to public use, the Board shall
require the applicant to submit, and also to record with the plan, a
copy of an agreement made with the Board on behalf of himself, his
heirs and assigns, and signed by him/her. The agreement shall
establish the conditions under which the street may later be offered
for dedication, and shall stipulate, among other things:
(a) That an offer to dedicate the street shall be made only for the
street as a whole.
(b) That the Township shall not be responsible for repairing or
maintaining any undedicated streets.
(c) That the method of assessing repair and maintenance cost of
undedicated streets be stipulated, and be set forth in recorded
deed restrictions so as to be binding on all successors or
assigns.
(d) That, if dedication be sought, the street shall conform to
Township specifications or that the owners of the abutting lots
shall, at their own expense, bring the street into conformance
with Township specifications.
(4) Full documentation of all existing and proposed zoning data. Where
applicable, a statement listing variances, special exceptions and/or
conditional use approvals and any qualifying conditions shall be
included.
(5) Where applicable, a statement listing waivers requested and/or
approved shall be included.
D. Conservation plan. The conservation plan shall be in accordance with
§ 149-801 of this chapter.
E. Landscape plan. The landscape plan shall be in accordance with
§ 149-802 of this chapter.
F. Stormwater management plan. The stormwater management plan shall
be in accordance with § 149-803 of this chapter.
§ 149-702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-702
1:363
G. Supplementary studies. Any of all supplementary studies which may be
required by the Township shall be in accordance with Article VIII of this
chapter.
§ 149-702 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-702
1:364
ARTICLE VIII
Supplementary Studies and Plans
§ 149-800. Required plans.
The following supplementary studies and plans shall be reviewed in
conjunction with the review of preliminary and/or final plans. They shall be
determining factors in the acceptance or rejection of the plans, and shall
include, but not be limited to, the following sections.
§ 149-801. Conservation plan.
The conservation plan shall show the total tract and be clearly and legibly
drawn to the same size and scale as that of the preliminary and final plan
and shall be in the form of an overall plan.
A. Contour lines at vertical intervals of not more than two feet.
B. Location and elevation of the bench mark to which contour elevations
refer. Where reasonable and practical, datum used shall be USGS from
a known, established bench mark. All subdivisions and/or land
developments shall have actual field run or aerial topography.
C. Location and ownership of all existing watercourses, floodplain areas,
wetlands, tree masses, specimen trees, soil types and other significant
natural or man-made features within the proposed subdivision and
within 50 feet of the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
D. Location and results of soil percolation tests whenever on-site disposal
of sewage is planned.
E. Location and type of all erosion and sedimentation control measures,
including, but not limited to, tire cleaners, retention basins, silt fences
and hay bales; proposed dates when such measures shall be in effect,
and supporting data assuring compliance with the erosion and
sedimentation control standards set forth in Chapter 80, Erosion,
Sediment Control and Grading. A note shall be added to the plans
indicating that the applicant is responsible for installation and
maintenance of all soil and erosion control measures until closeout of
the escrow account.
F. Notations indicating all significant site vegetation, trees or portions of
tree masses proposed to be cleared as part of the proposed subdivision
or development plan. Notations shall be included indicating all
proposed alterations of the natural grade, whether by cut or by fill,
exceeding five feet, together with reasons for such alterations.
G. Chapter 80, Erosion, Sediment Control and Grading, is hereby made a
part of this chapter and all of its requirements are applicable to any
subdivision or land development as defined in this chapter. The
applicant shall take whatever measures are necessary to ensure that no
§ 149-800 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-801
1:365
§ 149-802. Landscape plan.
The landscape plan shall show the entire tract, be clearly and legibly drawn
to the same size and scale as that of the preliminary and final plans, shall
be in the form of an overall plan and shall include:
§ 149-803. Stormwater management.
silt or mud leaves the property being developed up to dedication and/or
closeout of the escrow account.
A. A key map as described in § 149-602B(6).
B. Tract boundaries and the zoning classification of all abutting
properties.
C. Floodplain areas within and adjacent to the tract.
D. All bodies of water, waterways and drainage swales, showing the
direction of flow within the tract.
E. All existing tree masses and specimen trees shall be noted and
sufficiently labeled.
F. The location and type of all proposed landscaping and/or ground cover
in buffer areas, common open space and entrances shall be shown.
G. A full plantings list showing the proper and common name along with
the size and grade shall be provided.
A. Storm drainage. Storm drainage facilities shall be constructed by the
applicant to control runoff from street and/or any other area that could
impair public safety or cause physical damage to adjacent lands. The
facilities may consist of a storm sewer collection system, swales and
basins.
B. The stormwater management plan shall consist of written material,
calculations and topographical plan drawn to the same scale as the
preliminary and/or final plan. The stormwater management plan shall
include, but not be limited to:
(1) General requirements. For all subdivision and land development
proposals, a stormwater management plan and report shall be
submitted containing, but not limited to, the following:
(a) A suitable map of the total watershed (a USGS quadrangle map
is sufficient).
(b) Suitable maps and drawings showing all existing and proposed
drainage systems attributable to the subdivision or land
development.
(c) A plan of the proposed stormwater drainage system
attributable to the subdivision or land development.
§ 149-801 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-803
1:366
(d) The design computations for the stormwater drainage systems
including storm drainpipes and inlets, runoff control measures,
and culverts and drainage channels.
(e) A plan of the grading of the subject subdivision or land
development.
(f) A plan of the erosion and sedimentation procedures to be
utilized.
(g) Notation of ownership and responsibility for maintenance of
stormwater management structures. [Amended 7-22-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-5]
[1] The stormwater management plan shall include a plan
stating the proposed methods and schedules of
maintenance of stormwater facilities to ensure their
proper operation. The method of ownership and
maintenance responsibilities of stormwater facilities shall
be subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors.
[2] At its discretion, the Township may require that
stormwater facilities be dedicated to the Township for
maintenance. However, the Township is under no
obligation to accept dedication or maintenance
responsibilities. If the Township accepts maintenance
responsibilities, it may require the developer to fund an
account to pay for ongoing maintenance.
[3] The Township may require that maintenance
responsibilities be handled through a property owners'
association with all owners legally obligated to fund their
share of the costs.
[4] If stormwater facilities that require proper maintenance
are to be privately owned, legal mechanisms shall be
established prior to property conveyance to require the
owner and his/her successor and assigns to properly
maintain the facilities in a safe, functional and attractive
manner in accordance with the approved maintenance
schedule.
[5] If stormwater facilities will not be municipally owned, the
developer shall establish a legal right of the Township to
access the facilities for periodic inspections and
maintenance at the Township's discretion. However, the
Township is under no obligation to perform such
inspections and maintenance. The Township may require
that the entity responsible for maintenance of stormwater
facilities reimburse the Township for costs of maintenance
and repair of stormwater facilities if that entity fails to
perform its duties.
§ 149-803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-803
1:367
(2) Design criteria. The criteria behind the design of stormwater
management facilities is that "the peak rate of runoff after
development shall not exceed the peak rate prior to development."
The stormwater system design shall be based on the following
methodology:
(a) Design shall be by Modified Rational Method or Soil
Conservation Service (Technical Release No. 55) Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds.
(b) Storm sewers shall be designed to carry a storm of twenty-fiveyear
frequency. An overflow system shall be provided to carry
flow to the detention basin when the capacity of the storm
drain pipe system is exceeded. The overflow system shall have
sufficient capacity to carry the difference between the onehundred-
year and the twenty-five-year peak flow rates.
(c) Detention and retention basins shall be designed to control the
peak flow of storms of two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and
one-hundred-year frequency and of twenty-four-hour duration.
(d) Basins shall be designed to pass a storm of one-hundred-year
frequency through the outlet structure without failure of the
basin embankment.
(e) The entire contributory drainage area shall be taken into
account in basin design.
(3) Storm sewer system.
(a) Storm sewer design shall meet the requirements of PennDOT
408 Standards. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(b) Storm sewers shall be reinforced concrete when constructed
within rights-of-way of streets.
(c) All inlets shall be precast concrete, PennDOT type and shall
have bicycle-safe type grater. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-5]
(d) Inlets shall have a two-inch drop from inlet to outlet.
(e) Storm sewer design shall take into account the time of
concentration.
(f) Calculations shall be provided to show the flow in the system,
pipe size, allowable flow, actual flow and velocity.
(g) Storm sewers shall have a minimum grade of 0.5% and a
minimum inside diameter of 15 inches.
(h) Storm sewers shall have a minimum cover of 24 inches.
§ 149-803 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-803
1:368
(4) Detention/retention basins. All basins shall be constructed to
include, but not be limited to, the following standards:
(a) Berm constructed of earth of a clay base with no topsoil and a
cutoff trench key continuous along the berm base.
(b) The top of the berm shall be a minimum of 10 feet. The sides
shall have a maximum slope of three horizontal to one vertical
(3:1).
(c) The bottom of the basin shall have a minimum slope of 2% and
any channel shall have a minimum slope of 0.5%.
(d) The riser shall be precast concrete, box inlet or equivalent with
grate top and shall be built into the berm whenever possible.
(e) The barrel shall be concrete pipe with anti-seep collars with a
minimum projection of two feet beyond the pipe.
(f) Emergency spillway shall be constructed of concrete/grass
pavers. Pavers shall extend down the basin slopes at the
spillway location. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-5]
(g) Basin barrel outfall shall have an end wall or flared end section
with properly designed rip-rap or energy dissipators.
(5) Retention basins shall be designed with provisions for draining the
permanent pond.
(6) Inground retention basins/recharge systems shall be required for
all subdivisions and land developments and shall be designed to
recharge the increased volume of runoff from all additional
impervious areas for a two-year storm event. The systems shall be
designed in accordance with the following criteria: [Amended
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(a) A sump shall be provided between the impervious area and the
inground facility to collect and trap sediment and debris before
reaching the inground facility.
(b) The storage volume provided by the inground facility shall be
equal to 210 cubic feet of volume per 1,000 square feet of
impervious area.
(c) Runoff into the facility shall be evenly distributed through a
series of perforated PVC or HDPE pipes with Class 2
perforations.
(d) The distribution pipe shall be encased in a bed of AASHTO No.
1 coarse aggregate completed envelope (top, sides and
bottom) by PennDOT Class 1 geotextile.
§ 149-803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-803
1:369
§ 149-804. Supplementary studies.
The following supplementary studies, when required by the Township, shall
be reviewed in conjunction with the review of the preliminary and/or final
plans. They shall be determining factors in the acceptance or rejection of
the plans and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(e) The facility shall be designed to completely drain within 24
hours, and percolation rates used to design the facility shall be
determined by field testing conducted in accordance with PA
DEP criteria for on-site septic system design.
(f) The facility shall be provided with an emergency overflow
device. An operations and maintenance program shall be
developed for the facility and provided to the homeowner for
implementation.
(7) Individual berms or inground basins may be used where practical
but title plan shall contain a note that facilities are permanent and
shall be maintained by the property owner.
(8) Landscaping; drainage channels and retention areas. All storm
drainage channels and retention areas whether existing or
proposed shall be graded and planted to effectively naturalize
areas so as to become an integral and harmonious part of the
landscape by contour and type of plant material employed.
(9) Best Management Practices. This subsection shall apply in addition
to § 149-803B(6). Where determined by the Township Engineer to
be feasible considering soil conditions, the Board of Supervisors
may require that a subdivision or land development include Best
Management Practices to promote groundwater recharge and to
minimize pollutants in runoff. These measures should take into
account the manual entitled "Best Management Practices for
Developing Areas in Pennsylvania" that is available through the
County Conservation District. Where required, the applicant shall
submit construction details of the measures. Such measures shall
include, but not be limited to the following: [Added 7-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-5]
(a) Seepage beds, infiltration devices and/or pervious parking to
promote groundwater recharge.
(b) Devices to separate out a significant amount of pollutants from
stormwater runoff, including devices to separate oils, greases
and suspended solids.
A. Traffic impact study. A traffic impact study shall be required for any
subdivision or land development that is expected to generate more than
250 total average weekday trip-ends after build-out. The traffic impact
study shall include, but not be limited to, the following: [Amended
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
§ 149-803 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-804
1:370
(1) Scope and nature of the entire proposed development.
(a) Acreage of property.
(b) Intended use.
(c) Location.
(d) Number of units.
(2) Description of proposed access points.
(a) Location.
(b) Grades.
(c) Alignments.
(d) Sight distances.
(3) Existing conditions and uses of roads and intersections adjacent to
the property, accessing the property and in the vicinity of the
property.
(a) Right-of-way widths.
(b) Number of travel lanes.
(c) Width of travel lanes.
(d) Shoulder/parking lane widths.
(e) Intersection turning movements for the peak hour of travel.
(f) Average annual daily traffic counts.
(g) Peak hour traffic counts (Thursday and Friday during any
month from April to November).
(4) Calculation of capacity of all approaches to all intersections in the
vicinity of the development. It is strongly suggested that the
capacity analysis be based on the procedure established in the
1985 Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 209,
Transportation Research Board. This standardized methodology is
formulated around the following factors:
(a) Width and marking of approach lanes.
(b) Parking conditions.
(c) One-way, two-way operations.
(d) Load factor.
(e) Area population.
(f) Area land use.
§ 149-804 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-804
1:371
(g) Turning movements.
(h) Truck and bus movements.
(i) Traffic signalization.
(5) Estimate of potential peak hour trip generation based on
procedures established in the Trip Generation Manual, Institute of
Transportation Engineers (I.T.E.), latest published edition, 1987,
and shall be formulated around the following factors:
(a) Type.
(b) Number of units.
(c) Number of employees.
(d) Type of ingress and egress traffic movement.
(6) Distribution of traffic. Assign traffic to particular access points,
streets and intersections using marketing studies, work trip
(origin-destination data or traffic simulation models). See also
Subsection A(5) above.
(7) Comparison of existing peak hour counts and existing capacities of
each intersection.
(8) Comparison of existing peak hour counts plus traffic generated by
the development plus assumed annual increase in traffic and
existing capacities of each intersection. See also Subsection A(6)
above.
(9) Description of necessary improvements to accommodate future
traffic [if Subsection A(8) above shows an unacceptable level of
service].
(10) Cost estimates.
(11) Implementation strategy.
NOTE: For all capacity analyses, Westtown shall be considered
a residential area for "location within metropolitan area" and
"metropolitan area population" shall be 75,000.
B. Water study. The water study shall include but not be limited to the
following, and, where applicable, plans shall be drawn to the same scale
and be of the same size as that of the corresponding preliminary plan:
(1) The following information shall be supplied in a combination of
drawn plans and written material for both on-site and community
system applicants:
(a) Scope and nature of the entire proposed development,
including:
§ 149-804 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-804
1:372
[1] Acreage of total tract and size of all individual lots and
parcels.
[2] Location of tract showing use and size of all abutting and
adjacent properties.
[3] Intended uses of all lots, parcels and structures along with
the total number of structures and total population within
the development at the time of full build-out.
(2) Complete description of existing conditions found within and
surrounding the proposed development, including:
(a) Location and size of all waterways and bodies of water
(including underground within the tract and abutting and
adjacent properties).
(b) Location and size of all floodplain areas within the tract.
(c) Topography and geology data including soil types, strata and
elevations within the tract showing a certified geologist's
report as to the expected rate and/or supply from the
particular water supply strata.
(d) Existing water supplies, distribution and sewage treatment
facilities servicing the tract and all abutting and adjacent
properties to the tract.
(3) Complete description of both existing and proposed fire protection
facilities within the tract, and where applicable within all abutting
properties. Specifications shall comply with those found in
§§ 149-917 and 149-918 of this chapter and shall show:
(a) Full plan of existing and proposed fire hydrant locations.
(b) Source, capacity and pressure for all existing and proposed
hydrants and/or other fire protection water sources.
(c) Proposed commercial and industrial developments shall also
show:
[1] Use and/or storage of all chemicals and other flammable
materials per structure.
[2] Water needs other than for domestic use that would affect
water pressure needed for fire protection per structure.
[3] Plans for and use of sprinkler systems per structure.
[4] Effect of all proposed systems on existing systems.
(4) The following information shall be supplied in a combination of
drawn plans and written materials, for all on-site water supply,
distribution and/or sewage facilities.
§ 149-804 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-804
1:373
(a) All applicable specifications cited in this chapter, and any other
ordinances of Westtown Township, shall be clearly
demonstrated, including types of materials and equipment to
be used.
(b) Plans for placement of all wells and sewage systems shall be
clearly shown for verification of safe sewage disposal.
(c) Verification shall be shown that all wells shall be double cased,
group sealed into bedrock, at least 50 gallons per minute based
on a twenty-four-hour pump test of potable drinking water.
(5) Verification shall be shown as to the potability and chemical
makeup of the water supply in accordance with standards set by
the Chester County Health Department.
(6) The following information shall be supplied in a combination of
drawn plans and written material for all central water supply,
distribution and/or sewage facilities:
(a) All applicable specifications cited in this chapter shall be
clearly demonstrated, including types of materials and
equipment to be used.
(b) Complete information on the water/sewer company(ies) shall
be supplied, including:
[1] Name and location of company.
[2] Description of other users, including data on franchise
area, acreage, uses and number of units served.
(c) Complete description of company(ies) existing system,
including location and size of mains, storage, wells and sewage
facilities in the area.
(d) Complete description of proposed system and facilities within
the tract.
(e) Complete description of projected expansion of the
company(ies) services within the next five years.
(f) Verification of monitoring and maintenance services of the
company(ies) in reference to drawdown, well(s) and storage
capacity(ies).
§ 149-804 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-804
1:374
ARTICLE IX
Development and Design Standards
§ 149-900. Application.
The following standards shall be complied with in all subdivision and land
developments:
§ 149-901. General standards for public streets.
A. Improvement specifications; general requirements.
(1) Physical improvements to the property being developed shall be
provided, constructed and installed as shown on the record plan, in
accordance with the requirements of the Township.
(2) As a condition for approval of a final plan by the Township, the
applicant shall enter into an agreement with the Township as to
installation of all improvements shown on the plan and required by
these regulations. Before the final plan may be endorsed by the
Township, the applicant shall submit a completed original copy of
the subdivision improvements agreement.
(3) All improvements, whether public or private, installed by the
applicant shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
applicable criteria and specifications referenced herein. If there
are no applicable regulations, the Township may authorize that
specifications be prepared by a registered professional engineer.
(4) Inspection of the installation of the improvements required by this
chapter shall in all cases be the responsibility of the Township or
the appropriate state regulatory agency.
A. The location and width of all public streets shall conform to the
Westtown Township Official Map or to such parts thereof as may have
been adopted by the Township.
B. The proposed public street system shall extend existing or recorded
streets at the same or greater width, but in no case at less than the
required minimum width.
C. Where Westtown Township determines that it is desirable to provide for
public street access to adjoining property, public streets shall be
extended by dedication to the boundary of such property.
D. New minor public streets shall be so designed as to discourage through
traffic, but the applicant shall give adequate consideration to provision
for the extension and continuation of major and collector streets into
and from adjoining properties.
E. Where a development abuts an existing public street of improper width
or alignment, the Township may require the dedication of land
sufficient to widen the street or correct the alignment.
§ 149-900 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-901
1:375
§ 149-902. Partial and half streets.
§ 149-903. Right-of-way and cartway.
F. The length of a cul-de-sac shall be a minimum of 350 feet and a
maximum of 1,500 feet. Any proposed cul-de-sac longer than 1,500 feet
must be approved by the Board upon recommendation of the Township
Engineer. In no case shall any cul-de-sac street serve more than 25
dwelling units. Cul-de-sac length shall be measured from the radius of
the cul-de-sac turnaround to the edge of paving/curbline of the closest
through street. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
A. New half or partial streets will not be permitted except where essential
to the reasonable development of a tract in conformance with the other
requirements and standards of these regulations and where, in
addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of
the public street can be obtained.
B. The applicant shall provide the entire required right-of-way or as much
thereof as lies within his property, along all existing public streets
which traverse or abut his property.
A. The right-of-way and cartway widths of all new or proposed public and/
or private streets shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors and
shall be classified as follows:
(1) Arterial highway.
(a) The right-of-way of Routes 202 and 3 shall be 120 feet.
(b) The right-of-way of Routes 926 and 352 shall be 80 feet.
(c) The cartway widths will be determined by the Township after
consulting with the Chester County Planning Commission and
PennDOT. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(2) Collector street. Right-of-way shall be 60 feet and cartway width
shall be 28 feet. See Note 1.
(3) Minor street. Right-of-way shall be 50 feet and cartway width shall
be 24 feet. See Notes 1 and 2.
(4) Cul-de-sac street. A cul-de-sac is a minor street. Turnaround shall
have a right-of-way radius of 60 feet. Turnaround cartway paving
width shall have a radius of 50 feet. See Notes 1 and 2.
(a) When required for future extension, the turnaround right-ofway
shall be placed adjacent to the tract boundary with
sufficient width along the boundary line to permit extension of
the street at full width.
(b) The small triangle of land beyond the cul-de-sac to the
boundary shall be so deeded that, until the road is continued,
§ 149-901 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-903
1:376
maintenance of these corners of land will be the responsibility
of the adjoining owners.
(c) The Board of Supervisors may approve alternative designs for
the end of a cul-de-sac, provided the applicant proves their will
be adequate turning space for delivery trucks, snowplows and
school buses. For example, the Board of Supervisors may
approve a larger cul-de-sac bulb with landscaped space in the
middle of the bulb, provided there is an adequate system to
ensure proper maintenance of the landscaped space. The
Township may also require the establishment of a well-drained
snow storage easement at the end of a cul-de-sac to allow snow
to be pushed directly down the street onto grass. The provision
of this easement may make a landscape island more feasible.
[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(5) Service street (alley). Service streets are permitted only in small-lot
single-family detached development (see definitions). The right-ofway
shall be 20 feet and the cartway width shall be 12 feet.
NOTE 1: Additional right-of-way and cartway widths may be
required by Westtown Township for the purpose of promoting
the public safety and convenience, or to provide for parking in
commercial and industrial areas and in areas of high-density
residential development.
NOTE 2: At the sole discretion of the Township Supervisors, the
right-of-way of a minor street may be reduced to 40 feet and the
cartway width of a minor street may be reduced to 20 feet for
properties of one acre or more. Turnaround paved cartway of culde-
sac streets shall not reduced.
B. All streets, whether public or private, shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with Township regulations.
C. Right-of-way along existing streets. [Added 7-22-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-5]
(1) Where a subdivision or land development is proposed adjacent to
an existing public street, the applicant shall dedicate sufficient
right-of-way to result in the future right-of-way width provided for
in § 170-1511 of the Zoning Chapter. If the applicant only controls
land on one side of an existing street, then the applicant shall only
be responsible to dedicate land to result in a width from the street
cartway center line to the future right-of-way line equal to 50% of
the future street right-of-way width. Therefore, for example, if a
collector street has a sixty-foot-wide future right-of-way, an
applicant on one side would be responsible to ensure that a thirtyfoot-
wide right-of-way is provided on the applicant's side of the
center line.
§ 149-903 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-903
1:377
§ 149-904. Street grades.
§ 149-905. Horizontal curves.
§ 149-906. Vertical curves.
At all changes of public street grades where the algebraic difference
exceeds 1%, vertical curves shall be provided to permit the following
minimum sight distances:
(2) The dedication of future right-of-way shall not be required where
the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors,
based upon any review by the Township Engineer and Planning
Commission, that there is not a reasonable relationship between
the need for the additional right-of-way and the traffic created by
the proposed development.
(3) Along a state-owned street or highway, if the State Department of
Transportation refuses to accept a dedication of right-of-way, then
the future right-of-way shall be dedicated to the Township or be
irrevocably committed and reserved for future dedication when the
Board of Supervisors determines the right-of-way is needed.
A. On all streets there shall be minimum center-line grade of 1% and a
maximum of 7%.
B. The center-line grade may be increased up to 10% upon the
recommendation of the Township Engineer and the approval of the
Board of Supervisors.
C. The center-line grade on a cul-de-sac public street shall not exceed 7%,
and the grade of the diameter of the turnaround shall not exceed 4%.
D. Drainage of cul-de-sac public streets shall preferably be toward the
open end.
A. Whenever public street lines are deflected in excess of five degrees,
connections shall be made by horizontal curves.
B. To ensure adequate sight distance, minimum center-line radii for
horizontal curves shall be as follows:
(1) Minor streets: 150 feet.
(2) Collector streets: 300 feet.
(3) Arterial highways: 500 feet.
(4) Service streets: 80 feet.
C. A tangent of at least 100 feet shall be introduced between all horizontal
curves on collector streets and arterial highways.
§ 149-903 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-906
1:378
§ 149-907. Intersections.
§ 149-908. Sight distance at intersections.
A. Minor streets: 200 feet.
B. Collector streets: 300 feet.
C. Arterial highways: 400 feet.
D. Service streets: 100 feet.
A. Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles but in no
event at less than an angle of 60°.
B. No more than two streets shall intersect at the same point.
C. Streets entering the opposite sides of another street shall either be
directly opposite each other or shall be offset at least 200 feet on minor
and collector streets, measured center line to center line along the
center line of the street being intersected.
D. Intersections with arterial highways shall be located not less than 1,000
feet apart, measured from center line to center line, along the center
line of the arterial highway.
E. Where the grade of any street at the approach of an intersection
exceeds 4%, a leveling area of at least 75 feet measured from the
curbline of the street being intersected shall be provided. The grade of
this area shall not exceed 2%.
F. Street curb intersections shall be rounded by a tangent arc with a
minimum radius of 35 feet.
G. Curb and right-of-way radii shall have the same center point of origin.
H. Street right-of-way lines shall be parallel to curb lines.
A. A minimum clear sight triangle of 75 feet (as measured from the centerline
intersections of two streets) shall be provided at all intersections.
The minimum clear sight triangle shall be increased to 100 feet if either
street is a collector street and to 150 feet if either street is an arterial
highway. There shall be no physical obstruction, planting, berm or
grade above the height of 18 inches within the right-of way section of
this triangle or above the height of 2 1/2 feet elsewhere in this triangle.
B. Wherever a portion of the line of such triangle occurs behind (i.e., from
the street) the building setback line, such portion shall be shown on the
final plan of the development, and shall be considered a building
setback line.
C. Stopping sight distance at all intersections shall be in accordance with
PennDOT standards. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
§ 149-906 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-909
1:379
§ 149-909. Restriction of access.
§ 149-910. Street construction. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-5]
All materials used for the construction of streets and/or roads as herein
defined and the method of construction and installation shall be in strict
accordance with the requirements of PennDOT Specifications Publication
408 and/or PennDOT Seldom Used Specifications 1983 and/or the latest
revision thereof.
A. Wherever a development abuts (or contains) an existing or proposed
public street or highway with an ultimate right-of-way of 60 feet or
more, the development shall be designed to restrict access to that
street. If the street is an arterial highway, access to that arterial
highway shall be restricted by either:
(1) The creation of reverse frontage lots abutting arterial roads which
shall have access from a road of lesser classification.
(2) The creation of a public or private street which is separated by a
reserve strip from the arterial highway. The ownership and
maintenance of the reserve strip shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Township. Except as specified above, reserve strips
shall be prohibited.
B. Dead-end public streets are prohibited, except as stubs to permit future
street extension into adjoining properties, unless designed as cul-de-sac
streets.
C. Any public street dead-ended because of authorized staged
development shall be provided with a temporary, all-weather
turnaround, within the development, and the use of such turnaround
shall be guaranteed to the public until such time as the public street is
extended.
D. Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the
turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to the tract boundary
line to permit extension of the street at full width.
A. Drainage. All drainage and utility structures, including but not limited
to manholes, inlets, pipes, water and electric lines, shall be installed
prior to the final grading of the cartway.
B. Grading. Grading shall be completed to the full width of the right-ofway.
Banks shall be sloped not less than three horizontal to one vertical
with top of slopes rounded.
C. Subgrade. The subgrade within the limits of the proposed cartway shall
be shaped to conform to the line, grade and cross-section of the
proposed cartway and shall be thoroughly compacted as per PennDOT
Publication 408 as last revised. Subgrade shall be sloped to correspond
§ 149-909 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-910
1:380
to the slope of the finished road surface. Before placing the base
course, the subgrade shall be dressed with one inch of fine aggregate.
NOTE 1: Backfill of trenches within the cartway and shoulder area
shall be mechanically tamped in uniform layers of not more than eight
inches, thoroughly compacted, 95% dry volume, prior to application of
the base course.
NOTE 2: If, during the installation of any of the aforementioned items,
the Township determines that the material used for backfill is
unacceptable, the contractor shall be required to use select fill.
D. Paving:
(1) The Township Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the
Township Engineer, shall determine the type of paving which shall
be utilized.
(2) Type I Base Course. Base course shall be constructed of stone
aggregate, rolled with vibratory roller, and thoroughly compacted
in two layers to a depth of not less than eight inches for residential
and 10 inches for industrial. The materials and construction
methods shall be in strict accordance with the requirements of
Section 310, "Crushed Aggregate Base Course," PennDOT Seldom
Used Specifications.
(3) Type II Base Course. Base course shall consist of five inches for
residential and six inches for industrial, after compaction, of hot
mixed, hot laid bituminous concrete base course placed on a sixinch
compacted layer of PennDOT No. 2A course aggregate, Type C
or better (no slag material). The materials and construction
methods shall be in strict accordance with the requirements of
Section 305, Bituminous Concrete Base Course, and Section 305,
Subcourse, of PennDOT Publication 408 Specifications. The
subbase and base course shall be rolled with a vibratory roller.
(4) Bituminous Surface Course ID-2A. Bituminous surface course
ID-2A shall consist of constructing a binder course and wearing
course of hot mixed, hot laid asphalt concrete on the above
prepared base course. The binder course shall be rolled with
vibratory roller and compacted to a depth of not less than two
inches and the wearing course not less than 1 1/2 inches. The
materials and construction methods shall be in strict accordance
with the requirements of Section 420, Bituminous Wearing Course
ID-2, and Section 421, Bituminous Binder Course ID-2, of PennDOT
Publication 408, as amended. The Township may require that the
final application of bituminous concrete be withheld until the
streets are offered for dedication to the Township if the wearing
course is not applied immediately after the binder course. (NOTE:
The binder course shall be thoroughly cleaned and tack coated in
accordance with PennDOT Publication 408, as amended.)
§ 149-910 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-911
1:381
§ 149-911. Curbs. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
§ 149-912. Street names and signs.
§ 149-913. Block layout and design.
A. All materials entering into the construction of curbs and the method of
construction and installation shall be in accordance with PennDOT
Specifications Publication 408, as amended.
B. Vertical curbs meeting the dimensional requirements for plain cement
concrete curb contained in the PennDOT Standards for Roadway
Construction (RC-64) shall be required on all streets.
A. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others already
existing and named shall bear the names of the existing streets.
B. In no case shall the name of a proposed street duplicate an existing
street name in the Township or postal district, irrespective of the use of
the suffix street, road, avenue, boulevard, drive, etc.
C. All street names shall be subject to the approval of Westtown Township
and of the Postmaster.
D. Street name signs shall be placed at all intersections, naming all streets
at each intersection, and shall be visible from both directions. In
general, mounting heights of signs shall be seven feet. Signs shall be
mounted on 2 3/8 inch outside diameter galvanized steel tubular posts
10 feet in length. Posts shall be embedded in concrete footings three
feet six inches deep by 12 inches in diameter. Signs shall be aluminum
(0.08 inch minimum thickness) with a blue baked enamel background
and six-inches-high white reflectorized letters. Signs shall be eight
inches high and mounted to the top of the pole with appropriate
hardware. The type of sign, post and location shall be subject to the
approval of the Township. [Amended 3-1-1999 by Ord. No. 99-1;
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
E. Street signs shall be installed as soon as final grading has been
completed.
A. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed,
zoning requirements, topography and requirements for safe and
convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including the
reduction of intersections with arterial highways.
B. Blocks shall have a minimum length of 500 feet.
C. In the design of blocks longer than 1,000 feet, special consideration
shall be given to the requirements for satisfactory fire protection and
pedestrian access.
§ 149-911 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-913
1:382
§ 149-914. General standards for lots.
D. Where practicable, blocks along arterial highways and collector streets
shall not be less than 1,000 feet long.
E. Crosswalks (interior walks) may be required wherever necessary to
facilitate pedestrian circulation and to give access to community
facilities as well as in blocks of over 1,000 feet in length.
F. Such crosswalks (interior walks) shall have an easement width of not
less than 10 feet and paved width (if paved) of not less than four feet.
G. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two tiers
of lots, except where reverse frontage lots are required along an
arterial highway, or where prevented by the size, topographical
conditions or other inherent conditions of property, in which case the
Township may approve a single tier of lots.
H. Blocks in commercial and industrial areas may vary from the elements
of design detail in Subsection G if required by the nature of the use. In
all cases, however, adequate provision shall be made for off-street
parking and loading areas as well as for traffic circulation and parking
for employees and customers.
A. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the type
of development and use contemplated and shall conform to zoning
regulations.
B. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
street lines or radial to curved street lines.
C. Interior lots shall not be permitted unless the width of the access strip
is at least equal to the minimum lot width at the minimum building
setback line for the particular zoning district in which the interior lot is
located. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
D. Wherever feasible, lot lines shall follow Township boundaries rather
than cross them in order to avoid jurisdictional problems.
E. Depth and width of parcels intended for nonresidential uses shall be
adequate for the use proposed and sufficient to provide satisfactory
space for on-site parking, loading and unloading, setbacks,
landscaping, etc.
F. If, after subdividing, there exist substandard remnants of land, they
shall be either incorporated in existing or proposed lots, or legally
dedicated to public use, if acceptable to the Township.
G. For any new lot intended for the construction of a principal building, a
contiguous and uninterrupted area equal to 75% of the minimum lot
area required by the Zoning Chapter shall be provided which is
unencumbered by any of the following: wetlands, one-hundred-year
floodplains, steep slopes and/or stormwater detention basins. The
§ 149-913 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-914
1:383
§ 149-915. Driveways.
contiguous area shall be provided for construction of buildings and
customary accessory uses without intruding into these features.
[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
H. All easements and rights-of-way shall abut the property line whenever
possible.
I. Lots shall be conveniently shaped and the depth of the lots shall,
generally, not exceed the width by more than 2 1/2 times.
J. All lots shall have frontage on a street in accordance with Chapter 170,
Zoning.
K. Double or reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where required
to provide separation of residential development from arterial highways
or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation.
L. All residential reverse frontage lots shall have a rear yard with a
minimum depth of 60 feet (measured along the shortest distance from
the proposed dwelling unit to the ultimate right-of-way) and shall,
within such rear yard and immediately adjacent to the right-of-way,
have a planting screen easement of at least 10 feet in width, across
which there shall be no right of access.
A. Township approval is required for construction of a driveway. The
approval request may be included with a building permit application in
the case of new construction.
B. A plan shall be submitted with each application for approval of a
driveway and shall include the following:
(1) Site plan to scale at least one inch equals 50 feet.
(2) Location of building, septic tank and disposal field, well and all
other structures.
(3) Adjacent driveways within 100 feet.
(4) Plan of driveway.
(5) Topography of lot by field or photogrametric survey with contours
at two-foot intervals.
(6) Profile of proposed driveway from edge of road to end of driveway,
showing existing and proposed grades.
C. Private driveways for residences, except for townhouses, apartments
and mobile home parks, shall be located at least 60 feet from the point
of intersection of the nearest street right-of-way lines and at least five
feet from every property line.
§ 149-914 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-915
1:384
D. Private driveways in commercial, industrial and business park zoning
districts and for townhouse, mobile home parks and apartments shall
be located at least 100 feet from the point of intersection of the nearest
street right-of-way lines and at least 10 feet from every property line.
E. Driveways used jointly by more than one property owner may straddle
the property line. The appropriate easement restrictions shall be noted
on the final plan.
F. All driveways shall be located, designed and constructed in such a
manner as not to interfere or be inconsistent with the design,
maintenance and drainage of the highway.
G. Driveways shall be located in such manner that they will not cause the
following: interference to the traveling public; a hazard to the free
movement of normal highway traffic; or areas of undue traffic
congestion on the highway. In accordance with this principle, driveways
should be located where the highway alignment and profile are
favorable, i.e., where there are no sharp curves or steep grades, and
where sight distance in conjunction with the driveway access would be
adequate for safe traffic operation.
H. Driveways should not be located in such sections that would interfere
with the placement and proper functioning of highway signs, signals,
detectors, lighting or other devices that affect traffic control. The
location of a driveway near a signalized intersection that has an
actuated traffic signal may include a requirement that the permittee
provide (without expense to the Township or PennDOT) additional
detectors and signal poles and heads for the control of traffic movement
from his establishment or for relocation of existing detectors.
[Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
I. Where highway curbs exist, driveway approaches shall be installed 1 1/
2 inches above the adjacent highway or gutter grade to maintain the
proper drainage.
J. Where highway curbs do not exist, driveways shall be constructed in
such a manner as not to interfere with the drainage grade line of
shoulders. If, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, a pipe is required
to maintain the grade line, the permittee shall install such pipe at his
expense, parallel to the pavement edge and at a minimum distance of
10 feet therefrom and on the grade line as directed by the Township
Engineer. Where a pipe is placed in the shoulder line, the driveway may
slope away from the roadway at a lesser gradient than the normal
shoulder slope but not less than 1/4 inch per foot from the paving edge
to the pipe. The minimum pipe length shall be equal to the width of the
driveway plus 10 feet.
K. Design requirements.
(1) The grade of the driveway within 20 feet of the pavement edge or
the curbline of the public road, Township or state, shall not exceed
§ 149-915 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-915
1:385
4%. The maximum grade permitted beyond this point is 15%.
Vertical curves shall be used at a change of grades exceeding 5%.
(2) Width of driveway within the legal right-of-way of the public road
shall be at least 10 feet, and shall be nine feet within the property
line. Adequate turnaround surface shall be provided on the
property so egress to the street is in a forward direction. Where the
grade of the driveway exceeds 10%, at least one level parking
space shall be provided just within the property line for emergency
parking.
(3) The driveway within the legal right-of-way of the public road shall
be constructed with crushed aggregate meeting the requirement of
Section 350 of PennDOT Form 408 Specifications, compacted to a
minimum depth of six inches. It shall be surfaced with a minimum
of 2 1/2 inches of ID-2 surface course or approved equal. The
remaining length of driveway may be constructed of any suitable
stabilized material or bituminous surface adequate for the intended
use and vehicle loads. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-5]
(4) Discharge of roof drains or downspouts onto the driveway which
slopes toward the street shall not be permitted. No drain pipe from
any basement sump pump, foundation drain, disposal field, terrace,
roof or pavement shall be discharged onto the public right-of-way.
(5) The sight distance at the intersection of a Township or state
roadway and the proposed driveway shall be provided in
accordance with the following tabulation. The clear sight line shall
be described by a line from a point within the driveway, 10 feet
from the edge of pavement or curbline, to a point in the center of
the near lane of the roadway.
Posted Speed
(miles per hour)
Required Sight Distance
(feet)
20 200
25 250
30 350
35 440
40 540
45 635
50 760
55 875
(6) In addition to these requirements, all driveway intersections with
state highways shall also be designed in accordance with PennDOT
criteria. A PennDOT highway occupancy permit shall be obtained
§ 149-915 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-915
1:386
§ 149-916. Sidewalks and paths.
Sidewalks, bike paths and other paths may be required to be installed at
the discretion of the Board of Supervisors upon the recommendation of the
Planning Commission.
§ 149-917. Water supply.
for all driveway intersections with state highways. [Amended
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
A. All materials entering into the construction of sidewalks and the
method of construction and installation shall be in accordance with
PennDOT Specifications Publication 408, except that the compacted
thickness of the aggregate bed shall be four inches. Sidewalks across
driveways and driveway aprons shall be constructed with six inches of
concrete reinforced with six by six w1.4 by w1.4 welded wire fabric
placed two inches from the finished surface. Sidewalks shall have a
minimum width of four feet and be located four feet behind the curbline
unless approved otherwise. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-5]
B. Sidewalks at intersections shall be constructed to provide for
handicapped access.
C. Details and specifications for the construction of bike paths and other
paths shall be submitted with preliminary plans for review and approval
by the Township Planning Commission and Township Engineer.
A. Central water supply systems (community, public). All subdivisions and
land developments comprised of the following uses shall be served by a
central water supply system:
(1) Residential single-family detached dwellings on lots of less than
one acre.
(2) Residential multifamily dwellings.
(3) Residential attached dwellings.
(4) Mobile home parks.
(5) Commercial and/or industrial uses.
B. On-site water supply systems (private). Subdivisions and land
developments comprised of residential single-family detached
dwellings on lots of one acre or larger may be served by an on-site
water supply system.
C. Procedures. All applicants for subdivision or land development shall
state in the preliminary plan whether water supply will be community,
public or private on-site. A water study (Article VIII) shall be submitted
upon request of the Planning Commission and/or Board.
§ 149-915 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-917
1:387
§ 149-918. Water distribution.
D. Community central water systems. All proposed community central
water supply systems shall be designed, connected and installed to
furnish potable water to meet the specifications and requirements of
the Insurance Service Office of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP), Chester County Health Department
(CCHD) and all Township ordinances for domestic use and fire
protection.
E. Residential on-site water supply system. All proposed on-site water
supply systems shall have a permit certified by the Chester County
Health Department.
A. Plan requirements. All proposed water distribution systems shall be
designed, connected and installed to meet the specifications and
requirements of the DEP, Pennsylvania Utility Commission (PUC),
CCHD and all Township ordinances. The complete design of the
proposed distribution system and the following information shall be
provided as a part of all preliminary and final plans:
(1) Design standards.
(a) The design shall include the pipe material and the size of the
water mains to be utilized, the size of the existing water system
main(s) at the point(s) of interconnect, and the existing and
proposed placement of all valves and fire hydrants.
(b) Distribution systems for a residential district shall be laid out
in a grid pattern and looped where possible to avoid the use of
dead ends. In the event dead ends cannot be avoided, the dead
end of a main shall have a fire hydrant, flushing hydrant or
blowoff for flushing purposes.
(c) Mains within a residential district shall be a minimum of six
inches in diameter where the lengths between intersecting
mains are no more than 600 feet. Mains shall be a minimum of
eight inches in diameter for distances greater than 600 feet.
(d) Mains located on principal streets and arterial mains shall be a
minimum of eight inches in diameter unless a larger size is
specified by the Township Engineer for future interconnect
design potential.
(e) Distribution systems and main sizes for commercial and
industrial developments shall comply with those for a
residential district unless greater sizes are specified by the
engineer of the appropriate water utility company, the
Township Engineer and/or Fire Marshal.
(2) Materials.
§ 149-917 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-918
1:388
§ 149-919. Stormwater and runoff control.
Stormwater management and erosion control shall be in accordance with
Chapter 80, Erosion, Sediment Control and Grading.
§ 149-920. Utility and drainage easements.
(a) Standards and materials for the construction of all water
distribution systems shall meet or exceed those requirements
described in the most recent edition of the Public Water Supply
Manual of the DEP and shall be subject to the approval of the
Township Engineer.
(b) The water mains shall be as follows:
[1] Polyvinyl chloride pipe shall conform to AWWA Standard C
900-75. Polyvinyl chloride pressure pipe shall be Class 150
and shall meet the requirements of DR 18.
[2] Ductile cast iron pipe Class 52 shall conform to Federal
Specification for Pipe, Water, Ductile Cast Iron WW-P-421
C, be coated on the outside and cement-lined. [Amended
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(3) Storage. Adequate storage shall be provided to ensure the capacity,
gallonage and pressure as specified in § 149-804B of this chapter.
Additional capacity shall be provided as a reserve for fire
protection when requested by the Fire Marshal or Township
Engineer. [Amended 8-26-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5; 7-22-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(4) Fire hydrants. Whenever a central water distribution system is
provided, fire hydrants shall be installed as specified by the
Insurance Services Office of Pennsylvania, the Fire Marshal, the
Township Engineer and the following regulations: [Amended
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(a) For purposes of fire protection in detached residential
districts, fire hydrants shall be installed within 500 feet of all
existing and proposed structures, measured by way of
accessible streets.
(b) For purposes of fire protection in commercial and/or industrial
districts, semidetached and multifamily developments, fire
hydrants shall be installed within 400 feet of all existing and
proposed structures, measured by way of accessible streets.
B. Approvals and reviews. No construction of any water distribution
system shall commence prior to written approvals and/or comments
from the DEP, CCHD, Fire Marshal and Township Engineer.
§ 149-918 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-920
1:389
§ 149-921. Public and/or private facilities and open space.
A. There shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet, measured in the shortest
distance between any proposed dwelling unit and any petroleum
products or natural gas transmission line which traverses the
subdivision.
B. Where easements are required, they shall be a minimum width of 20
feet. No structures shall be placed within such easements.
C. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear and side lot lines.
A. In reviewing subdivision and land development plans, the Planning
Commission shall consider whether community facilities, including
schools, in the area are adequate to serve the needs of the additional
dwellings proposed by the development and shall make such report
thereon as it deems necessary in the public interest.
B. Applicants shall provide 10% of the gross area of tracts larger than two
acres for open space, which are proposed for two or more dwelling
units or residential lots. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
C. Open space shall comply with the following standards:
(1) The open space shall be laid out to the satisfaction of the Board in
accordance with the best principles of site design, and shall be
consistent with the intent of Chapter 170, Zoning, and the
Township's Comprehensive Plan and Parks, Recreation and Open
Space Plan.
(2) Within the required acreage of open space, or elsewhere on the
tract, an area equivalent to at least 10% of the gross tract acreage
shall be suitable and available to serve the particular recreational
needs of the residents of the development (and/or the general
public). The Board may require that all, or a portion of, this
recreational area be suitable for active recreation, and may further
require that such area be prepared and developed for such
purposes.
(3) Where applicable or deemed appropriate or contained in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan or Parks, Recreation and Open
Space Plan, provision for pedestrian trails for public and/or private
use shall be provided. This provision need not be in addition to the
10% requirement of Subsection B above unless the Board
determines that the entire 10% minimum must be designated for
active recreation.
(4) The plan shall designate the use of common open space, the type of
maintenance to be provided, and a planting plan or schedule. In
designating use and maintenance, the following classes may be
used:
§ 149-920 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-921
1:390
(a) Lawn. A grass area with or without trees which may be used by
the residents for a variety of purposes and which shall be
mowed regularly to ensure a neat and tidy appearance.
(b) Natural area. An area of natural vegetation undisturbed during
construction, or replanted; such areas may contain pathways.
Meadows shall be maintained as such. Maintenance may be
minimal but shall prevent the proliferation of undesirable
plants. Litter, dead trees and brush shall be removed and
streams kept in free-flowing condition.
(c) Recreation area. An area designated for a specific recreational
use, including by way of example tennis, swimming, playfields
and totlots. Such areas shall be located and maintained in such
manner as not to create a hazard or nuisance and shall
perpetuate the proposed use.
(d) Stormwater detention/retention and sewage disposal areas.
Detention or retention areas or land used for surface (land
application) or subsurface sewage disposal and holding or
settlement ponds.
(5) At least 60% of the minimum required common open space area
shall be located outside floodplain areas and areas of greater than
25% slope.
(6) The following design standards, as deemed appropriate by the
Board, shall apply to areas of common open space. Such areas shall
be:
(a) Not less than 75 feet in width at any point and not less than 1/2
acre of contiguous area, except when part of a trail system or
pathway network.
(b) Interconnected with common open space areas on abutting
parcels wherever possible, including provisions for pedestrian
pathways for general public use to create linked pathway
systems within the Township.
(c) Provided with sufficient perimeter parking when necessary,
and with safe and convenient access from adjoining public road
frontage or other rights-of-way or easements capable of
accommodating pedestrian, bicycle and maintenance and
vehicle traffic, and containing appropriate access
improvements. Areas required for parking may be included in
calculating the minimum acreage required for open space.
(d) Undivided by any crossings of public or private roads, except
where necessary for proper traffic circulation, and then only
upon recommendation of the Township Engineer and Planning
Commission.
§ 149-921 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-921
1:391
(e) Free of all structures, except those related to outdoor
recreational use or as otherwise provided herein.
(f) Suitably landscaped by retaining existing natural cover and
wooded areas and/or by a landscaping plan which is consistent
with the purposes of this article and which minimizes
maintenance costs.
(g) Made subject to such agreement with the Township and such
deed restrictions, duly recorded in the office of the Chester
County Recorder of Deeds, as may be required by the Board of
Supervisors for the purpose of preserving the common open
space for such use.
(7) To count towards the required common open space, land must be:
[Added 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(a) Landscaped in trees, shrubs and other vegetation;
(b) Preserved in woods or natural vegetation;
(c) Developed as active or passive recreational facilities;
(d) Part of an approved agricultural use (such as crop farming or a
wholesale tree nursery); or
(e) Approved under Subsection C(10) below.
(8) Common open space shall be interconnected with common open
space areas on abutting parcels where possible, including
provisions for pedestrian pathways for general public use to create
linked pathway systems within the Township. [Added 7-22-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(9) Common open space areas are not required to be served by their
own off-street parking unless they are developed for active
recreation facilities. [Added 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(10) A stormwater detention or retention basin shall not be permitted to
be counted towards the minimum common open space requirement
unless the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that such basin would be designed and constructed to
serve a recreation use during the vast majority of weather
conditions or would function as a scenic open space asset and/or
will result in the infiltration of stormwater runoff into the ground.
[Added 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(11) The following areas shall not be permitted to be counted towards
the minimum common open space requirement: [Added
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(a) Areas within the lot lines of a fee simple building lot; nor
§ 149-921 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-921
1:392
(b) Areas within 20 feet of the front, rear or side of a principal
building.
(12) If land is proposed for dedication to the Township for recreation
purposes, the applicant may be required by the Board of
Supervisors to provide a professional assessment of such land to
determine whether evidence exists of environmental
contamination. If such contamination is found, the applicant shall
ameliorate the contamination in a manner as to make the land
suitable for its intended use. [Added 7-22-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-5]
D. Ownership. Any of the following methods may be used, either
individually or together, to preserve, own, and maintain common open
space: condominium, homeowners' association, dedication in fee
simple, dedication of easements, and transfer of fee simple title and
easements to a private conservation organization. Such land shall not
be eligible for transfer to another party except for transfer to another
method of ownership permitted under this section, and then only where
there is no change in the open space ratio. The following specific
requirements are associated with each of the various methods:
(1) Homeowners' association. The common open space may be held in
common ownership by a homeowners' association. This method
shall be subject to all of the provisions for homeowners'
associations set forth in Subsection D(2) below, and the
homeowners' association agreement shall be recorded.
(2) Fee simple dedication. The Township may, but shall not be required
to, accept any portion or portions of the common open space,
provided that:
(a) Such land is accessible to the residents of the Township;
(b) There is no cost of acquisition (other than any costs incidental
to the transfer of ownership); and
(c) The Township agrees to and has access to maintain such lands.
(3) Transfer to a private conservation organization. With permission of
the Township, an owner may transfer either the fee simple title,
with appropriate deed restrictions running in favor of the
Township, or a conservation easement to a private nonprofit
organization, among whose purposes is to conserve open space
land and/or natural resources, provided that:
(a) The organization is acceptable to the Township as a bona fide
conservation organization with perpetual existence;
(b) The conveyance contains appropriate provision for proper
reverter or retransfer in the event that the organization
§ 149-921 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-921
1:393
becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its
functions; and
(c) A maintenance agreement acceptable to the Township is
reached.
(4) Dedication of easements. The Township may, but shall not be
required to, accept easements for public use of any portion or
portions of open space land, title to which is to remain in ownership
by condominium or homeowners' association, provided that:
(a) Such land is accessible to the residents of the Township;
(b) There is no cost of acquisition (other than any costs incidental
to the transfer of ownership); and
(c) A maintenance agreement acceptable to the Township is
reached.
(5) Condominium. The common open space may be controlled through
the use of condominium agreements. Such agreements shall be in
conformance with the Uniform Condominium Act of 1980.73 All
such common open space land shall be held as "common element."
E. Maintenance of open space.
(1) In the event that the organization established to own and maintain
common open space, or any successor organization, shall at any
time fail to maintain the common open space in reasonable order
and condition in accordance with the development plan, the
Township may serve written notice upon such organization, or upon
the residents and owners of the development, setting forth the
manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the
common open space in reasonable condition, and said notice shall
include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured
within 30 days thereof, and shall state the date and place of a
hearing thereon which shall be held within 14 days of the notice. At
such hearing the Township may modify the terms of the original
notice as to the deficiencies and may give an extension of time
within which they shall be corrected. If the deficiencies set forth in
the original notice or in the modifications thereof shall not be
corrected within said 30 days or any extension thereof, the
Township, in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties
within the development and to prevent the common open space
from becoming a public nuisance, may, in its discretion, enter upon
said common open space and maintain the same for a period of one
year. Said entry and maintenance shall not constitute a taking of
said common open space, and shall not vest in the public any rights
to use the common open space except when the same is voluntarily
dedicated to the public by the residents and owners and such
73.Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 149-921 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-921
1:394
dedication is acceptable to the Township. Before the expiration of
said year, the Township shall, upon its initiative or upon the request
of the organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance of
the common open space, call a public hearing upon notice to such
organization, or to the residents and owners of the development,
to be held by the Township, at which hearing such organization
or the residents and owners of the development shall show cause
why such maintenance by the Township shall not, at the election of
the Township, continue for a succeeding year. If the Township shall
determine that such organization is ready and able to maintain
said common open space in reasonable condition, the Township
shall cease to maintain said common open space at the end of
said year. If the Township shall determine such organization is
not ready and able to maintain said common open space in a
reasonable condition, the Township may, in its discretion, continue
to maintain said common open space during the next succeeding
year and, subject to a similar hearing and determination, in each
year thereafter. The decision of the Township in any case shall
constitute a final administrative decision subject to judicial review.
(2) The cost of such maintenance and enforcement proceedings by the
Township shall be assessed ratably against the properties within
the development that have a right of enjoyment of the common
open space and shall become a lien on said properties. Said
assessments or charges shall be subordinate in lien to the lien of
any prior mortgage or mortgages on the property which is subject
to such assessments or charges. The Township, at the time of
entering upon such said common open space for the purpose of
maintenance, shall file notice of such lien, in the office of the
Prothonotary of Chester County, upon the properties affected by
such lien within the development.
(3) Included in any terms of ownership shall be protection of the open
space against development in perpetuity by means of a
conservation easement prohibiting development. The required
easement shall be conveyed either to the Township directly (in
which case the development's property owners shall be named as
third-party beneficiary) or to a conservation organization
acceptable to the Board (in which case the Township and property
owners of the development shall be named as third-party
beneficiaries).
F. Recreation fees. [Added 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(1) Purposes. To provide adequate open spaces, recreational lands and
recreational facilities to serve new inhabitants/occupants of new
developments, for both active and passive recreation. To recognize
and work to carry out the parks, recreation and open space
recommendations of the Growth Management Plan, which are
hereby adopted as the official Recreation Plan of Westtown
Township.
§ 149-921 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-921
1:395
(2) If there is mutual agreement between an applicant and the Board of
Supervisors, or if the applicant cannot feasibly provide common
open space that would meet all of the requirements, of this
§ 149-921, then recreation fees shall be required in place of
dedicating common open space. However, fees shall not be
required in place of common open space if a subdivision or land
development would involve 10 or more acres of land.
(3) Applicability. This subsection shall apply to any subdivision or land
development for which a preliminary plan or a combined
preliminary/final plan is submitted after the enactment date of this
amendment.
(a) This § 149-921F shall not apply to plans that the Board of
Supervisors determines only involve adjustments or
corrections to an approved preliminary plan or a preliminary
plan that was actively before the Township for consideration as
of the date of the adoption of this subsection, provided the
adjustments do not increase the number of proposed dwelling
units or involve a new principal nonresidential building.
(4) Limitations on use of fees.
(a) Any fees collected under this subsection shall be placed within
an interest-bearing account and shall be accounted for
separately from other Township funds.
(b) To make sure that the lands and facilities are accessible to the
inhabitants of the developments that paid fees towards their
cost, such fees should only be used within a five-mile radius of
the boundaries of the subdivision or land development that
paid the fees, unless the fees are used within a recreation area
open to the public that the Township intends to serve the entire
Township.
(c) Such fees shall only be used for the following: acquisition of
public open space and related debt payments, development of
public recreational facilities, landscaping of public open space
and closely related engineering and design work.
(d) Unless the Township identifies fees for a different set of
facilities or recreation area, then the fees shall be used for the
further development of Oakbourne Park, which may include
the adjacent Cope Tract, on South Concord Road, as a
generally centrally located recreation area providing programs
and facilities for all inhabitants of the entire Township.
(5) The fee requirements of this subsection shall be based upon the
number of new dwelling units that would be allowed on the lots of a
subdivision or land development after approval. No fee or land
requirement shall be required for agricultural, livestock or poultry
buildings.
§ 149-921 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-921
1:396
§ 149-922. Buffers.
(6) Fees. If the Board of Supervisors determines that a proposed
subdivision or land development is required to pay fees-in-lieu of
dedicating open space, this fee shall be as established by the
Township Fee Schedule, which may be updated by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors. Until such time as a different fee may be
established or revised by resolution, a fee of $1,100 shall apply per
dwelling unit.
(7) Timing of residential fees. Fees required by this subsection for all
of the dwelling units shall be paid prior to the recording of the final
plan, except as follows:
(a) If the required fee would be greater than $2,000, and the
applicant and the Township mutually agree to provisions in a
binding development agreement to require the payment of all
applicable recreation fees prior to the issuance of any building
permits within each clearly defined phase or subphase of the
development, then fees are not required to be paid prior to
recording of the final plan but may instead be paid within the
requirements of that development agreement.
(b) If the applicant agrees to pay such fees in installments, then all
such fees shall not be considered to be paid for the purposes o
any applicable time limitations for utilization under the state
Municipalities Planning Code74 until all such fees are paid in
full, including all installments and phases.
A. The buffer shall be a landscaped area free of structures. No driveway or
street shall be permitted in the buffer except at points of ingress or
egress. Parking shall be permitted only when specifically authorized by
Chapter 170, Zoning.
B. All buffers shall include a completely planted visual barrier or
landscape screen. Such visual barrier shall be fully attainable within a
three-year period.
(1) Existing tree masses shall be retained wherever possible and, at
the Township's discretion, cleared of any undesirable flora (vines,
etc.) and debris which would hinder tree and shrub growth.
(2) Where the existing tree masses do not fully screen the area or
where there are no existing tree masses, plantings shall be added
to complete the visual barrier within the prescribed time period.
(3) The landscape screen shall be composed of both high-level and lowlevel
plantings.
74.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 149-921 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-922
1:397
§ 149-923. Community assets.
Consideration will be shown for all natural features, such as large trees,
watercourses, steep slopes, historic areas and structures, and similar
community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value
to the remainder of the developments. Trees shall be preserved wherever
possible.
§ 149-924. Existing trees.
(a) The high-level screen shall consist of a combination of
evergreen trees (initially not less than eight feet in height) and
deciduous trees (initially with caliper of not less than 2 1/2
inches measured one foot from ground level). Trees shall be
planted in staggered rows and centered no more than 18 feet
apart.
(b) The low-level screen shall consist of evergreen shrubs (initially
not less than three feet in height). Shrubs shall be spaced in
staggered rows and centered no more than five feet apart.
C. Plantings shall be resistant to disease and insect infestation and known
as "long-lived."
D. The area of the buffer not covered by the planting screen shall be
planted with grass seed, sod or ground cover, and shall be maintained
and kept clean of all debris and rubbish.
E. The applicant shall guarantee required plantings in the buffer for 18
months from the date of dedication or closeout of the escrow accounts.
F. The applicant shall post a maintenance bond for 18 months in the
amount of 15% of the actual cost of the installed plantings.
G. Care and maintenance of the buffer including plantings shall be the sole
responsibility of the property owner.
A. Neither portions of tree masses nor specimen trees shall be cleared
unless absolutely necessary. Applicants shall make all reasonable
efforts to harmonize their plans in order to preserve these existing
trees.
B. When development of a proposed subdivision and/or land development
necessitates the clearing of trees or portions of tree masses, applicants
shall be guided by the following criteria in selecting trees and
ornamentals for retention or clearing:
(1) Aesthetic values (autumn coloration, type of flowers and fruit, bark
and crown characteristics, amount of dieback present).
(2) Susceptibility of tree to insect and disease attack and to air
pollution.
§ 149-922 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-924
1:398
(3) Species longevity.
(4) Wind firmness and characteristic of soil to hold trees.
(5) Wildlife values (e.g., oak, hickory, pine, walnut, and dogwood have
high food value).
(6) Comfort to surroundings (e.g., hardwoods reduce summer
temperatures more effectively than pines or cedars).
(7) Existence of disease, rot or other damage to the tree.
(8) Protection of buildings (e.g., dead or large limbs hanging over
buildings shall be removed).
(9) The size of the tree at maturity.
C. Applicants shall exercise care to protect trees which remain from
damage during construction. The following procedures shall be
required for the protection of the remaining trees and shall be noted on
the plan. All remedial work shall be performed by qualified personnel.
(1) Where existing ground levels are changed, drainage tile will be
placed at the old soil level and open into a well built around the
base of the tree. Such well may be left open or can be filled with
coarse stones or gravel. Tiles may be installed in a radiating
pattern or laid in parallel lines.
(2) Those trees which have been delineated on the plan and are within
25 feet of a proposed building excavation or other locations
deemed appropriate by the Township Engineer shall be protected
by installing and maintaining a fence at the drip line.
(3) No boards or other material shall be nailed to trees during
construction.
(4) Heavy equipment operators shall avoid damaging existing tree
trunks and roots. Feeder roots shall not be cut closer than 25 feet
from tree trunks.
(5) Tree trunks and exposed roots damaged during construction shall
be protected from further damage and treated immediately. Tree
limbs damaged shall be properly pruned and treated immediately.
(6) The operation of heavy equipment over root systems of such trees
shall be minimized in order to prevent soil compaction.
(7) Damaged trees shall be fertilized to aid in their recovery.
(8) Construction debris shall not be disposed of near or around the
bases of such trees.
D. A tree protection management plan must be submitted at the time of
preliminary plan application if there are 10 or more viable trees
§ 149-924 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-924
1:399
proposed to be cut or removed from a property. Tree protection
management plan shall contain the following information on a plot plan:
[Added 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(1) Applicant's name, street address, telephone number.
(2) Lot owner's name, street address, telephone number.
(3) Lot owner's consent to the application.
(4) Unified parcel index number.
(5) Location of all existing or proposed buildings, driveways, septic
fields, easements, underground utility lines and other
improvements.
(6) Existing and proposed rights-of-way.
(7) Existing topography within 20 feet of the proposed disturbed area
and proposed grading, if any.
(8) Location of existing natural features, including wooded areas,
watercourses, wetlands and floodplains.
(9) The limits of tree protection zone, according to the following
distances from proposed improvements:
(a) House or building: 12 feet.
(b) Pavement (parking lot, driveway, sidewalk): five feet.
(c) Septic fields, underground utilities, the base of berm grading
of stormwater basins, pools, sheds, picnic shelters and other
improvements: 10 feet.
(d) Streets: 10 feet beyond right-of-way.
(10) Each tree, six inches or greater, to be removed or transplanted
shall be clearly marked.
(11) A chart tabulating the diameter inches being removed, the
required diameter inches to be replaced and the equivalent number
of compensatory trees.
(12) Compensatory planting.
(a) In the event that preservation of existing trees within the tree
protection zone is impossible, and/or relocation of
improvements impractical, then compensatory planting shall
be required for each viable tree within the tree protection zone
and each specimen tree anywhere on the site.
(b) Compensatory trees shall be provided in the following ratios,
based on the sum total of the diameter inches of trees being
removed. The standards are applicable to both deciduous and
§ 149-924 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-924
1:400
evergreen trees. Compensation is not required for shrubs,
unless otherwise required by the Board of Supervisors.
[1] For viable nonspecimen: one inch of new tree caliper shall
be provided for every four inches of existing tree diameter
cut or removed. For example, if a single-trunked, twentyinch
diameter oak is removed, five diameter inches shall
be replanted.
[2] For viable specimen: one inch of new tree diameter for
every one inch of existing tree diameter cut or removed.
Where it has been determined by the Zoning Officer that a
specimen tree has been or is proposed to be cut or
removed, the person responsible shall be fined no more
than $1,000.
[3] For existing street trees within the right-of-way, one tree,
with a caliper of 3 1/2 inches shall be replanted as a
canopy tree in accordance with § 149-925I(6).
(c) A chart tabulating the diameter inches being removed, the
diameter inches to be replaced and the resultant number of
compensatory trees shall be provided on the tree protection
management plan. The number of compensatory trees should
be calculated from the total diameter inches to be replaced,
divided by 3 1/2, rounded up to the next whole number.
(d) Compensatory trees shall be 3 1/2 inches in caliper and
planted in accordance with the standards contained within
§ 149-925. Evergreen trees may be substituted at a ratio of two
evergreens to one deciduous tree. Alternative types of
compensatory planting may be permitted, when approved by
the Board of Supervisors.
(e) Locations of compensatory trees must clearly be labeled on the
landscape plan. They may be placed anywhere on the site.
Compensatory trees are in addition to other required trees.
(f) Constraints incident to the land.
[1] In the event that the applicant establishes to the
satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that constraints
incident to the land itself (including, without limitation,
extreme topography, unsuitable soils, rock outcrops and
existing dense canopy) render it impractical to locate on
the lot the required number of compensatory trees, then,
at the election of the Board of Supervisors, the applicant
shall:
[a] Install a portion of the required compensatory trees
on other public lands within the Township.
§ 149-924 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-924
1:401
§ 149-925. Landscaping requirements and standards.
[b] Contribute to the Township the estimated cost of those
trees which cannot practically be installed on the
property for later installation of trees on public lands.
[c] Install fewer, larger or more valuable compensatory
trees on the lot with an aggregate cost as installed and
guaranteed not less than the estimated aggregate cost
of the required number of compensatory trees.
[2] Whichever alternative is elected by the Board shall serve
as the basis for calculating the required financial security
in conformance with § 149-403 of this chapter.
A. The requirements and standards prescribed herein shall be considered
minimum requirements and standards for new planting materials,
which shall apply to all nonresidential subdivisions and land
developments, and to all residential subdivisions and developments
except those involving three or fewer single-family detached dwelling
lots where no new streets are proposed and to a mobile home park
developed in conformance with § 149-928 of this chapter.
B. A reduction in the number of trees or shrubs actually planted may be
authorized by the Board of Supervisors and/or Planning Commission
only after it can be demonstrated that:
(1) Planting in the quantities normally prescribed would be injurious to
existing significant tree masses or individual specimen plantings;
and
(2) Existing tree masses or individual specimen plantings have
survived all construction activities and are reasonably assured of
continued maintenance and survival.
C. Trees and shrubs shall be of nursery-grown stock of noncolumnar
varieties, and shall be insect, pest and disease resistant.
D. In the design of a landscape plan, plantings shall be provided in the
varieties, quantities and site location necessary to:
(1) Provide seasonal color variety.
(2) Reduce glare and reflection, and to buffer noise and objectionable
views.
(3) Moderate ground surface, building and stream water
temperatures.
(4) Provide moisture retention, soil stabilization, wind breaks and air
purification.
(5) Complement existing landscaping on adjoining properties.
§ 149-924 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-925
1:402
E. Planting varieties shall be selected with due consideration of their
function; local growing habits; rooting, branching and leafing
characteristics; and climate, moisture, soil and nutrient requirements.
F. Plantings shall not be installed where they will:
(1) Block, impede or interfere with the construction, maintenance or
operation of roadways, drainage facilities, sanitary sewers or other
above- or below-ground utilities.
(2) Diminish sight distance along roadways.
(3) Cast dense winter shadow on roadways or public sidewalks (in the
case of evergreen plantings).
G. Minimum plant quantities required. All portions of a property not
utilized by building or paved surfaces shall be landscaped utilizing
combinations of trees, shrubbery, lawns, fencing, ground cover, rock
formations, contours and existing foliage in the quantities, sizes and
locations specified below:
(1) Lot or perimeter yard requirements. Each yard shall be landscaped
as follows:
Landscaping Per 100 Linear Feet
Canopy
Trees
Mature
Height
Over 30
Feet
Ornamental
Flowering
Trees Shrubs
Single-family detached dwelling
Street frontage 1.5 0.5
All other
property lines
0.5 0.5
All other dwellings
Street
frontage(s)
1.0 0.5 4.0
All other
property line
0.5 0.5 2.0
Nonresidential
Street
frontage(s)
2.0 1.5 6.0
All other
property lines
1.0 1.0 3.0
(2) Parking area requirements.
§ 149-925 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-925
1:403
(a) Each planter island which is 20 feet or less in length shall
contain one tree and 10 shrubs.
(b) Each planter island which is more than 20 feet in length shall
contain two trees and 20 shrubs.
(3) Stormwater retention/detention basins.
(a) Deciduous or evergreen trees at the rate of one tree per 2,000
square feet of basin area; and
(b) Shrubs, hedges or yews at the rate of one plant per 200 square
feet of basin area.
H. Minimum planting sizes.
(1) Deciduous trees: 3 1/2 inch caliper.
(2) Evergreen trees: eight feet in height.
(3) Shrubs, hedges, yews: two feet in height.
I. General landscape provisions.
(1) All landscape plans shall be prepared and sealed by a landscape
architect registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) A two-year maintenance and replacement guaranty shall be
provided to the Township by the landscape contractor. All plantings
which do not survive after the expiration of the maintenance
guaranty shall be replaced by the owner.
(3) Individual trees and plantings may be clustered together.
(4) Trees and other plantings within stormwater basin areas shall be
installed to stabilize steep embankments and to provide visual
screening of the basin, but shall not be installed in a manner which
will block or impede the flow of water from the basin.
(5) Shrubs and trees shall not be placed closer than 10 feet from any
side or rear property line or five feet from the street line (right-ofway).
(6) Unless specifically required otherwise by the Township, or where it
is impractical because of the location of existing trees, canopy trees
required by this § 149-925 along the street frontage shall be
planted with the trunk between five feet and 15 feet from the street
right-of-way. These trees shall be intended to provide a canopy over
the edges of streets. The Board of Supervisors may approve
alternative locations for these trees, such as within a street rightof-
way or less than five feet from the right-of-way. The species of
these trees shall be subject to approval by the Township. [Added
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
§ 149-925 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-926
1:404
§ 149-926. Disposal of debris.
No on-site burying or burning of construction debris shall be permitted
except under conditions specifically approved by the Township.
§ 149-927. Sanitary sewage disposal and treatment facilities.
A. The applicant shall provide sanitary sewage disposal facilities
consistent with the existing physical, geographical and geological
conditions and in conformance with all applicable Township, state,
county and federal ordinances and/or regulations.
B. If the subdivision or land development is in an area served by a public
system the applicant shall be required to connect to the system if
capacity is available.
C. Where the Westtown Township Act 53775 states that the area to be
subdivided or developed shall be served in a reasonable time by a
collection system, capped sewers will be installed. The sewer lines shall
be suitably capped at the limits of the subdivision, and the laterals shall
be capped at the street right-of-way line. When capped sewers are
provided, on-site disposal facilities shall also be provided.
D. The applicant shall comply with all requirements of Westtown
Township, the Chester County Health Department and the Pennsylvania
DEP and shall so certify prior to final plan approval.
E. Sewer design criteria.
(1) Construction drawings. All drawings shall be submitted on
eighteen-inch-by-twenty-four-inch or twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-sixinch
sheets with a scale of one inch equals 50 feet horizontal and
one inch equals five feet vertical unless otherwise specified by
Westtown Township.
(a) All elevations shall be based on NGVD datum with bench mark
noted and described and shall be tied into any bench marks
established by Westtown Township.
(b) Drawings shall contain a note that all construction of sanitary
sewers shall be in accordance with the standards and
specifications adopted by Westtown Township.
(c) Drawings shall contain the name of the design engineer, the
applicant and the development. All drawings will be signed and
sealed by a professional engineer registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(d) If required by the Township, an index map at the scale of one
inch equals 400 feet (or as specified by Westtown Township)
shall be included showing sewer sizes, manhole numbers,
75.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 149-926 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-927
1:405
streets and approximate property lines. Manhole numbers
shall conform to the Township numbering system.
(e) Plan and profile sheets.
[1] The following information shall be shown on the plan view
of each plan and profile sheet:
[a] Location of each existing building with elevation of
any basement. If existing, the invert elevation of any
vent trap will be shown.
[b] Manhole numbers corresponding to those on index
map (plan view and profile view).
[c] Location of proposed laterals.
[d] Location and size of all existing and proposed
underground utilities including Act 187 information
and file number. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-5]
[e] All easements shown with width, distances and
courses as necessary.
[f] Each set of plans will contain a sheet showing
standard construction details. These may be from the
standard Township detail sheet which may be included
in the plan set. In addition, a detail of bedding of pipe
will be put on one of the plan and profile sheets.
[g] All lots without basement service to be noted clearly
on plan view and title plan.
[2] The following information shall be shown on the profile
view of each plan and profile sheet:
[a] Top elevations of proposed manholes (Profile view).
[b] Accurate existing and proposed ground surface
elevations.
[c] Proposed invert elevations of manhole.
[d] Manhole numbers corresponding to those on Index
Map.
[e] Distance between manholes from center line to
centerline of manhole.
[f] Grade of proposed sewer.
[g] Size of proposed sewer with type and class of pipe
noted.
§ 149-927 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-927
1:406
[h] Location of proposed laterals.
[i] Location, size and elevation of all existing and
proposed underground utilities.
(2) The following information will be submitted as a supplement to the
construction drawings and planning modules:
(a) Number of persons or units to be served initially.
(b) Number of persons or units to be served in the future.
(c) Number of acres to be served initially.
(d) Number of acres to be served in the future.
(e) Initial and future sanitary sewer flows if the development is
other than residential.
(f) Design assumptions and source material.
(3) As-built drawings. Prior to acceptance of the work, copies of asbuilt
drawings shall be submitted by the applicant. As-built
drawings will be copies of the approved construction drawings.
Existing design numbers (top and invert elevations, pipe lengths
and slopes) shall be crossed out with one line so that the original
numbers can still be determined. As-built numbers will be indicated
below the crossed-out numbers. A statement that the drawings are
as-built shall also be submitted. In addition to other information,
plans will show locations and depths of all lateral stubs. Locations
shall provide a minimum of three dimensions and depth shall be
from a permanent object such as curbing, etc. All easements shall
be shown and shall be fully described. Property lines shall be
located accurately by scale with respect to the sewer.
(4) Design criteria. All design shall be in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection criteria as well as
additional criteria from other agencies having jurisdiction. The
following criteria are not intended to be all-inclusive. Criteria will
apply to public or private sewers. Private sewers will be
constructed and inspected to municipal standards.
(a) Service. Sewers will be of a depth that will provide service to
all basements. (All lots that cannot have basement service
must be noted on the plans.) Design engineers shall note the
required first-floor elevations of proposed buildings in the lowlying
areas where necessary to ensure service. Any basements
that are not served must be approved by the Township
Engineer. Land adjacent to off-site sewers that are to be
constructed by the developer will be investigated for possible
future connections to prevent future road openings. The
municipality may require installation of wyes and lateral stubs
as appropriate.
§ 149-927 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-927
1:407
(b) Laterals. Minimum diameter from the lateral/main connection
to the cleanout/trap assembly shall be six inches. Where a
larger lateral is required it will be noted on the plans.
Minimum grade on a lateral will be 1/4 inch per foot unless
otherwise approved by the Township Engineer. Maximum
length of a lateral will be 150 feet unless approved otherwise
by the Township Engineer. Cleanouts will be installed at fiftyfoot
intervals. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
(c) Manholes. Maximum manhole spacing will be 350 feet. In
special cases manholes may be spaced 400 feet apart with
approval of the Township Engineer. Manholes will not be
located in or near the gutterline of the road where they will be
exposed to surface flooding. All manholes will have a drop of
0.2 feet between the inlet and outlet built-in. Manhole cones
will be a minimum of three feet. Shorter cones and slab top
manholes may be used only with permission of the Township
Engineer. Watertight lids will be used and noted on the plans
when the manhole is within a one-hundred-year floodplain or
may become submerged. Manholes will be provided at all
changes in grade, size or alignment. In junction manholes
pipes entering and leaving shall be oriented so that the flow
angle is more than 90°.
(d) Sewer design.
[1] Minimum sewer size will be eight inches in diameter with
a minimum grade of 1/2% for eight-inch sewer. Sewer runs
to terminal manholes shall have a minimum grade of 1%.
[2] Minimum cover over the top of the sewer shall be 4 1/2
feet unless special construction precautions such as cast
iron pipe or concrete encasement are specified and
approved.
[3] When sewers are designed with a grade in excess of 20%,
steep slope anchors will be installed in accordance
Pennsylvania DEP rules and regulations. [Amended
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
[4] Sewer easements outside of public rights-of-way shall have
a minimum permanent width of 20 feet and a construction
width of 30 feet.
[5] When a sewer crosses a stream or ditch, the design shall
be in accordance with Pennsylvania DEP rules and
regulations.
[6] Sewers shall be located a minimum of 15 feet horizontally
from any obstruction such as a building. Sewers must be a
minimum of 10 feet from a water main or 18 inches
(measured from top of sewer to bottom of water main)
§ 149-927 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-927
1:408
§ 149-928. Mobile home park regulations.
from same. When a sanitary sewer line crosses above or
under any other pipeline with a vertical separation of less
than 18 inches, the sanitary line will be provided with
concrete encasement that extends 10 feet on either side
of the pipe being crossed. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-5]
[7] When connecting to an existing manhole which contains
an existing pipe of larger diameter, the designer will match
elevations of the tops of both pipes.
[8] Depths of sewers along a stream shall be adequate to
serve the other side of the stream.
(5) Erosion and sedimentation control plans will be submitted
whenever sewers are being constructed through land not covered
by the overall erosion and sedimentation plan.
(6) Pump station and/or meter pit plans and specifications will be
complete and detailed and must be reviewed and approved by the
Township Engineer. Shop drawings shall be submitted prior to
construction.
(7) All permit forms must be filled out by the applicant and will be
submitted to Pennsylvania DEP by Westtown Township.
(8) Plan reviews, inspections during construction, and final inspections
will be by the Township Engineer.
F. All improvements installed shall be constructed in accordance with the
design standards and specifications adopted by Westtown Township. If
there are no applicable Township, county or state regulations, the
Township may authorize that specifications be prepared by a registered
professional engineer.
G. If a private or community sewage disposal system (other than individual
on-lot) is proposed, the Township shall review and approve the plans
and inspect the construction.
A. Landscaping.
(1) Any portion of a site which is not used for buildings, structures,
loading and parking spaces and aisles, sidewalks or other
impervious surfaces shall be left in its natural state or planted and
maintained with all-season ground cover approved by the Board of
Supervisors. A replacement program for nonsurviving plantings
shall be established.
(2) Existing trees shall be preserved wherever possible. The protection
of trees six inches or more in caliper shall be a factor in
§ 149-927 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-928
1:409
determining the location of buildings, structures, roads and other
improvements.
(3) A master landscaping plan shall be prepared by a registered
landscape architect and approved by the Board of Supervisors. The
landscape plan shall depict all proposed plantings as required
within buffer areas in the form of a buffer planting area, and in
other landscaped areas which relate to, complement, screen or
accentuate buildings, roads, parking areas, sidewalks, walkways,
sitting areas, service or maintenance structures, courtyards and
other site features.
(4) Design criteria for landscape planting plans.
(a) Planting shall be installed and maintained in the buffer areas to
form a continuous visual buffer. In addition to groundcover and
evergreen shrubs, the buffer planting strip shall be comprised
of evergreen trees which are a minimum of eight feet in height
at the time of planting and shall be spaced in two alternating
rows on ten-foot centers. The combined evergreen shrub and
tree plantings shall constitute a continuous visual screen at the
time of occupancy of any buildings and/or at the time of
initiation of any use. In the event such plantings do not provide
a continuous visual buffer, the plantings shall be placed upon a
berm at the height from three to five feet to increase their
effectiveness.
(b) The outer perimeter of all parking areas shall be screened.
Effective screens may be accomplished through the use of
plant materials, fencing or walls and/or mounding through the
use of earthen berms.
(c) Plantings shall be provided in association with each mobile
home in accordance with the following criteria: At least two
minimum 3 1/2 inch caliper specimen deciduous trees and one
minimum eight-foot height specimen evergreen tree shall be
planted for every mobile home. These specimen trees shall be
clustered or grouped to provide a pleasing, natural effect.
Existing trees of comparable size which have survived all
construction activities and are reasonably assured of continued
maintenance and survival may be utilized to satisfy this
requirement.
(d) Other plantings, including trees, shrubs and groundcover, shall
be provided along walkways, in courtyards, around sitting
areas, at the entrance to the site and in other highly visible
locations, especially on the outer side of any internal access
roads which are visible from a public street which may adjoin
the tract, at the entrance to buildings and around structures
used for service, storage or maintenance purposes.
§ 149-928 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-928
1:410
(e) Shrubs and trees shall not be placed closer than 10 feet from
any property line or public right-of-way.
(f) The location, type, size, height and other characteristics of
landscaping shall be subject to review by the Planning
Commission and approval of the Board of Supervisors.
(5) Standards for the quality and maintenance of plant material.
(a) Planting varieties shall be selected with due consideration of
their function; local growing habits; rooting, branching and
leafing characteristics; and climate, moisture, soil and nutrient
requirements.
(b) Trees and shrubs shall be of nursery-grown stock and shall be
insect, pest and disease resistant.
(c) A two-year maintenance and replacement guaranty shall be
provided by the landscape contractor. All plantings which do
not survive after the expiration of the maintenance guaranty
shall be replaced by the owner.
B. Park road system.
(1) Regardless of whether dedicated to the Township or not, all roads
in a mobile home park shall be developed in conformance with
§§ 149-901 through 149-910 of this chapter.
(a) No right-of-way in excess of cartway width shall be required
(unless such road is dedicated to the Township).
(b) Roads providing access to no more than 10 mobile homes may
be developed with cartway widths of 20 feet.
(c) Roads providing access to more than 10 mobile homes shall be
developed with cartway widths of 24 feet.
(2) Grades, horizontal curves, vertical curves, intersections and sight
distances of all roads shall conform to the standards for public
streets in this chapter, regardless of whether such roads are
dedicated to the Township.
C. Curbs. Upright cement concrete curbs, as required by § 149-911 of this
chapter, shall be provided on all park roads providing access to more
than 10 mobile homes.
D. Sidewalks and crosswalks.
(1) The Board of Supervisors may require sidewalks and/or crosswalks
to be installed to facilitate pedestrian circulation.
(2) Any sidewalk or crosswalk required shall be developed in
conformance with the standards of § 149-916 of this chapter.
§ 149-928 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-928
1:411
E. Off-street parking.
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided in conformity with Article XVII
of Chapter 170, Zoning, of 1991.
(2) On-street parking shall be prohibited on internal roads, and it shall
be the duty of the owner of the park to enforce this provision.
(3) Two parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile home.
F. Utilities.
(1) All utilities shall be installed and maintained in accordance with
utility company specifications regulating such systems and shall be
underground.
(2) Centralized water system service and sanitary sewer system
service shall be provided for each mobile home.
(3) Fire hydrants shall be provided to meet the specifications of the
Insurance Services Office of Pennsylvania (or its successors) and in
every case in sufficient numbers so every mobile home and
structure shall be within 600 feet of a hydrant (measured by way of
accessible streets).
(4) Stormwater and runoff control facilities shall be developed in
conformity with the requirements of Chapter 80, Erosion, Sediment
Control and Grading.
G. Fuel supply and storage.
(1) Liquefied petroleum gas systems. The design, installation,
construction and maintenance of containers and pertinent
equipment for the storage and handling of liquefied petroleum
gases shall conform to the provisions of the National Fire Code,
NFPA 58, latest revision.
(2) Fuel oil supply systems.
(a) All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service
buildings and other structures shall be installed and
maintained in conformity with Chapter 57, Building
Construction, Article II, Building Code.
(b) Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be
protected against physical damage and screened from view on
all sides.
H. Mobile home pad and skirts.
(1) Every mobile home shall be placed on a reinforced concrete pad at
least six inches thick, with proper subgrade, with at least six tiedowns,
provided either:
§ 149-928 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-928
1:412
(a) On the pad (if such pad is equal in length and width to the
mobile home placed thereon); or
(b) Piers 12 inches in diameter by 30 inches deep placed greater
than 10 feet on center under each side of the lateral frame.
(2) Every mobile home placed shall, prior to occupancy or other use,
have a skirt installed which is designed to complement the
appearance of the mobile home. Skirting material shall be
specifically designed for this purpose and adequately vented to
allow for access to all utility connections. In no instance shall the
area beneath the mobile home be used for storage.
I. Maintenance of facilities.
(1) The operator and owner shall be responsible for maintaining all
common facilities, including, but not limited to, roads, parking
areas, sidewalks or pathways, common open spaces, water supply
and sewage disposal systems and service buildings, in a condition
of proper repair, maintenance and cleanliness in compliance with
applicable Township ordinances, codes and regulations.
(2) If, upon inspection by the Zoning Officer or other Township
representative, it is determined that the mobile home park is not in
compliance with this standard of maintenance, the owner and
operator shall be considered to be in violation of this chapter, and
the Zoning Officer shall notify the operator or licensee of the
particulars of any such violation.
J. Refuse disposal.
(1) The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home
park shall be so managed as to prevent health hazards, rodent
harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air
pollution.
(2) All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodentproof
containers, which shall be located not more than 200 feet from any
mobile home space. Containers shall be provided in sufficient
number and capacity to properly store all refuse.
(3) Racks or holders shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such
containers, racks or holders shall be so designed as to prevent
containers from being tipped to minimize spillage and container
deterioration and to facilitate cleaning around them.
(4) All refuse shall be collected at least once weekly. Where suitable
collection service is not available from municipal or private
agencies, the mobile home park operator shall provide this service.
All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or
covered containers.
§ 149-928 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-928
1:413
§ 149-929. Noise protection.
(5) All refuse storage shall be completely screened from view from any
public right-of-way and contiguous residential use. Screening shall
consist of evergreen plantings and an architectural masonry or
wooden screen.
K. Exterior lighting.
(1) An electrical outlet supply of at least 110 volts of sixty-cycle
alternating current shall be provided for each mobile home space.
Such electrical outlets shall be grounded and weatherproof.
(2) Public streets, driveways and walkways shall be lighted at night
with a minimum illumination of at least 0.6 footcandles. Lighting
fixtures shall be so spaced and so equipped as to provide adequate
levels of illumination throughout the park for the safe movement of
vehicles and pedestrians and shall be of a nonglare type.
(3) Each mobile home lot will be provided with a walkway light located
between the mobile home and parking area.
A. Specific intent: to avoid noise conflicts between Route 202 and new
construction.
B. When a use including dwelling units is to be constructed within 300 feet
of the future right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 202, the following
requirements shall be in effect:
(1) A continuous earthen berm shall be constructed between Route
202 and any proposed residential building sites within 300 feet of
the future right-of-way of Route 202. The berm shall be designed to
deflect noise from the highway away from any proposed
residences.
(2) The Board of Supervisors may waive the requirement for this berm
along all or part of the tract's Route 202 frontage in the following
circumstances:
(a) The applicant can prove, by submission of a detailed noise
study prepared by a professional engineer with significant
experience in noise analysis, that the berm is not needed
because the noise levels from the highway would not create a
nuisance for future residents. A noise nuisance shall be defined
as a sound level at any proposed residential building footprint
of greater than 62 dB(A) Ldn in sound level. The sound level
shall be measured at times between 3:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.
(b) Construction of the berm requires the removal of numerous
mature and attractive trees.
(c) The topography of the site makes construction of the berm
unreasonable.
§ 149-928 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-929
1:414
(d) The Board determines that construction of the berm would
interfere with preservation of a significant viewshed.
(e) The berm would interfere with future logical access points to
Route 202.
(3) The design and landscaping of a required earthen berm shall be
reviewed by the Township Engineer and shall be subject to
approval by the Board based upon the following criteria:
(a) The earthen berm shall be covered with an all-season
groundcover and shall be well landscaped with evergreen trees
and shrubs.
(b) The design of the earthen berm should generally follow the
standards of the U.S. Federal Highway Administration.
(c) The berm should generally be located within the required
setback from Route 202.
(d) The berm should average 10 feet in height above the average
ground level and not have side slopes with a horizontal to
vertical ratio of less than 2.5:1. The top of the berm shall not be
less than four feet wide.
(e) The berm should vary in height and alignment, especially if
longer than 300 feet.
(f) No earthen berm shall obstruct the site distance requirements
of this chapter.
(4) The Board may require that existing trees and major vegetation
within 200 feet of the future road right-of-way not be substantially
removed or altered except as is essential for construction in order
to provide buffering and screening from highway noise.
(5) Provisions for ownership and maintenance of the berm must be
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(6) The following definitions shall apply to the noise protection
provisions of this chapter:
A-WEIGHTING SOUND LEVEL — The sound pressure level in
decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting
network. The level so read is designated dB(A).
DECIBEL (dB) — A unit for measuring the sound pressure level
equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the
pressure of sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20
micropascels (20 micronewtons per square meter).
Ldn — Day-night average calculated in accordance with the
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
§ 149-929 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-929
1:415
NOISE — Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which
causes or tends to cause adverse psychological or physiological
effects on humans.
NOISE BARRIER — An earthen berm or a solid wall situated
between a noise source and a point so as to reduce the sound level
at the point.
SOUND LEVEL — The weighted sound pressure level obtained by
the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network,
such as A, B or C, as specified in American National Standards
Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI S1.4-1983, or
the latest revision thereof). If the frequency weighting employed is
not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
SOUNDS — An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement,
particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with
internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that
medium. The description of sound may include any characteristics
of such sound including duration, intensity and frequency.
§ 149-929 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-929
1:416
ARTICLE X
Amendments, Enforcement and Appeals
§ 149-1000. Amendments.
§ 149-1001. Enforcement remedies.76
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the District Justice determining that there has been a violation
further determines that there was a good-faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating the chapter to have believed that there
was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been
only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice. Thereafter, each day that
a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments,
costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of this chapter
shall be paid over to the Township.
§ 149-1002. Appeals.
In any case where the Board of Supervisors shall disapprove a preliminary
plan or a final plan, any person aggrieved may, within 30 days of the action,
A. Power to amend. The regulations set forth in this chapter may be
amended by the Board of Supervisors.
B. Procedure.
(1) Proposed amendments must be submitted to the Planning
Commission for its recommendation.
(2) The written recommendations of the Planning Commission shall be
submitted to the Board of Supervisors. Failure to submit such
reports within 45 days shall constitute approval.
(3) Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Planning Commission
a public hearing pursuant to public notice on the proposed
amendment shall be held, at which time the parties in interest and
citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 149-1000 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-1002
1:417
appeal therefrom by petition to court in accordance with the Municipalities
Planning Code.
§ 149-1002 WESTTOWN CODE § 149-1002
1:418
Chapter 154
TAXATION
§ 149-1002 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-1002
1:419

ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-477]
§ 154-1. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.,
shall have the meanings set forth therein. The following terms shall have
the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the Tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2011.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of Westtown Township.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.101 et seq., and as amended in the future.
TAX — The tax imposed by this enactment.
TAXING AUTHORITY — Township of Westtown.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the collector for reporting the amount
of Tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted, or
reported under this enactment or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TCC — The Tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part
of the taxing authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
THIS ENACTMENT — This Earned Income Tax Ordinance.
§ 154-2. Imposition of tax; rate.
A. General purpose resident tax. The taxing authority hereby imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income
and net profits of individual residents of the taxing authority.
B. General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The taxing authority also
imposes a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned
income and net profits derived by an individual who is not a resident of
the taxing authority from any work, business, profession, or activity, of
any kind engaged in within the boundaries of the taxing authority.
77.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Earned Income Tax, adopted
1-4-1971 by Ord. No. 71-4, as amended, and provided an effective date of 1-1-2011.
§ 154-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-2
1:421
§ 154-3. Exemption.
Although credits and deductions against the tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations, no individuals
are exempt from tax based on age, income, or other factors.
§ 154-4. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 154-5. Employer withholding, remittance, and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit the tax, and file tax
returns in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 154-6. Collection of tax.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the collector.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this enactment is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Combined tax rate applicable to residents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to residents of the taxing authority, including the tax
imposed by the school district and municipality in which the individual
resides, is 1%.
E. Municipal tax rate applicable to nonresidents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to nonresidents working within the taxing authority based on
the municipal nonresident tax rate is 1%.
F. Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this
enactment. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that
are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will
automatically become part of this enactment upon the effective date of
such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this
enactment, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
G. Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations, and with policies and procedures adopted by the TCC or by
the collector. This includes any regulations, policies, and procedures
adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1937.
§ 154-2 WESTTOWN CODE § 154-7
1:422
§ 154-7. Interest, penalties, costs, and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed
by the collector in accordance with authorization by the TCC having
jurisdiction.
§ 154-8. Purpose; effect on prior provisions.
The primary purpose of this enactment is to conform the earned income and
net profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended
and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time frame required
by Act 32. Any prior enactment or part of any prior enactment conflicting
with the provisions of this enactment is rescinded insofar as the conflict
exists. To the extent the same as any enactment in force immediately prior
to adoption of this enactment, the provisions of this enactment are intended
as a continuation of such prior enactment and not as a new enactment. If
this enactment is declared invalid, any prior enactment levying a similar tax
shall remain in full force and effect and shall not be affected in any manner
by adoption of this enactment. The provisions of this enactment shall not
affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall such provisions affect any
suit or prosecution pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty
or to punish an offense under the authority of any enactment in force
prior to adoption of this enactment. Subject to the foregoing provisions of
this section, this enactment shall supersede and repeal on the Effective
Date any enactment levying a tax on earned income or net profits in force
immediately prior to the effective date.78
§ 154-9. through § 154-10. (Reserved)
78.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2011.
§ 154-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-9
1:423

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)79
§ 154-11. through § 154-13. (Reserved)
79.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Fire Hydrant Tax, adopted 11-1-1983 by Ord. No. 83-4, as
amended, was repealed 1-2-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-1.
§ 154-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-11
1:425

ARTICLE III
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 2-2-1987 by Ord. No. 87-1]
§ 154-14. Tax levied; title.
§ 154-15. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise, owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint stock association, business trust or
banking institution which is organized under the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, the United States, or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. A document shall also include a
declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording pursuant
to § 154-19B hereof.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of
its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of
each class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members
of the same family. The business of agriculture shall include the leasing to
members of the same family of property which is directly and principally
A. Pursuant to the authority contained in the Local Tax Enabling Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257,80 a tax for the purpose of providing
revenue for general Township purposes is hereby levied, assessed and
imposed upon the transfer of real property or an interest in real
property within the limits of Westtown Township, regardless of where
the instruments making the transfers are made, executed or delivered
or where the actual settlements on the transfer take place, at the rate of
1% of the amount of the value of said real property or interest therein
as herein defined.
B. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Westtown
Township Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance."
80.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 154-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-15
1:427
used for agricultural purposes. The business of agriculture shall not be
deemed to include:[Amended 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5]
FAMILY FARM PARTNERSHIP — A partnership of which at least 75% of
its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of
the interests in the partnership are continuously owned by members of
the same family. The business of agriculture shall include the leasing to
members of the same family of property which is directly and principally
used for agricultural purposes. The business of agriculture shall not be
deemed to include:[Added 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5]
LIVING TRUST — Any trust, other than a business trust, intended as a
will substitute by the settlor which becomes effective during the lifetime
of the settlor but from which trust distributions cannot be made to any
beneficiaries other than the settlor prior to the death of the settlor.[Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5]
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal decedents of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
ORDINARY TRUST — Any trust, other than a business trust or a living
trust, which takes effect during the lifetime of the settlor and for which
the trustees of the trust take title to property primarily for the purpose
of protecting, managing or conserving it until distribution to the named
beneficiaries of the trust. An ordinary trust does not include a trust that
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
Raising, breeding or training of game animals, game birds, fish, cats,
dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or recreational
activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
§ 154-15 WESTTOWN CODE § 154-15
1:428
has an objective to carry on business and divide gains, nor does it either
expressly or impliedly have any of the following features: the treatment of
beneficiaries as associates, the treatment of the interests in the trust as
personal property, the free transferability of beneficial interests in the trust,
centralized management by the trustee or the beneficiaries, or continuity of
life.[Added 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5]
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment or both,
the term "person" as applied to associations shall include the responsible
members or general partners thereof and, as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
Any lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, including, without limitation, buildings, structures,
fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without
upper or lower boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables
or interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of
land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in
an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
D. Real property.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold.
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
B.
§ 154-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-15
1:429
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity; provided, however, in determining
the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or option to renew
or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge to the lessee is
fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is established.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate; provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio of assessed values
to market values of the taxing district as established by the State Tax
Equalization Board, or a commensurate part of the assessment where
the assessment includes other real estate;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor or a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.81
D.
81.Editor's Note: The former definition of "acquired company," which immediately followed
this definition, was deleted herefrom and reenacted as § 154-20A 8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-5.
§ 154-15 WESTTOWN CODE § 154-16
1:430
§ 154-16. Imposition of tax.
Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document, or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be subject
to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof or for and
in respect of the vellum parchment or paper upon which such document
is written or printed a tax payable to Westtown Township, Chester County,
Pennsylvania, at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented
by such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of such
document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
§ 154-17. Exempt parties.
The United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any of their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from
payment of the tax imposed by this article. The exemption of such
governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a
transaction from liability for the tax.
§ 154-18. Excluded transactions.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall not be imposed upon the following
transactions:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the commonwealth is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school
district or county of a tax-delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties takes shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
§ 154-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-18
1:431
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and between a grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to a tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no-or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the benefit of
his principal there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is
the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee
claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
§ 154-18 WESTTOWN CODE § 154-18
1:432
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee or property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open-space opportunities; or a transfer from such a
conservancy to the United States, the Commonwealth or to any of
their instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions.
[Amended 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5]
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm partnership by a member of the same family, which
family directly owns at least 75% of the interests in the
partnership. [Added 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5]
(21) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company, family farm corporation or family
farm partnership which owns real estate. [Amended 8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-5]
§ 154-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-18
1:433
§ 154-19. Documents relating to associations, corporations and
acquired companies.
§ 154-20. Acquired companies. [Added 8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-5]
(22) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(23) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of
value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document is
not subject to tax under this article.
A. Except as excluded in § 154-18 hereof, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders
or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this
article, corporations and associations are entities separate from their
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders.
B. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present for recording a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of
Deeds of Chester County for the purpose of noting thereon or the
affixation thereto of such documentary stamps or other evidence of the
payment of this tax as required by law. Such declaration shall set forth
the value of the real estate holdings of the acquired company in Chester
County.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change:
(1) Does not affect the continuity of the company; and
(2) Of itself or together with prior changes has the effect of
transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of the total
ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business or agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. A family farm partnership is an acquired company when, because of
voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm
partnership or when, because of transfer of partnership interests or
§ 154-18 WESTTOWN CODE § 154-20
1:434
§ 154-21. Credits against transfer tax.
§ 154-22. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or cost of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, and the sheriff or other officer conducting such sale
shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first moneys paid to him/her in
connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the
entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining
tax.
§ 154-23. Real estate or interest therein partially located in
Township.
Where real estate or an interest in real estate lying partly within the
boundaries of Westtown Township and partly without said boundaries is
transferred, the tax herein imposed shall be calculated upon such portion
because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the
business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm partnership under this article.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him/her within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him/her shall be given to him/her toward the amount of the
tax upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is demised by the grantor,
a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the demise shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 154-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-23
1:435
of the value as shall be represented by the portion of the real estate or
interest therein lying within the boundaries of the Township as determined
by the realty transfer tax statement of value filed with the Recorder of
Deeds or, if no such filing is required, by affidavit of the transferor or as
separately stated in the document of transfer; provided, however, that such
value shall in no event be less than the highest assessed valuation for local
tax purposes placed upon the real estate or the interest in the real estate in
the assessment of the property within the Township.
§ 154-24. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds of
Chester County for recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such
document the true, full and complete value thereof. When the full, complete
and actual consideration for the transfer which is subject to the tax is
not set forth in the document, the person liable for the tax shall,
contemporaneously with the filing of the document, file with the Recorder of
Deeds a realty transfer tax statement of value identical to that promulgated
by the Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or,
in the instance of an acquired company, a realty transfer tax declaration
of acquisition identical to that promulgated by the Department of Revenue
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt from
taxation based on family relationship.
§ 154-25. Recorder of Deeds as agent for Township.
The tax imposed hereby, including any amount payable to the Township
based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania pursuant to § 154-27 hereof, shall be collected by the
Recorder of Deeds of Chester County who shall act as agent for the
Township in the collection of the transfer tax as provided in 16 P.S.
§ 11011-6, as amended. The tax thus collected shall be payable by the
Recorder to the Treasurer of Westtown Township at least monthly or at such
other intervals as the Township and the Recorder of Deeds shall mutually
determine.
§ 154-26. Documentary stamps or other evidence of payment.
The payment of the tax imposed by this article when received by the
Recorder of Deeds shall be evidenced by the affixing of a documentary
stamp or stamps or other evidence of payment as approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Revenue.
§ 154-27. Determination of additional tax due or redetermination.
A. In the event a determination or redetermination of transfer tax due is
made by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue pursuant to § 1111-C
of Act 1986-77, 72 P.S. § 8111-C, such determination or redetermination
shall be deemed to have been also made by the Secretary of Westtown
§ 154-23 WESTTOWN CODE § 154-27
1:436
§ 154-28. Township Secretary as enforcement officer.
The Secretary of Westtown Township is hereby charged with the
enforcement of the provisions of this article and is hereby authorized and
empowered to prescribe, adopt and enforce rules and regulations relating
to the registration and notation of transactions, the collection of transfer
taxes, interest and penalties due hereunder, the prosecution of violations
hereunder and any other matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article; provided, however, that the
regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department
of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., as the same are from time to time
amended, are incorporated into and made a part of this article and shall be
deemed to have been adopted by the Township Secretary.
§ 154-29. Administration; imposition of interest and penalties.
§ 154-30. Violations and penalties.
Township, and there shall be due and owing to the Township as
additional transfer tax the amount determined or redetermined by the
Department to be due the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the
document only when the transfer tax imposed by this article has been
paid.
A. The tax imposed under § 154-14A and all applicable interest and
penalties shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of
December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), as amended, known as "the
Local Tax Enabling Act,"82 provided that if the correct amount of the tax
is not paid by the last date prescribed for timely payment, the
Township, pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971
(72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce
the tax, interest and penalties.
B. Any tax imposed under § 154-14A that is not paid by the date the tax is
due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent
municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53
P.S. § 7101 et seq.), as amended, known as "the Municipal Claims and
Tax Liens Act." The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate
imposed upon delinquent commonwealth taxes as provided in Section
806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as
amended, known as "the Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate
permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
82.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 154-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-30
1:437
§ 154-31. When effective.
This article and the tax herein levied shall be effective five days after
enactment as by law provided and shall remain in effect until amended or
repealed.
(1) Accept or present for recording or cause to be accepted or
presented for recording any document without the full amount of
the tax thereon being duly paid; or
(2) Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate the provisions of
this article or the rules and regulations prescribed, adopted and
promulgated by the Secretary under the provisions of this article.
B. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's
fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this article. No
judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to
seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance
herewith.
§ 154-30 WESTTOWN CODE § 154-31
1:438
ARTICLE IV
Delinquent Tax Collector
[Adopted 1-7-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-1]
§ 154-32. Appointment of delinquent tax collector.
Pursuant to the authority set forth in Act 104 of 2000, amending the Local
Tax Collection Law, the Board of Supervisors of Westtown Township hereby
appoints the elected Tax Collector of Westtown Township as the delinquent
Tax Collector.
§ 154-33. Powers of delinquent tax collector.
The delinquent tax collector shall collect delinquent taxes in accordance
with and shall have the same powers, rights, privileges, duties and
obligations as are set forth in the Public School Code of 1949, 24 P.S.
§ 6-686.
§ 154-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-33
1:439

ARTICLE V
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-6; amended in its entirety
12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-8]
§ 154-34. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Westtown Township
Local Services Tax Ordinance" and shall be referred to herein as the "LST
Ordinance."
§ 154-35. Definitions.
The following terms shall have, for the purpose of this Article V, the
following meanings:
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended (53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended).
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity employing one or
more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis,
including a self-employed person.
HE/SHE, HIS or HIM/HER — Indicates the singular and plural number, as
well as male, female and neutral genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of Westtown Township.
LST — The local services tax in the amount of $52 levied by this article.
LST COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency
designated by the Board of Supervisors of Westtown Township to collect and
administer the local services tax.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended (53 P.S. § 6913, as amended).
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on
or performed within the corporate limits of Westtown Township for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 154-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-35
1:441
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Westtown, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
§ 154-36. Levy of tax.
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed,
commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging in an
occupation with a primary place of employment within the corporate limits
of Westtown Township during the tax year. Each person who exercises
such privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the
tax for that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata basis,
in accordance with the provisions of this section. This tax may be used
solely for the following purposes as the same may be allocated by the
Westtown Township Board of Supervisors from time to time: 1) emergency
services, which shall include emergency medical services, police services
and/or fire services; 2) road construction and/or maintenance; 3) reduction
of property taxes; or 4) property tax relief through implementation of
a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A.
Chapter 85, Subchapter F (relating to homestead property exclusion). The
Township shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from the tax for
emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or
nature heretofore levied by Westtown Township. The tax shall be no more
that $52 on each person for each calendar year, irrespective of the number
of political subdivisions within which a person may be employed.
§ 154-37. Exemptions and refunds.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the Township is less than $12,000 for any calendar
year in which tax is levied is exempt from the payment of the tax for
that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are exempt from
payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a
double, triple or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected
disability declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or
its successor to be a total, one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this Subsection A(2), "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United State Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
§ 154-35 WESTTOWN CODE § 154-37
1:442
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the LST shall annually
file an exemption certificate with the Township and with the
person's employer affirming that the person reasonably expects to
receive earned income and net profits from all sources within the
Township of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for which the
exemption certificate is filed. In the event the Township utilizes a
tax collection officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption
certificate to that officer. The exemption certificate shall have
attached to it a copy of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2
forms from the employment within the Township for the year prior
to the fiscal year for which the employee is requesting to be
exempted from the tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate
and until otherwise instructed by the Township or except as
required by Subsection A(2) below, the employer shall not withhold
the tax from the person during the calendar year or the remainder
of the calendar year for which the exemption certificate applies.
Employers shall ensure that the exemption certificate forms are
readily available to employees at all times and shall furnish each
new employee with a form at the time of the hiring.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the Township that the person has received earned
income and net profits from all sources within the Township equal
to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is
otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that calendar year, or
upon an employer's payment to the person of earned income within
the Township in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year, an employer shall withhold the LST from the person
under Subsection B(3) below.
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2) above, the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2) above, a lump sum equal to the
amount of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the
exemption claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the
per-payroll amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of
tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in
that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this clause is subsequently severed in
that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding
balance of tax due, and the Township may pursue collection under
this act.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2) above, it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
§ 154-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-37
1:443
§ 154-38. Duty of employers to collect.
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from a LST.
C. Refunds. The Township Manager, in consultation with the LST Collector
and DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund
claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption,
which procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the General
Municipal Law relating to refunds of overpayments (see 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 8425) and interest on overpayments (see 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8426).
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The Township Manager or the LST Collector shall
determine eligibility for refunds to exempt persons and provide
refunds.
A. Each employer within Westtown Township, as well as those employers
situated outside Westtown Township but who engage in business within
Westtown Township, is hereby charged with the duty of collecting the
tax from each of his employees engaged by him/her or performing for
him/her within Westtown Township.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the combined rate
of the tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest onehundredth
of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll
period basis for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in
an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For
purposes of this subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate
annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and the Township.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the LST by more than one
political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
§ 154-37 WESTTOWN CODE § 154-38
1:444
§ 154-39. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of
the tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the LST Collector. If
an employer fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the
employer makes collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions
paid by him/her or her to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this
article, the employer shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full
as though the tax had been originally levied against the employer.
§ 154-40. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the LST Collector on or before the 30th day following the
end of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 154-41. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within Westtown Township shall be required to comply with the
article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the LST Collector on
or before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 154-42. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The Township shall provide a taxpayer a
receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the Township if the failure to
withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by the
employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
LST in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the employer if the
employer complies with the provisions of Subsection B of § 154-37 of
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the LST 30 days after the end of
each quarter of a calendar year.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
§ 154-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-42
1:445
§ 154-43. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside Westtown Township but who perform services of any
type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within Westtown
Township do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject themselves
to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under this article
with the same force and effect as though they were residents of Westtown
Township. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation with Westtown
Township and an employee of a nonresidential employer may, for the
purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed person, and in the
event his or her tax is not paid, the Township shall have the option of
proceeding against either the employer or employee for the collection of
this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 154-44. Administration of tax.
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the LST shall be in the following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed.
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision.
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of a dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that
calendar year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment
constitutes prima facie certification of payment to all other political
subdivisions.
A. The LST Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the Westtown
Township Board of Supervisors. It shall be the duty of the LST Collector
to accept and receive payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof
showing the amount received by him/her from each employer or selfemployed
person, together with the date the tax was received.
B. The LST Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to Westtown Township Board of Supervisor's approval, to
prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the examination and correction of any return
made in compliance with this article and any payment alleged or found
to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the LST Collector
shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Chester
County as in other cases provided.
§ 154-42 WESTTOWN CODE § 154-44
1:446
§ 154-45. Suits for collection.
§ 154-46. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails
or refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default
of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30
days. The action to enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted
against any person in charge of the business of any employer who shall have
filed or who refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 154-47. Interpretation.
C. The LST Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and
payroll records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any
return made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the
tax due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the LST
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the LST Collector may sue for
the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together
with interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower
Westtown Township to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the Township under the
Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 154-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-48
1:447
§ 154-48. Effective date.
This article shall become effective January 1, 2008, and all calendar years
thereafter unless repealed or modified by ordinance of Westtown Township.
§ 154-48 WESTTOWN CODE § 154-48
1:448
ARTICLE VI
Rental Status and Occupancy Reporting
[Adopted 11-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-5]
§ 154-49. Purpose.
This article is enacted to provide for the uniform and equitable collection of
earned income taxes levied within Westtown Township.
§ 154-50. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have
the meaning ascribed below:
OWNER — The person(s) in whose name(s) the property on which the rental
unit is located as recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Chester
County, and as reflected on the Tax Duplicate issued by the Office of Tax
Assessment of Chester County.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, trust, estate,
association or other legal entity capable of holding title to real estate.
PROPERTY — A parcel of real estate located in Westtown Township to which
a Chester County, Pennsylvania, tax parcel identification number has been
assigned by the Office of Tax Assessment of Chester County, Pennsylvania.
RENTAL UNIT — Any space used for human occupancy located within a
building used for residential use and occupancy, that is rented for human
occupancy under either a written or oral lease or other rental agreement,
regardless of the term of the rental or lease, but excluding units within a
motel or hotel rented by the day for transient occupancy.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Westtown, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
§ 154-51. Reporting requirement.
It shall be the duty of the owner of every rental unit located within the
Township to prepare and file an annual report with the Township Secretary,
which shall contain the complete name and address of each person 18 years
of age and older who is currently residing or who during the preceding
calendar year resided in each rental unit owned by the person required to
file the report.
§ 154-52. Supplementation of report.
The report required by § 154-51 of this article shall be supplemented within
15 days of the arrival of tenants or lessees not previously reported or of the
departure of lessees or tenants previously reported.
§ 154-53. Filing deadlines.
The report required by § 154-51 of this article shall be filed on a Townshipdesignated
reporting form and shall be filed not later than 60 days following
§ 154-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-53
1:449
the effective date of this article, and annually thereafter within 60 days of
the end of each calendar year.
§ 154-54. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate § 154-51 or 154-53 of this article by failing or
refusing to timely file the required report within 10 days of the due date
thereof shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a
Magistrate Judge having jurisdiction, be subject to a fine for each such
violation of not less than $100 and not more than $600, together with costs
of prosecution, and upon default in the timely payment of the fine and costs,
shall be subject to a period of imprisonment in the Chester County Prison
not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation shall continue following
the initial notice by the Township Secretary to such person that such person
is in violation of this article shall constitute a single and separate offense,
punishable by a separate fine.
§ 154-53 WESTTOWN CODE § 154-54
1:450
Chapter 158
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 54.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 126.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 146.
§ 154-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-54
1:451

ARTICLE I
Obstruction of Public Rights-of-Way
[Adopted 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-2]
§ 158-1. Declaration of threat.
It is hereby declared that obstruction of the public rights-of-way of the
Township by trees and parts thereof falling and encroaching into said rightsof-
way from private property located outside said rights-of-way poses a
substantial and imminent threat to the health, safety and welfare of the
Township, its inhabitants and persons using the public rights-of-way of the
Township.
§ 158-2. Exclusive control by Township.
Under the authority of the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code, 53
P.S. § 65101 et seq., including §§ 66506, 67325, 67326 and 67907 thereof,
the Township shall have exclusive custody and control of those trees or
parts thereof that are located within the area of any Township street rightof-
way and/or Township-owned property and is authorized to plant, remove
and protect such trees.
§ 158-3. Property owner responsibility.
In furtherance of the protection of the Township, its inhabitants and persons
using the public rights-of-way of the Township, any owner of property
located outside said rights-of-way shall be responsible for the immediate
clearing and removal of any tree or parts thereof if the condition of the
tree or parts thereof, through disease or otherwise, unreasonably affects or
interferes with the health, safety or welfare of the public or the right of the
public to the unobstructed use of public roads or property.
§ 158-4. Notice to remove.
A. If within 30 days after the date of notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to remove the trees or parts thereof the property owner has
not complied with that order, the Board of Supervisors or Township
Manager may direct the appropriate Township personnel or authorized
Township contractor to enter the premises and remove the trees or
parts thereof.
B. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the Township
shall have the right, without prior notice to any property owner, to
perform any act/acts necessary to abate clear, present and immediate
threats to the public health, safety or welfare caused by the condition of
trees or parts thereof that are located on private property outside of the
right-of-way of any Township street.
§ 158-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-5
1:453
§ 158-5. Assessment of costs against property owner.
In the event of Township action as described in § 158-4 above, the cost
incurred by the Township pursuant thereto shall be collected by the
Township Treasurer by the assessment of such costs against the responsible
property owner as provided by 53 P.S. § 68302, including the filing of a
municipal lien, if necessary.
§ 158-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township before a District Justice, pay a
fine for each such violation in an amount not less than $100 and not
more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees,
incurred by the Township. No judgment shall be imposed until the date
of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce
the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
§ 158-5 WESTTOWN CODE § 158-6
1:454
Chapter 162
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motorized vehicles — See Ch. 167.
§ 158-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-6
1:455

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 162-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 162-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Township of Westtown.
§ 162-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 162-4. Experimental regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq. (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except
that in this chapter the word "street" may be used interchangeably with
the word "highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word
"highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The ____________________ shall have the following powers to regulate
traffic and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
____________________ and the police in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who drives or parks a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature.
A. The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, designate places upon
and along the streets in the Township where, for a period of not more
§ 162-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-4
1:457
§ 162-5. Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events.
§ 162-6. Authority of police officers.
The police shall have authority to direct traffic on the streets in the
Township, at intersections in public and in other places where the Vehicle
Code or this chapter applies.
than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate those
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in
this chapter. No person shall drive or park a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made
by authority of this section. Any person who violates any provision of
this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty set out in the
law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station police officers at each end of the closed portion, while
construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is
being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
under way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
§ 162-4 WESTTOWN CODE § 162-6
1:458
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 162-7. Speed limits.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in this section is hereby established at the rate of speed
indicated in said schedule. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle at a higher speed than the maximum prescribed for that street or
part of a street.
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Johnny's Way 25 Entire length
Orvis Way [Added 12-2-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-07]
25 Entire length
Shiloh Road [Added 10-6-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-4]
30 Entire length
Stanton Avenue [Added
12-20-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-7]
25 Entire length
§ 162-8. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
the following streets:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 162-9. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
into another one-way street) when facing a steady red signal at any of the
following locations:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on
Red Signal Onto
(Reserved)
§ 162-10. Prohibited turns and through movements at
intersections. [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-2]
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a turn of the
kind designated (left, right, all) at any of the following intersections:
§ 162-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-10
1:459
§ 162-11. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn on any of
the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 162-12. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in this section are hereby
designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other than
in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 162-13. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established along those streets or parts of
streets described in this section, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of
any vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle or to drive on the left side of
the roadway in any no-passing zone described in said schedule:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 162-14. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in this section are hereby
established as through streets; and the driver of any vehicle, upon
approaching any such street at any intersection thereof (except for such
intersections where there are now or shall hereafter be located official
traffic signals), shall come to a full stop or yield the right-of-way, as the case
may be, before entering any such through street:
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At
Intersection
of
(Reserved)
B. Motor vehicles traveling west on East Pleasant Grove Road or east on
West Pleasant Grove Road, upon entering the intersection of S.R. 202,
are prohibited from making either a left turn onto S.R. 202 from either
direction or driving straight through the intersection, thereby
restricting all turning movements to right turns only.
§ 162-10 WESTTOWN CODE § 162-14
1:460
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 162-15. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in this section (in addition to intersections with
the through streets established by this chapter) are hereby established as
stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected in such a position
upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the second-named
street in the direction or directions indicated in said schedule. Every driver
of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street,
in the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall come to a full stop
before entering any such intersection.
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Supplee Way [Added
6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-7]
North/south Jacqueline Drive
Walnut Hill Road [Added
3-15-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-2]
North Cider Knoll Way
§ 162-16. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in this section (in addition to intersections with
the through streets established by this chapter) are hereby established
as yield intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected in such a
position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street in the direction or directions indicated. Every driver of
a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street, in
the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop
the vehicle and then yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection
or approaching on the second-named street so closely as to constitute a
hazard during the time that the driver is moving across or within such
intersection.
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Carolyn Drive [Added
12-20-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-6]
North Carolyn Drive and Carolyn
Drive
§ 162-17. Closing of certain streets to certain vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle, except a passenger
vehicle (but not including any passenger vehicle drawing any trailer or
towing any other vehicle), upon any of the following streets or parts of
streets:
§ 162-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-17
1:461
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 162-18. Vehicle weight limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any commercial vehicle or
other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination, having a gross weight in
excess of that respectively prescribed, upon any of the streets or bridges, or
portions thereof, described in this section, except for the purpose of making
local deliveries on said streets:
Name of Street or Bridge
Max. Gross
Weight
(pounds) Location
(Reserved)
§ 162-17 WESTTOWN CODE § 162-18
1:462
ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 162-19. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 162-20. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in this section, except at the angle designated and only within the
painted stall lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is
now or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be
parked with the front thereof nearest the curb.
Name of Street
Angle Side
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 162-21. Parking prohibited at all times. [Amended 8-5-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-7; 12-15-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-5; 3-7-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-1]
A. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following
streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Edinburgh Drive Both From Green Lane (T432) to a point
approximately 325 feet south along
Edinburgh Drive
Green Lane Both From Route 3 to a point
approximately 800 feet south and
west along Green Lane
Picket Way South and
west
From South Concord Road to the
terminus of Picket Way
Trellis Lane West From Oakbourne Road to Picket Way
B. It shall be unlawful to park or place any unregistered vehicle, dumpster,
construction equipment or material, landscaping equipment or
material, storage facility or similar vehicles and/or equipment on the
streets of the Township without the express authority of the Township
and subject to such limitations and/or conditions, including the
payment of a fee for temporary occupancy of said street, as the
Township may impose. [Amended 4-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-3]
§ 162-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-22
1:463
§ 162-22. Parking prohibited certain hours.
§ 162-23. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon any
of the streets or parts of streets described in this section, between the hours
specified, for longer than the time indicated in said schedule.
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 162-24. Special purpose parking zones.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to allow the same
to remain parked in any special purpose parking zone established in this
section, except as specifically provided for such zone.
Name of Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Location
(Reserved)
A. There shall be no parking on Township roads between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m., except for vehicles bearing official placards issued
by Westtown Township permitting parking on designated streets
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. Such streets shall be
designated by the enactment of an ordinance establishing the roads
that are subject to the exception. [Amended 12-15-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-5]
(1) Vehicles parked on the following Township roads and bearing
official Township placards shall be exempt from the 2:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m. parking prohibition:
Name of Street Side Location
Trellis Lane South From Oakbourne Road to Picket
Way
Picket Way North and
east
From South Concord Road to
terminus of Picket Way
B. No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in this section, during the hours specified in said schedule, on
any day except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 162-22 WESTTOWN CODE § 162-25
1:464
§ 162-25. Handicapped parking. [Added 4-5-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-283]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or allow the same
to remain parked in a parking space anywhere in Westtown Township
designated for handicapped persons if the vehicle that is parked does
not have visibly displayed an official handicapped placard or handicapped
license plate.
§ 162-25.1. Penalties for parking violations. [Added 4-5-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-2; amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1; 4-4-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-3]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code (75 Pa.
C.S.A § 101 et seq.) or except as otherwise specified herein, any person who
violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $35 and costs. The police officer or other person
shall also attach to or place upon every such vehicle a ticket stating that the
vehicle was parked in violation of this article.
83.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 162-25, Penalties for parking
violations.
§ 162-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-25.1
1:465

ARTICLE IV
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 162-26. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of Section 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle
Code and gives authority to the Township to remove and impound vehicles
that are parked overtime on any street in the Township, or in metered and
unmetered parking lots in the Township, in violation of any provision of this
chapter.
§ 162-27. Authority to remove and impound.
The Township shall have authority to remove and impound or to order
the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 162-26 of this article and provided that no such
vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the
provisions of this article.
§ 162-28. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time
by the Board of Supervisors. Every such garage shall submit evidence
to the Board of Supervisors that it is bonded or has acquired liability
insurance in an amount satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors as sufficient
to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to
those vehicles while in the custody of the garagekeeper for the purpose of
towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to the Board
of Supervisors its schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles
under this article, and when the schedule is approved by the Board of
Supervisors, those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage
garage. No different schedule of charges shall be adopted without approval
of the Board of Supervisors, and no different charges shall be demanded of
or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or impounded under
this article by any approved storage garage. The Board of Supervisors shall
delete from its list of approved storage garages any garage that makes any
unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle removed or impounded
under this article.
§ 162-29. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that the vehicle was removed shall
be sent by the Township to the owner of record of the vehicle. The notice
shall designate the place from which the vehicle was removed, the reason
for its removal and impounding and the garage in which it was impounded.
§ 162-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-30
1:467
§ 162-30. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this article
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive and
shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If
payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a District Justice. Payment
of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any
vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision
of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 162-31. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Township shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded
under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the
owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to
the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 162-32. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in
charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 162-30 WESTTOWN CODE § 162-32
1:468
ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 162-33. Declaration of snow and ice emergency. [Amended
1-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-1]
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of
snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named pursuant to this article,
any member of the Board of Supervisors or a Township officer appointed
by the Board of Supervisors, in his or her discretion, may declare a snow
and ice emergency (designated in this article as a "snow emergency").
Information on the existence of a snow emergency may be given by the
Township through radio, newspaper or other available media, and
information on the termination of the emergency may be given by use of the
same media.
§ 162-34. Parking and driving restrictions.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 162-35. Snow emergency routes. [Amended 1-5-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-1]
All streets or parts of streets located within Westtown Township and
maintained by Westtown Township are hereby designated as snow
emergency routes.
§ 162-36. Penalty for violation.
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated pursuant to this
article; or
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
A. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under this
article, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a motor vehicle to
remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency route, that person
shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be
punishable as provided in § 162-25 of this chapter.
B. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under this
article, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow emergency
route without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires or chains,
that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon
conviction, shall be punishable as provided in § 162-37 of this chapter.
§ 162-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-36
1:469

ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 162-37. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or except as herein specified, every person
convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, or any supplement
thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of $25 and costs of prosecution.
§ 162-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-37
1:471
Chapter 167
VEHICLES, MOTORIZED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 113.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 116.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 146.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 162.
§ 167-1. Use on public and private property restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorcycle, minibike,
trail bike, motor bike, snowmobile or similar type motor vehicle on the
sidewalks, footpaths, parks or other property of the township, or upon the
property belonging to a person other than the operator of such vehicle
unless the operation of such vehicle is with the express written permission
of the owner of such property.
§ 167-2. Disturbances prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to operate a motorcycle, minibike, trail bike, motor
bike, snowmobile or other similar type motor vehicle in such a manner or at
such time or times of the day as to cause an unreasonable annoyance and
disturbance of the peace of the township and the citizens thereof.
§ 167-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
§ 167-4. Impoundment of vehicle; redemption; fee.
In the event of a violation of this chapter, any police officer may take into
custody the vehicle of the person so found in violation to prevent such
further violation. Any vehicle so taken into custody may be redeemed by the
owner upon the payment of a sum as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors on account of handling and storage charge of such
vehicle.
§ 162-37 WESTTOWN CODE § 167-4
1:472
Chapter 170
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Broadband and telecommunications — See
Ch. 53.
Building construction — See Ch. 57.
Erosion, sediment control and grading — See
Ch. 80.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 87.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 149.
§ 167-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-4
1:473

ARTICLE I
Introductory Provisions
§ 170-100. Title and effective date.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Westtown Township
Zoning Ordinance of 1991." It shall take effect five days after enactment.
§ 170-101. General purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety,
general welfare, and coordinated and practical community development of
the Township; is in accordance with the Westtown Township Comprehensive
Plan; and is designed to lessen congestion on the roads and highways, to
secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, to provide adequate light
and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue congestion of
population, to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, vehicle
parking, water, sewage facilities, schools, parks and other public
requirements, to conserve the value of buildings, and to encourage the most
appropriate use of land throughout the Township.
§ 170-102. Community development objectives.
A. This chapter is intended to carry out the goals and objectives of the
Westtown Township Growth Management/Comprehensive Plan (Plan),
which goals and objectives are hereby incorporated by reference. The
plan has been formulated to implement the purposes set forth in
§ 170-101, above, in the respects therein stated, and more particularly
with a view toward the following community development objectives:
[Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(1) To avoid environmental harm from development.
(2) To preserve prime farmland and forests.
(3) To conserve the open and scenic character and natural beauty of
Westtown Township.
(4) To provide for a variety of residential living environments.
(5) To prevent conflicts between land uses and to protect the property
value of residents.
(6) To closely coordinate the road system with desired land uses.
(7) To manage access along Route 202 and other major roads to ensure
safe and efficient transportation.
(8) To prevent strip commercial development, especially along Route
202.
(9) To provide for businesses only in locations with safe access that
would not interfere with through traffic.
§ 170-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-102
1:475
(10) To provide adequate community facilities, including a balance of
passive and active open space.
(11) To stress continued cooperation with neighboring communities.
(12) To carry out the plan through a continuous program of planning
and action.
B. In addition to attaining the community development objectives as
stated in Subsection A above, the residential districts established in this
chapter are intended to achieve the following:
(1) To provide sufficient space, appropriately located for residential
development, to meet the housing needs of the present and
expected future population of the Township, within the range of
dwelling types anticipated.
(2) To assure light, air, and privacy, as far as possible, by controlling
the spacing and height of buildings and other structures.
(3) To protect residential areas against hazards of fire, offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, odors, glare, or other objectionable influences.
(4) To prevent congestion, as far as possible, by regulating the density
of population and the bulk of buildings and by providing for offstreet
parking.
(5) To protect residential neighborhoods, as far as possible, against
traffic congestion or through traffic.
(6) To make possible the provision of those public and private
educational, recreational, health, and similar facilities serving the
needs of nearby residents, which perform most effectively in a
residential environment and do not create objectionable influences.
(7) To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building
development in accord with a well-considered plan, to promote
stable residential development, to protect the character of any
district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve
the value of land and buildings, and to protect the tax revenue
base.
C. In addition to attaining the community development objectives as
stated in Subsection A above, the commercial districts established in
this chapter are intended to achieve the following:
(1) To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for the types of
commercial and service establishments anticipated.
(2) To protect commercial development against intrusive uses which
are incompatible with it, against objectionable influences such as
noise or glare, and from hazards of fire.
§ 170-102 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-102
1:476
§ 170-103. Scope of regulations.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety, and
general welfare of the Township. The use and development of all land, and
the construction of every building or portion thereof, will be subject to the
regulations contained herein.
§ 170-104. Conflict.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, or interfere
with any existing ordinance or enactment, or with any rule, regulation,
or permit adopted or issued thereunder, except insofar as the same may
be inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter,
provided that, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions upon the use
of buildings or land, or upon the height and bulk of buildings, or prescribes
larger open spaces than are required by the provision of such ordinance,
enactment, rule, regulation, or permit, then the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
(3) To provide appropriate space for the requirements of present-day
merchandising, including provision for off-street parking and for
safe circulation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, both within the
zoning district and in nearby areas.
D. The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted, administered, and
applied in such manner as will facilitate attainment of the above
community development objectives.
§ 170-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-104
1:477

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 170-200. General interpretation. [Amended 8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-5]
§ 170-201. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONMENT — An intentional and absolute relinquishment and
cessation of a use with no intention to resume such use.
ACCESSORY DWELLING — A self-contained dwelling unit which is
complete with food preparation and bathroom facilities, has direct access
to the outdoors or to a hall from which there is direct access to the
outdoors, and is accessory to the existing primary dwelling unit.[Amended
5-21-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-5]
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
ACCESSWAY — A way for vehicular and foot traffic leading from any street.
ACT — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as
amended and reenacted by Act 170 of 1988, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., and any
subsequent amendments thereto.
ADULT COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT — A residential development of
dwelling units and permitted accessory uses, with the dwellings limited
to occupancy by households that each include at least one person age 55
or older. An adult community development shall meet the requirements of
§ 170-1615.[Added 5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2]
A. If a word is not defined in this chapter, but is defined in Chapter 149,
Subdivision and Land Development, then the definition shall also apply
to this chapter. [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
B. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the words and phrases listed in this
article shall be construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings
indicated herein. The present tense includes the future; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; the masculine
gender includes the feminine and neuter; the word "used" includes the
words "designed, arranged, or intended to be used"; the word "person"
includes any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or
organization; the word "occupied" includes the words "designed or
intended to be occupied"; the word "may" is permissive; and the word
"shall" or "must" is always mandatory. When terms, phrases, or words
are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or
such as the context may imply.
§ 170-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:479
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — Any use meeting the definition
for this term in Title 68, Chapter 55 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated
Statutes, as amended. An adult-oriented establishment shall be considered
a distinct use, not be considered a retail sales, theater, entertainment,
personal service or any other use, and only be allowed where specifically
stated in this chapter.[Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
AGRICULTURALLY SUITED SOILS — Those soils rated as Class I or Class
II for productivity for crops by the Soils Survey of Chester and Delaware
Counties (USDA, 1963), as shown on the Soils and Floodplains Map in the
1987 Township Comprehensive Plan.
AGRICULTURE — Activities which involve the raising of food, plants,
poultry, and livestock, including but not limited to crop production and
nurserying.
ALTERATIONS — Alterations include, but are not limited to, the following:
ANAEROBIC DIGESTION — The process by which microorganisms in the
absence of oxygen convert the energy stored in volatile acids in livestock
and poultry manure or other organic materials into biogas, which is then
burned on-site to produce heat, electricity and water, and has the ancillary
benefit of managing livestock manure.[Added 2-17-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-3]
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels, dishes,
whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission or reception
of wireless signals. An antenna may include an omnidirectional antenna
(rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic antenna (disc) or any other
wireless antenna. An antenna shall not include tower-based wireless
communications facilities as defined below.[Added 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-6]
APARTMENT — See "dwelling, dwelling unit."
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, including his heirs, successors,
and assigns, who has filed any application for approval under the terms of
this chapter, or for approval of a subdivision or land development under
terms of Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development.
APPURTENANCES — The visible, functional, or ornamental objects
accessory to and part of buildings or structures.[Added 2-17-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-3]
ATHLETIC FIELD — A public or private daily recreational facility dedicated
exclusively to group sports and/or individual athletic events, arranged and
conducted in a manner conducive to such activities.
All incidental changes or replacement in the nonstructural parts of a
building or other structure.
A.
Minor changes or replacements in the structural parts of a building or
other structure.
B.
§ 170-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-201
1:480
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION[Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord. No.
94-6] — An area of land, together with any structure thereon, used for:
BASE FLOOD — The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis
upon which the floodplain management provisions of this chapter have been
prepared; for purposes of this chapter, a flood which has a one-percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the
"one-hundred-year flood" or one-percent annual chance flood).[Amended
9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the water surface
elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or greater chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Within the approximated
floodplain, the base flood elevation shall be established as a point on the
boundary of the approximated floodplain which is nearest to the site in
question.[Amended 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
BASEMENT — A floor level completely below grade or floor level in which
more than 2/3 of the perimeter walls are below grade. A wall shall be
considered below grade where the dimension from the first floor line to
the finished grade is five feet or less, and the slope of the finished grade
extending 10 feet from the building walls does not exceed 30°. For
floodplain management purposes, a basement is any area of the building
having its floor below ground level on all sides.[Amended 9-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-3]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST FACILITY — A single-family dwelling containing
guest rooms available for short-term overnight rental and providing
breakfast service to overnight guests. A bed-and-breakfast facility shall not
include any cooking facilities for exclusive use by guests, nor the sale of
meals for persons who are not a resident of the dwelling unit or an employee
or overnight guest of the bed-and-breakfast facility.[Amended 3-3-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-2]
BIOGAS — A fuel consisting of methane, carbon dioxide, and small amounts
of water and other compounds produced as part of the anaerobic digestion
processes.[Added 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3]
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors, except where the context clearly refers
to the Zoning Hearing Board.[Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
BOARDINGHOUSE (includes rooming house) — A residential use which
contains:[Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
The retail sale of motor fuel and lubricants and incidental services, such
as lubrication and washing of motor vehicles.
A.
The sale, installation, or minor repair of tires, batteries, and other
automobile accessories incidental to the foregoing.
B.
The retail sale of food, beverages, personal care items, and similar
goods (such as a convenience commercial center).
C.
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:481
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of Westtown
Township.[Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
BUFFER — A strip of required space adjacent to a use or facility within a
property, or to the boundary of a property or district, on which is located a
visual barrier of sufficient height and density to appropriately limit views of
the property or use.
BUILDING — Any structure which is erected on the ground and
permanently affixed thereto, consisting of at least three walls and a roof,
and designed, intended, or arranged for the housing, sheltering, enclosure,
or structural support of persons, animals, or property of any kind. Any
mobile home or similar structure constructed off-site prior to placement on
the ground also is a building.
BUILDING AREA — The area contained within the limits of the outside face
of the exterior walls, that being the aggregate of the maximum horizontal
cross-section areas of all the buildings on a lot, excluding cornices, eaves,
gutters, chimneys projecting not more than 18 inches, bay windows not
extending more than one story and not projecting more than five feet,
uncovered steps and balconies, but including porches, breezeways, and
carports.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The relation of the total ground floor area of all
buildings on a lot to the total area of the lot on which they are located.
BUILDING FOOTPRINT — The area of any building measured along the
perimeter of the exterior foundation walls.[Added 5-6-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-02]
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line parallel to the street line at a
distance therefrom equal to the depth of the front yard required for the
district in which the lot is located. In the case of a lot in which the side lot
lines are not parallel, the building setback line shall be at that point where
minimum lot width first coincides with the required lot width, but in no case
closer to the street than the required front yard.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A structure in which is conducted, designed to be
conducted, or intended to be conducted the primary use of the lot on which
it is located.
Room(s) that do not meet the definition of a lawful dwelling unit that
are rented for habitation; or
A.
Houses greater than the permitted maximum number of unrelated
persons. A boardinghouse shall not include a use that meets the
definition of a hotel/motel, assisted-living facility, bed-and-breakfast
facility, group home or nursing home. A boardinghouse may either
involve or not involve the providing of meals to residents. A
boardinghouse shall primarily serve persons residing on-site for five or
more consecutive days.
B.
§ 170-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-201
1:482
BULK — A term used to describe the size of buildings or other structures
and their relationship to each other, to open areas such as yards, and to lot
lines; included, therefore, are:
BUS SHELTER — A frame-like structure enclosed on a maximum of three
sides built to mark an existing regional transportation system bus stop and
to shelter pedestrians from the weather while waiting for buses in a public
or private regional transportation system. Bus shelters may contain limited
advertising space.[Amended 7-6-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1]
CELLAR — An enclosed building space more than 33 1/3% below grade
which shall be considered as uninhabitable for living purposes.
CLEAR-CUTTING — The indiscriminant or complete removal of all trees
on a site, or any portion thereof greater than 0.5 acre in contiguous area,
during a single timber harvesting operation or within a five-year
period.[Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
CLOSED HORIZONTAL LOOP GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM — A type of
geothermal heating and/or cooling system that consists of the following
basic elements: underground loops of piping; approved, nontoxic heat
transfer fluid; a heat pump; and an air distribution system. An opening is
made in the earth. A series of pipes are installed into the opening and
connected to a heat exchange system in the building. The pipes form a
closed loop and are filled with a heat transfer fluid. The heat transfer
fluid is potable or beneficial reuse water and may have approved nontoxic
antifreeze, such as propylene glycol, added. The fluid is circulated through
the piping from the opening into the heat exchanger and back. The system
functions in the same manner as the open-loop system except there is no
pumping of groundwater.[Added 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3]
CLOSED VERTICAL LOOP GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM — A type of geothermal
heating and/or cooling system that utilizes a pressurized heat exchanger
consisting of pipe, a circulating pump, and a water-source heat pump in
which the heat transfer fluid is not exposed to the atmosphere. The heat
transfer fluid is potable or beneficial reuse water and may have approved
nontoxic antifreeze, such as propylene glycol, added.[Added 2-17-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-3]
CLUB — An association based on membership, whether with or without
dues, rules, bylaws, charter, or local or national affiliation, of persons
with common interests, pursuits, or purposes. Also, the permanent meeting
place maintained for or by that membership, including but not limited to,
fraternal, athletic, or other associations.
The size, including height and floor area, of the building or other
structure.
A.
The relation of the number of dwelling units in a residential building to
the area of the lot.
B.
C. All open areas in yard space relating buildings and other structures.
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:483
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — An arrangement of residential structures
that allows for grouping the structures by reducing lot area and yard
requirements and incorporating the remaining area as open space.84
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more WCFs, including antennas,
on an existing tower-based WCF, or on any structure that already supports
at least one non-tower WCF.[Added 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
COMMUNITY CENTER FACILITY — A building and related outdoor areas
used for noncommercial social, recreation and meeting activities by
residents of a development and their occasional invited guests.[Added
5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2]
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate that meets the requirements for a
condominium as stated in the State Uniform Condominium Act,85 and which
involves portions held in separate ownership and other portions held in
common ownership by all of the owners of the portions.[Added 3-3-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-2]
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration, or relocation of a building or structure,
including the placement of a mobile home.
CONVALESCENT HOME — See "nursing home."
CONVERSION — The creation of two or more dwelling units within an
existing, owner-occupied single-family detached dwelling, with the resulting
units each having independent kitchen, bath, and sleeping facilities.
CORNER LOT — See "lot, corner."[Added 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
CUL-DE-SAC — A local street intersecting another street at one end and
terminated at the other end by a permanent vehicular turnaround.
CUTOFF ANGLE — The angle formed by a line drawn from the ground
vertically to the center of the luminaire, and a line drawn from the center of
the luminaire representing the point of total light cutoff from the luminaire.
The position of the cutoff line is the point above which no light is emitted.
DAY CAMP — A public or private facility operated for the outdoor
recreational and educational needs of children on a daily basis, where a fee
or other form of compensation for the care of the children is charged, and
which is licensed or approved to operate as a day camp.
DAY-CARE CENTER — Land and buildings where daytime care and/or
instruction is provided for seven or more individuals, and including staffed
professional supervision necessary to serve such purposes. Such use may,
but need not, be in support of and operated by another nonresidential
use. Operation of a day-care center may be by a public agency, a private
nonprofit organization, or a private commercial entity, and shall be licensed
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. This term shall include "child-care
center."
84.Editor's Note: The former definition of "communication tower," as amended, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3.
85.Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 170-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-201
1:484
DBH — The diameter of a tree at breast height, usually measured 3.5 feet
from the ground surface.
DECK — An unroofed, raised structure generally attached to a principle use
building.
DEMOLITION — The razing or destruction, whether entirely or in
significant part, of a building, structure, site, or object. Demolition includes
the removal of any building, structure, or object from its site, or the removal
or destruction of the facade or surface.
DENSITY, NET — Within a flexible development, the area of that portion of
the tract to be utilized for a particular dwelling type, divided by the total
number of dwelling units of that type permitted, expressed in units per acre.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission from a landowner, who makes or causes to be made the
improvements associated with a subdivision or land development. The
developer may also be the subdivider as defined herein.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures,
the placement of mobile homes, streets, and other paving, utilities, filling,
grading, excavation, mining, dredging, or drilling operations, the storage of
equipment or materials, and the subdivision of land.[Amended 11-4-1996
by Ord. No. 96-7; 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — Network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.[Added 6-15-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-6]
DUPLEX — See "dwelling, dwelling unit."
DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT — A building or entirely self-contained
portion thereof containing food preparation and bathroom facilities, for
occupancy by only one family (including any domestic servants living or
employed on the premises) with no enclosed space (other than vestibules,
entrance or other hallways or porches) in common with any other dwelling
unit. Dwellings may be classified as follows:
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building having only one dwelling
unit from ground to roof, independent outside access, and open space
on all sides.
A.
TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two dwelling units (detached,
semidetached, or attached), including but not limited to twin or duplex:
TWIN — A building containing two dwelling units, separated by a
party wall, each having independent outside access and open space
on three sides.
(1)
B.
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:485
EASEMENT — A permanent right granted for limited use of private land,
normally for a public purpose (e.g., utility, drainage, public access). The
owner of the property shall have the right to make any other use of the land
which is not inconsistent with the rights of the grantee.
EASEMENT, CONSERVATION — A legal agreement between a property
owner and an appropriate conservation organization or governmental
entity, through which the property owner establishes certain use
restrictions over all or portions of the property for conservation purposes.
EMERGENCY — A condition that:[Added 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
ENGINEER — A professional engineer, registered in Pennsylvania.
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area of an existing building, an
increase of size of another structure, or an increase in that portion of a lot
occupied by an existing use.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
DUPLEX — A building containing two dwelling units from ground
to roof, each of which has independent outside access and open
space on all sides.
(2)
MULTIFAMILY — A building containing three or more dwelling units,
including but not limited to four-family dwelling (fourplex, quadraplex),
townhouse (single-family attached), and apartment buildings:
FOUR-FAMILY DWELLING (FOURPLEX, QUADRAPLEX) — A
building containing four dwelling units, each of which has
independent outside access, two nonparallel walls in common with
adjacent dwelling units, and open space on two nonparallel sides.
(1)
TOWNHOUSE (SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED) — A building
containing dwelling units separated by parallel party walls, each of
which has only one dwelling unit from ground to roof, independent
outside access, not more than two walls in common with adjoining
units, and open space to the front and rear (internal units) or front,
rear, and one side (end units).
(2)
APARTMENT — A building containing three or more dwelling units
separated by party walls, and which may have more than one
dwelling unit from ground to roof, common outside accesses, and
hallways.
(3)
C.
Constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or
safety of the public; or
A.
Has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be
unusable and result in loss of the services provided.
B.
§ 170-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-201
1:486
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.[Added 9-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-3]
EXPANSION TO EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).[Added 9-5-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-3]
FAMILY — A family is:[Amended 9-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2; 3-3-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-2]
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A single-family detached dwelling where daycare
services are provided for as many as, but not more than, six
individuals, none of whom need be a relative of the caregiver, in accordance
with Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare regulations.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.[Added 6-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-6]
FENCE — Any freestanding and uninhabited structure consisting of wood,
glass, metal, plastic, wire, wire mesh, or masonry, singly or in combination
with other materials, 2 1/2 feet high or higher, erected to secure or divide
one property from another or part of a property from a remaining part, to
assure privacy, to protect the property so defined, or to enclose all or part
of the property; a freestanding masonry wall is considered a fence.
FILL — Material, exclusive of structures, placed or deposited so as to form
an embankment or raise the surface elevation of the land.
FLAG LOT — See the definition of "lot, interior" in this § 170-201.[Added
3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by a landowner,
to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling units, the
development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk or type of
A. A single person occupying a dwelling unit;
Two or more individuals living together on a nontransient basis as
a single housekeeping unit and doing their cooking on the premises,
when said individuals are related by blood, marriage, or adoption,
including foster children and including not more than two boarders,
roomers, or lodgers;
B.
A maximum of five children or adults requiring special care or
supervision who are under the twenty-four-hour or full-time care of
resident parents or persons acting in loco parentis (i.e., the occupants
of a group home as defined in this chapter); or
C.
Not more than three individuals not related living together as a single
housekeeping unit and doing their cooking in one kitchen on the
premises.
D.
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:487
dwelling, density, lot coverage, and required open space to the regulations
established in any one residential district created, from time to time, under
the provisions of this chapter.
FLOOD — A general and temporary inundation of normally dry land from
the overflow of streams, rivers, or other waters.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.[Added 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.[Added 9-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-3]
FLOOD, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — The highest level of flooding that, on the
average, is likely to occur every 100 years, i.e., that has a one-percent
chance of occurring each year, as delineated by maps and related materials
developed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the National
Flood Insurance Program.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream,
or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; an area
subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS — Standards set forth under § 170-401 to
minimize the hazards and damage resulting from flooding.[Added
9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures which
reduces or eliminates flood damage to real estate or improved real property,
lands, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and contents of
buildings.[Amended 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.[Added 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the area of the several floors of a building or
buildings measured from the face of the exterior walls or from center lines
of walls separating two buildings. In particular, floor area includes, but is
not limited to, the following:
A. Basement space, as defined herein.
Elevator shafts, stairwells, and attic space (whether or not a floor has
been laid) providing structural headroom of eight feet or more.
B.
§ 170-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-201
1:488
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The ratio of the total building floor area to
the lot area. For example, on a one-hundred thousand-square-foot lot, with
a maximum floor area ratio of 0.4:1.0, the maximum total building floor
area shall be 40,000 square feet, therefore allowing two stories of 20,000
square feet each. Space used for vehicle parking that is in a basement level
shall not be counted towards the floor area when determining the floor area
ratio.[Amended 10-15-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-7]
FOOTCANDLE — The illumination on a surface one square foot in area on
which there is a uniformly distributed flux of one lumen, or the illumination
produced on a surface, all points of which are at a distance of one foot from
a directionally uniform point source of one candela.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural practices, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involve any land development. Forestry
specifically does not include clear-cutting.[Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
FOURPLEX — See "dwelling, dwelling unit."
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or part of a principal building
used for the storage of motor vehicles owned and used by the owner or
tenant of the premises, and for the storage of not more than two motor
vehicles owned and used by persons other than the owner or tenants of the
premises.
GARDEN SHED — An accessory structure, not greater than 250 square feet,
for the storage of garden or lawn equipment, or used as a workshop.
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEM — An energy generating system that uses
the Earth's thermal properties, in conjunction with electricity, to provide
for the heating and cooling of buildings.[Added 2-17-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-3]
GOLF COURSE — A tract of land for playing golf, improved with tees,
greens, fairway, and hazards, and which may include clubhouse and
shelters.
Roofed terraces, exterior balconies, breezeways, or porches, provided
that over 50% of the perimeter of these is enclosed.
C.
Any other floor space used for dwelling purposes, no matter where
located within the building.
D.
Accessory buildings, excluding space used for off-street parking or for
loading berths.
E.
Any other floor space not specifically excluded, but excluding space
used for air-conditioning machinery or cooling towers and similar
mechanical equipment serving the building and cellar space.
F.
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:489
GROSS AREA — The total area of a lot or tract as described in the deed of
record for the lot or tract and lying within existing property lines prior to
subdivision or land development.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA — The total floor area of any building or structure
in which some or all spaces are leased.
GROUP HOME — A residential facility used as living quarters by a
maximum of five unrelated persons, consisting of children or adults
requiring special care and their attending supervisors. A group home is
specifically designed to create a single-family residential setting. The
individuals requiring special care must be deemed permanent residents
and their supervisors must provide twenty-four-hour or full-time equivalent
coverage of the facility. A group home in a residential district shall not be
used for meetings of staff who are not on duty.[Amended 9-8-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-2; 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
HEIGHT, BUILDING — A building's vertical measurement from the mean
level of the ground surrounding the building to the highest point of the
roof, provided that chimneys, spires, towers, elevator and other unoccupied
utility penthouses, tanks, and similar projections shall not be included in
calculating the height.
HEIGHT OF A TOWER-BASED WCF — The vertical distance measured
from the ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point on a
tower-based WCF, including antennas mounted on the tower and any other
appurtenances.[Added 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
HEIGHT, SIGN — The vertical distance as measured:
HISTORIC RESOURCE(S) — Within the context of this chapter, all
buildings, sites, structures, objects and districts identified on the Westtown
Township Historic Resources Map.[Added 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-2]
HISTORIC RESOURCES MAP — A map adopted as part of this chapter
showing historic properties and their respective classifications and
maintained by the Westtown Township Historical Commission.[Added
3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-2]
HISTORIC STRUCTURE[Amended 11-4-1996 by Ord. No. 96-17] — Any
structure that is:
From ground level to the highest point on the sign itself and/or its
supporting structure.
A.
Along the face of the sign or its supporting frame from lowest point to
highest.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
B.
§ 170-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-201
1:490
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use constituting entirely or partly
the livelihood of person(s) living in a dwelling unit, when in compliance
with the terms of § 170-1605 of this chapter. Home occupations are divided
into major and minor categories as defined in § 170-1605.[Amended
9-15-1997]
HORSE BARN — A building, or a portion of a building, used for the shelter
of horses belonging to the landowner or tenant residing on the property.
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or buildings including rooms rented out
to persons as transient and temporary living quarters. Any such use that
customarily involves the housing of persons for periods of time longer
than 30 days shall be considered a boardinghouse and shall meet the
requirements of that use.[Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The ratio of the total impervious surface area
on a lot to the total lot area on which it is located.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Area covered by roofs, paving and other manmade
materials that have a coefficient of runoff of 0.8 or greater. For
the purposes of determining compliance with this chapter, stone surfaces
routinely used for vehicle parking and movement shall be considered
impervious.[Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
INSTITUTIONAL USE — A cultural, educational, recreational, therapeutic,
rehabilitative or similar lawful use, including, but not limited to, properties
with six or more unrelated persons in residence and, where necessary
to serve such use, twenty-four-hour or full-time equivalent professional
supervision. The term "institutional use" shall not include a religious use,
primary or secondary school, day-care center, or residential care facility for
senior citizens.[Amended 9-8-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2; 3-3-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-2; 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
INTEGRATED TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT — A development containing
townhouses which includes parking areas and internal drives, and in which
a designated portion of the tract is set aside as open space.
JUNKYARD — An area of land, with or without buildings, which is used for
the storage, outside a completely enclosed building, of used and discarded
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places under a
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania historic preservation program which
has been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a Township inventory of historic places under a
historic preservation program that has been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:491
materials, including but not limited to: waste paper, rags, metal, building
materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles, or parts thereof, with
or without the dismantling, processing, salvage, sale, or other use or
disposition of the same. The deposit or storage on a lot of two or more
unlicensed, wrecked, or disabled vehicles, or the major parts thereof, shall
be deemed a junkyard.
KENNEL — A place for the keeping, breeding, and/or boarding of more than
four dogs for commercial purposes.
LABORATORY — A building or group of buildings in which are located the
facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing, and experimentation,
but not including the manufacture of products for sale, except as an
accessory use.
LAKE or POND — A natural body of water, containing a permanent pool
of water a minimum of six feet in depth, with side slopes which must
be steeper than 10:1. A lake or pond may be utilized for stormwater
management purposes.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LIVESTOCK — The horses, cattle, sheep, and other useful animals kept or
raised on an agricultural property or on any property meeting the provisions
of this chapter.
LOT — A parcel of land, undivided by any street or dedicated future street
right-of-way. Such parcel shall be separately described by metes and
bounds, the description of which is recorded in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Chester County by deed description or is described by an approved
subdivision plan recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Chester
County.
LOT AREA — The acreage contained within the property lines of a lot,
as defined in the deed or as shown on an approved subdivision plan. For
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or
other features.
(2)
A.
A subdivision of land. Those activities described in Section 503(1.1) of
the Act [53 P.S. § 10503(1.1)] shall not be considered land developments
for purposes of this chapter.
B.
§ 170-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-201
1:492
purposes of compliance with minimum lot area requirements, the following
shall be excluded:[Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting two or more
intersecting streets, where the interior angle of intersection does not
exceed 135°. A lot abutting a curved street shall be deemed a corner lot
if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the lot lines
with the street intersect at an interior angle of less than 135°. Each yard
abutting a street shall be considered a front yard. On a corner lot, any yard
not considered a front yard shall be regulated as a side yard. Corner lots
shall be subject to the provisions of § 170-1502H.[Amended 3-3-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-2; 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot which does not meet the minimum lot width
requirement as measured at the minimum building setback line. This term
may include a lot that has a narrow portion of the lot connecting the street
right-of-way with the wider portion of the lot.[Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-2]
LOT LINE — A property boundary line of any lot held in single and separate
ownership, except that, in the case of any lot abutting a street, the lot line
for such portion of the lot as abuts such street shall be deemed to be the
same as the street line, and shall not be the center line of the street, or
any other line within the street line even though such may be the property
boundary line.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line abutting any street and coinciding with
any street line. In the case of a corner lot, each of the two (or more) streetabutting
lot lines shall be considered a front lot line. In the case of an
interior lot, the front lot line shall be the line most parallel and closest to
the street line at the end of the access strip; all other lines shall be side or
rear lot lines.
LOT LINE, REAR — A lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line; if the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length, or if the lot forms a
point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line 10 feet in
length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front
lot line. In the case of a corner lot, any lot line that is neither a front lot line
nor a side lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line not a front or rear lot line; in the case of a
corner lot, any lot line that intersects a front lot line shall be considered a
side lot line.
Any area used for gas, oil, natural gas, electric, water, or
communications transmission facilities, whether below or above
ground, that do not serve the lot or lots traversed.
A.
Any area within a street or other transportation right-of-way, existing or
proposed.
B.
C. Any area within a permanent drainage easement.
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:493
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot extending between and having frontage
on an arterial or collector street and a local street, with vehicular access
solely from the local street.
LOT WIDTH — The distance in feet between the side lot lines, measured
at the street line or along a line parallel to the street line at the building
setback line.
LOT WIDTH AT BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The distance between the
side lot lines measured at the minimum building setback line, as opposed to
the proposed building setback line.[Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
LOT WIDTH AT THE STREET LINE — The distance in feet between the
side lot lines measured along the street line.[Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program (Regulations for Floodplain Management and Flood
Hazard Identification), Federal Emergency Management Agency, and this
chapter.[Amended 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
MALT — Germinated grain including, but not limited to, barley, wheat, and
rye.[Added 9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-5]
MALT PRODUCTION — An agricultural use that produces malt and malt
products such as food and beverages that contain malt.[Added 9-6-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-5]
MALT TASTING ROOM — A designated area on an agriculturally zoned
property for the retail sale and consumption of malt and malt
products.[Added 9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-5]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent only (park) or for rent or sale (subdivision).
MANURE DIGESTER — A facility designed to use anaerobic digestion
processes to convert livestock and poultry manure into biogas, which is
generally burned on-site to produce electricity, heat, and water, as well as
to manage livestock and poultry manure. Manure digesters may include
"co-digestion" in which the livestock and poultry manure may be mixed
with other organic materials. Types of manure digesters include covered
anaerobic lagoons, plug-flow, and/or complete mix (or continually stirred
tank reactor), along with other appurtenant sites, structures and buildings,
electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and other appurtenant
structures and facilities.[Added 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3]
MEDICAL SERVICES — A type of personal service dedicated to health care
and healing, including related support facilities. Such uses include, but are
not necessarily limited to, offices of medical professionals (e.g., medical
§ 170-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-201
1:494
doctors and specialists, dentists, orthodontists, psychologists, psychiatrists,
ophthalmologists, optometrists, chiropractors), clinics, facilities for physical
therapy and rehabilitation, medical testing centers, and medical
laboratories.[Added 7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestor and lineal decedents of any of the foregoing,
a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the foregoing.
Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be treated as
if they were related by the whole blood.[Added 5-6-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-02]
MICRO-TURBINE PANELS — Panels with rotors with a diameter of one
foot or less, meant for areas with low-to-moderate wind speeds.[Added
2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3]
MICROWAVE ANTENNA FOR SATELLITE COMMUNICATION — A
parabolic ground-based or roof-mounted reflector, together with its pedestal
and any other attachments and parts thereof, commonly referred to as a
dish-shaped antenna, used or intended to receive radio or electromagnetic
waves from an overhead satellite.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent
or similar piping, electric wiring, or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
MOBILE HOME/MANUFACTURED HOME — A transportable, single-family
dwelling, intended for permanent occupancy contained in one unit, or in
two or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit which arrives
at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be
used without a permanent foundation, including any addition or accessory
structure, such as porches, sheds, decks, or additional rooms. All mobile
homes shall meet construction standards set by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development. For floodplain management purposes,
the term "mobile home" includes "manufactured home," and also includes
"park trailer," "travel trailer," and other similar vehicles placed on a site
for greater than 180 consecutive days. Outside of the Special Flood Hazard
Area, this term shall not apply to a modular dwelling unit that meets
the International Building Code and which is supported by a perimeter
foundation.[Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2; 9-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-3]
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A lot occupied by two or more
mobile homes, which may include the lease of mobile/manufactured homes
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:495
and/or spaces for mobile/manufactured homes on the lot to individual
households. For the purposes of this chapter, the terms mobile home park
and manufactured home park shall have the same meaning, and the terms
mobile home and manufactured home shall have the same
meaning.[Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
MODULAR DWELLING UNIT — A generally standard construction dwelling
unit, in which some or all of the structural, skin, or service units (kitchen,
baths) are manufactured off-site by factory methodology, transported to
the site, and tied in and erected on foundation and prepared on-site. The
term includes module, pre-fab, factory-built, panel-built, etc. This term
shall include a dwelling unit that meets the International Construction
Code or its successor code and which is supported by a perimeter
foundation.[Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
MONOPOLE — A WCF or site which consists of a single-pole structure,
designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure, to support
communications antennas and connecting appurtenances.[Added
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
MOTEL — A building, or a group of two or more detached or semidetached
buildings, containing rooms having entrances provided directly or closely in
connection with automobile parking or storage space serving such rooms,
which building or group of buildings is designed, intended, or used
principally to provide sleeping accommodations for travelers, and is
suitable for occupancy at all seasons of the year.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after effective start date of this floodplain management
regulation, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures
for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective start
date of this floodplain management regulation and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after June 1,
1977, and before the effective start date of this floodplain management
regulation is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was
issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit
issuance.[Amended 11-4-1996 by Ord. No. 96-17; 9-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-3]
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.[Added 9-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-3]
NONCONFORMING — A building or other structure, use, lot, or sign which,
by reason of design, size, or use, does not conform with the requirements
of the district or districts in which it is located, or with other applicable
provisions of this chapter. However, no existing use shall be deemed
§ 170-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-201
1:496
nonconforming solely because of either of the following: the existence
of less than the required off-street parking or loading conditions; or the
existence of less than the required compliance with the general and
supplemental regulations of this chapter, other than those regarding signs.
NON-TOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NON-TOWER
WCF) — All non-tower wireless communications facilities, including but not
limited to, antennas and related equipment. "Non-tower WCF" shall not
include support structures for antennas or any related equipment that is
mounted to the ground or at ground-level.[Added 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-6]
NOXIOUS VEGETATION — Plant material that is undesirable or offensive
due to unsightliness, threats to health, or prolific and uncontrollable
growth. For purposes of this chapter, noxious vegetation shall include,
but not be limited to, ragweed, multiflora rose, Canada thistle, Japanese
honeysuckle, and Oriental bittersweet.
NURSING HOME — A facility, generally operated for compensation, which
provides lodging, board, and nursing care to sick, invalid, infirm, disabled,
or convalescent persons.
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building,
fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or
projecting into any channel, watercourse, or flood-prone area, which may
impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water either in itself
or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or which is placed
where the flow of the water might carry the same downstream to the
damage of life and property.
OCCUPIED STRUCTURE — Any structure occupied or intended to be
occupied as a residence or place of work or other regular human activity,
including such structures which are temporarily vacant. Structures used
principally for storage, or otherwise not frequented by humans more than
occasionally and for brief periods of time, shall not be considered
occupied.[Added 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3]
OFF-SITE SEWER SERVICE — The disposal of sewage beyond the confines
of the lot or tract, by use of a sanitary sewer system served by a central
sewage treatment facility approved by all governmental agencies having
jurisdiction over such matters.
OFF-SITE WATER SERVICE — A safe, adequate, and healthful supply of
water to more than one user from a common source, located beyond the
confines of the lot or tract, approved by all governmental agencies having
jurisdiction over such matters.
ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD — See "flood, one-hundred year."
ON-SITE SEWER SERVICE — The disposal of sewage by use of individual
or community cesspools, septic tanks, tile disposal fields, land application
systems, or other safe and healthful means within the confines of the lot
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:497
or tract on which the use is located, when approved by all governmental
agencies having jurisdiction over such matters.
ON-SITE WATER SERVICE — A safe, adequate, and healthful supply of
water to a single user or tract from a private well, located within the
confines of the lot or tract, which is approved by all governmental agencies
having jurisdiction over such matters.
OPEN-LOOP GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM — A type of geothermal heating and/
or cooling system that utilizes a water supply, well, or other source, and
a pump to deliver groundwater to a heat exchanger. The discharge water
from the heat exchanger may be returned to the subsurface through a
recharge well or infiltration bed, or may be discharged into a pond, lake, or
stream.[Added 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3]
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — Area or areas of land and/or water,
substantially free of structures and paved areas, permanently restricted for
common enjoyment and recreational use by residents of a development and
possibly the general public, including agricultural activities as permitted
herein, but not including individually owned private yards.
OPEN SPACE, USABLE — An area of common open space within a
residential development that is suitable, in terms of location, land
characteristics, size, etc., for active recreation.
OUTDOOR HYDRONIC HEATER — See "outdoor wood-fired boiler."[Added
2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3]
OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILER (OWB) — A fuel-burning device in which
all of the following applies:[Added 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3]
It is designed to burn, or is capable of burning, one or more of the
following allowed fuels:
(1) Clean wood;
(2) Wood pellets made from clean wood;
Home heating oil, natural gas or propane that:
(a) Complies with all applicable sulfur limits;
Is used as a starter or supplemental fuel for dual-fired outdoor
wood-fired boilers.
(b)
(3)
Other fuel approved, in writing, by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP).
(4)
A.
B. Has a rated thermal output of less than 350,000 Btu per hour.
The manufacturer designs or specifies the device for outdoor
installation or installation in structures not normally intended for
habitation by humans or domestic animals, including structures like
garages and sheds.
C.
§ 170-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-201
1:498
OVERLAY — A special use district, either graphically depicted on the Zoning
Map or described by meets and bounds, whose uses, conditional or by right,
are permitted in the base zoning district.
PA DEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or its
successor agency.[Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
PARKING SPACE — A space located off the public right-of-way, designed and
designated for parking a motor vehicle.
PIPELINE — As defined by 49 CFR 195.2 and 192.3.[Added 7-17-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-2]
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Westtown
Township.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVEGROUND — Where at least 51% of the actual cash
value of a structure, less land value, is above ground.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — Offices where services are provided that
require specialized training or professional certification and where no
goods or merchandise are sold or exchanged, except for those directly
related to the service provided, including but not limited to accountant,
appraiser, attorney, architect, financial planner, landscape architect and
engineer. A professional office shall not constitute a medical establishment,
including but not limited to physician, dentist, chiropractor, massage
therapist, psychologist and optometrist.[Added 11-7-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-6]
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice
shall state the time and place of any hearing or meeting and the particular
nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing or meeting. The first
publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication shall
not be less than seven days prior to the date of the hearing or meeting.
QUADRAPLEX — See "dwelling, dwelling unit."
RECREATION, ACTIVE — Those recreational pursuits which require
physical alteration to the area in which they are performed. Such areas
are intensively used and include, but are not limited to, playgrounds, ball
courts, golf courses, and swimming pools.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:[Added 10-16-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-3]
Heats building space or a fluid, or both, through the distribution,
typically through pipes, of a fluid heated in the device, typically water
or a mixture of water and approved, nontoxic antifreeze.
D.
A. Built on a single chassis;
not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:499
RECREATION, PASSIVE — Recreational pursuits which can be carried out
with little alteration or disruption in the area in which they are performed.
Such uses include, but are not limited to, hiking, biking, and picnicking.
RECYCLING DROPOFF/COLLECTION CENTER — A facility established
and/or operated by Westtown Township, by Chester County, or by a
nonprofit or citizens' organization for the collection and/or processing of
recyclable materials such as glass, paper, aluminum, or plastic; such facility
may accept recyclables by donation, redemption, or purchase, and may
separate or process such materials for reuse or for sale as raw material for
use in the manufacture of a new product.
REFORESTATION — The restocking of an area with forest trees, including
natural regeneration as well as tree planting.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet. The freeboard safety factor also applies
to utilities and ductwork.[Added 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
RELATED EQUIPMENT — Any piece of equipment related to, incidental to,
or necessary for, the operation of a tower-based WCF or non-tower WCF.
By way of illustration, not limitation, related equipment includes generators
and base stations.[Added 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
RELATED or RELATIVE — Persons who are related by blood, marriage,
adoption or formal foster relationship to result in one of the following
relationships: spouse, brother, sister, parent, child, grandparent, great
grandparent, grandchild, great grandchild, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew,
sister-in-law, brother-in-law, parent-in-law or cousin.[Added 3-3-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-2]
RELIGIOUS USE — A building and surrounding land used primarily for
religious and/or spiritual worship by a group of 10 or more persons at a
time and that is operated for nonprofit and noncommercial purposes. The
only residential use that may occur on the same lot as a religious use shall
be a maximum of two dwelling units. A religious use shall include, but
not be limited to, a church, synagogue, temple or mosque. A religious use
may include customary accessory uses.[Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM — An energy system which makes use
of recurring natural resources or byproducts to produce energy without
consuming nonrenewable resources or causing significant disturbance to
natural systems. Renewable energy systems include, but are not limited to,
geothermal, solar, and wind energy systems, as well as manure digesters
and outdoor wood-fired boilers (OWBs). Such systems are usually
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
D.
§ 170-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-201
1:500
independent of the primary utility supplied energy system but may be
connected thereto.[Added 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3]
RIDING ACADEMY — An establishment where horses are boarded and
cared for and where instruction in riding, jumping, and showing is offered
and the general public may, for a fee, hire horses for riding.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication,
prescription, or condemnation, and intended to be occupied or occupied by
a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline,
water line, sanitary or storm sewer, and other similar uses; generally, the
right of one to pass over the property of another.
SCHOOL — An educational use, including college; public, private, or
parochial elementary or secondary school; or other educational institution
for academic instruction, but not including a business or trade school, dance
studio, or similar use.
SCHOOL, PRIMARY OR SECONDARY — An educational institution licensed
by the State Department of Education that primarily provides education
between the grades of Kindergarten and 12th grade.[Added 3-3-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-2]
SCREEN — See "buffer."
SECTION — A geographical area or portion of a tract that is proposed
for flexible development and which is to be developed in accordance with
a timetable for development that is included as part of the applicant's
development plan.
SELECTIVE CUTTING — The felling of certain, but not all, trees in an
area for the purposes of removing dead, diseased, damaged, mature, or
marketable timber; improving the quality of a tree stand or species; or
meeting personal domestic needs.
SETBACK LINE — See "building setback line."
SIGN — Any name, nameplate, poster, panel, display, illustration, structure,
or device used for visual communication which is affixed, painted, or
represented directly or indirectly upon a building or other outdoor surface
for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public
EXISTING RIGHT-OF-WAY — The legal road right-of-way as established
by the commonwealth or other appropriate governing authority and
currently in existence.
A.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right-of-way deemed necessary to
provide adequate width in this chapter and Chapter 149, Subdivision
and Land Development, for future circulation improvements. The future
right-of-way shall be measured equal distance from the center line of
the existing cartway.
B.
CARTWAY — The paved area of a road right-of-way, including width
intended for vehicular movement and on-street parking, but not
including shoulders.
C.
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:501
or advertising a business, commodity, service, or product or for identifying
a business structure or use of land.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of property by any
person, which ownership is separate and distinct from that of any adjoining
property.
SOLAR ENERGY — Energy which has been converted, through the use
of a solar energy system, from sunlight into usable electricity or to heat
air, water, or other fluids for use in hot water or space heating, or other
applications.[Added 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3]
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — An energy conversion system, including
appurtenances, which converts solar energy to a usable form of energy to
meet all or part of the energy or heating requirements of the on-site user, or
which is to be sold to a utility company to be used by others, or sold directly
to other users. Particular types of solar energy systems include, but are not
limited to:[Added 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3]
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.[Added
9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
STACK — Any vertical structure enclosing a flue or flues that carry off
smoke or exhaust from a furnace or other fuel-burning device, especially
that part of a structure extending above a roof.[Added 2-17-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-3]
STAGE — One or more sections on which an applicant proposes to
commence development at the same time, as part of a timetable for
development over a period of years.
START OF CONSTRUCTION[Amended 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3] —
A. Photovoltaic (PV) collectors, which convert solar energy into electricity;
Solar thermal collectors, which are designed to use solar energy to heat
air, water, or other fluids for use in hot water or space heating, or other
applications.
B.
The date of issuance of a building permit, provided that the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other
improvement was within 90 days of the permit date. The "actual start"
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the state of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
A.
§ 170-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-201
1:502
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications towers, antennas and other facilities which render them
more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing
structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally
visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited
to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure and facilities constructed
to resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles.[Added 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-6]
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — A man-made, relatively shallow
depression installed for the purpose of collecting and controlling the flow
of stormwater runoff. Such basins shall be designed for one-hundred-year
storm volumes and rates, and shall have side slopes no greater than 3:1.
STORY — That portion of a building comprised between the surface of
any floor and the surface of any floor or roof next above, exclusive of any
basement or cellar.
STREET — A right-of-way intended for general public use to provide means
of approach for vehicles and pedestrians. The word "street" includes the
words "road," "highway," "thoroughfare," and "way." Streets shall be further
classified as:
For floodplain management purposes, start of construction includes
substantial improvement and other proposed new development and
means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days after the date of
the permit and shall be completed within 12 months after the date of
issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted, in writing,
by the floodplain administrator. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of
the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
B.
ARTERIAL — A street serving the heaviest volumes of traffic
(comparatively high-speed and long-distance) in the Township,
including all facilities classified as main and secondary highways by
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation; providing the highest
degree of vehicular mobility; and/or involving controls on access.
A.
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:503
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot. The street
line shall be the same as the future right-of-way line as defined by this
chapter and Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development.
STRUCTURE — Any form or arrangement of building materials involving
the necessity of providing proper support, bracing, anchorage or other
protection. Such arrangement shall have a permanently fixed location in or
on the ground. Structures include but are not limited to buildings, open
sheds and similar enclosures with less than four walls and/or a roof, signs,
fences or walls over six feet in height, detached aerials and antennae,
porches, platforms, tennis and handball courts, swimming pools, tents,
tanks, and towers. For floodplain management purposes, a structure is
defined as a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.[Amended 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
STRUCTURAL UNIT — One or more buildings enclosed by continuous
exterior walls and a continuous roof.
SUBDIVISION — See definition of "subdivision" in Chapter 149, Subdivision
and Land Development.[Amended 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5]
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.[Amended 11-4-1996 by Ord. No. 96-17]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage or cumulative substantial damage regardless
of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include:[Amended 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
COLLECTOR — A street designed and located to provide means of
access to traffic off local streets and to provide access for through
traffic between residential neighborhoods and districts within the
Township to major streets and/or a street used for access to
nonresidential properties, i.e., commercial, industrial, professional, etc.
B.
LOCAL — A street intended to serve and provide access to the
properties abutting thereon and not connecting with other streets in
such a manner as to encourage through traffic.
C.
SERVICE (ALLEY) — A minor right-of-way providing secondary
vehicular access to the side or rear of two or more properties.
[Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord. No. 94-6]
D.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
A.
§ 170-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-201
1:504
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — [Added
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
SURFACE LAND USES AFFILIATED WITH TRANSMISSION PIPELINES
— Above-ground transmission pipeline facilities including, but not limited
to, compressor stations, pumping stations, regulator stations, launcher/
receiver stations, and other surface pipeline appurtenances.[Added
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-2]
SWIMMING CLUB — A public or private recreational facility with a fee
structure, comprised of a swimming pool or other water-filled enclosure
permanently constructed and designed, used, and maintained for
recreational swimming and bathing; included may be tennis courts or other
recreational activities, snack bars, clubhouses, and shelter commonly
associated with such facilities.
TOPSOIL — Natural and friable loam containing sufficient humus and
nutrients to support plant growth.
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWERBASED
WCF) — Any structure that is used for the purpose of supporting
one or more antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility poles and DAS ground-based
structures. DAS hub facilities are considered to be tower-based
WCF.[Added 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
TOWNHOUSE — see "dwelling, dwelling unit.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Westtown, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
TRACT — One or more lots assembled and presented as a single property
for purposes of subdivision or land development.
TRACT AREA — The net acreage of a tract, contained within the property
lines of the tract, calculated for purposes of establishing the maximum
density or intensity of use on any tract proposed for subdivision or land
development. Tract area shall be determined through compliance with the
terms of § 170-1519 of this chapter.
TRANSMISSION PIPELINES — Transmission pipelines include, but are not
limited to, pipelines designed for the transmission of a "gas" or "petroleum
Any alteration of a structure listed in the National Register of Historic
Places or the Pennsylvania Inventory/Register of Historic Places.
B.
Any increase in the height of a wireless support structure by more than
10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation
from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever
is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed wireless
communications facility may exceed the size limits set forth herein if
necessary to avoid interference with existing antennas; or
A.
Any further increase in the height of a wireless support structure which
has already been extended by more than 10% of its originally approved
height or by the height of one additional antenna array.
B.
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:505
gas," except a "service line," as those terms are defined by 49 CFR 192.3;
also included are pipelines designed for transmission of a "hazardous
liquid," as defined by 49 CFR 195.2.[Added 7-17-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-2]
TWIN — See "dwelling, dwelling unit."
USE — Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of
land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; or any
activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on or intended to be
carried on in a building or other structure or on a tract of land.
VERTICAL AXIS TURBINE — See "wind energy system."[Added 2-17-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-3]
VIEW — The relative ability to see a given object from a designated location.
Views shall be further classified as:
VIOLATION — For floodplain management purposes, a violation means
the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with
the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other
development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other
evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided.[Added 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
VISUAL ARTS CENTER (VAC) — A building containing a minimum of 30%
of the gross floor area used for multiple visual arts uses, including but
not limited to: ceramics, drawing, painting, sculpture, printmaking, design,
crafts, photography, video, audio, filmmaking and architecture. Also
included in the visual arts are the applied arts, which include but are
not limited to: industrial design, graphic design, fashion design, interior
design and decorative art. A VAC may also include accessory uses such as:
an educational or classroom component, production or recording studio,
a movie theater, a visual art display gallery, gift shop, concession stand,
snack bar and cafe. A building containing a VAC may incorporate a visual
communication technology (VCT) on the exterior of the building.[Added
12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-6]
VISUAL COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (VCT) — A means or method
of communicating visual messaging using various forms of technology
including, but not limited to: light emitting diodes, fiber optics, projection
technology or other similar forms of illumination. A VCT may only be used
as part of a VAC use and shall be directly incorporated into the exterior of a
building facade of a VAC use.[Added 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-6]
UNOBSTRUCTED — The ability to see most or all of the object;
specifically, where more than 80% of the object is visible.
A.
FILTERED — The ability to see some of the object; specifically, where
20% to 80% of the object is visible.
B.
HIDDEN — The ability to see little or none of the object; specifically,
where less than 20% of the object is visible.
C.
§ 170-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-201
1:506
WAREHOUSING — The temporary storage of goods and materials within
a building, generally for subsequent distribution to other locations and not
involving retail activities.
WATER TABLE — The upper surface of a zone of saturation except where
that surface is formed by an impermeable body.
WBCA — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S.
§ 11702.1 et seq.).[Added 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves including, but not limited
to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio
signals.[Added 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The antennas, nodes,
control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics and
other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless communications
services.[Added 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF APPLICANT)
— Any person that applies for a wireless communication facility building
permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the public right-of-way
(ROW) or other Township owned land or property.[Added 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-6]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as
a tower-based wireless communications facility or any other support
structure that could support the placement or installation of a wireless
communications facility if approved by the Township.[Added 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-6]
WETLAND — Those areas inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; or as further defined
and delineated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United
States Environmental Protection Agency, or the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — An energy conversion system, typically
consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, blades and associated controls and
appurtenances (including electrical infrastructure and transmission lines),
that converts wind energy to a usable form of energy to meet all or part of
the energy requirements of the on-site user, and/or which is to be sold to
a utility company to be used by others, and/or sold directly to other users.
Wind energy systems include windmills where the energy is used directly
and not converted into electricity.[Added 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3]
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM HEIGHT — The distance measured from the
ground surface of the wind energy system tower base to the highest point of
the wind energy blade tip when extended upwards at 90° from the surface
of the ground or any other higher point of the wind energy system.
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:507
WOODLAND — An ecosystem characterized by a more or less dense and
extensive tree cover; more particularly, a plant community consisting
predominantly of healthy trees and other woody vegetation, well-stocked
and growing more or less closely together.
WOODLAND MANAGEMENT PLAN — A description, by means of text and
map(s), of proposed actions involving the removal of trees from a tract
of land. Such plan shall be prepared by a person(s) with demonstrable
expertise in forest management, and shall document measures to be taken
to protect water quality; to minimize impacts from skid trails and logging
roads, landing areas, and the tree removal process; and to assure site
restoration.
YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building or other
structure or use.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending the full width of the lot along the front
lot line and extending in depth from the front lot line to the nearest point
of any part of a structure on the lot. On a corner lot, the Zoning Officer
shall have the authority to determine which yard is the front yard, based
upon the predominate pattern in the area.[Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-2]
YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full width of the lot along the rear lot
line and extending in depth from the rear lot line to the nearest point of any
part of a structure on the lot.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending the full depth of the lot along a side lot line
and extending in width from such side lot line to the nearest point of any
part of a structure on the lot.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of Westtown
Township.
ZONING MAP — A map of Westtown Township indicating the location of
boundaries for each zoning district.
ZONING OFFICER — The municipal officer charged with enforcing the
literal terms of this chapter and the representative agent of the Zoning
Hearing Board.
§ 170-201 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-201
1:508
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Districts
§ 170-300. Classes of districts. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
§ 170-301. Zoning Map. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the Township of Westtown is hereby
divided into nine base zoning districts, which are designated as follows:
[Amended 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-4]
A/C Agricultural/Cluster Residential District
POC Planned Office Campus District
R-1 Residential District
R-2 Residential District
R-3 Residence-Office District
M-U Multi-Use District
C-1 Neighborhood and Highway Commercial District
C-2 Highway Commercial District
T Township District
B. Overlay districts. [Amended 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
(1) Further, certain areas are considered to be overlays on the base
zoning districts. These areas are as follows:
Steep Slope Conservation District
(2) In addition to the otherwise applicable provisions of this chapter,
these overlay districts are subject, respectively, to the following
specific standards and requirements: § 170-402, Steep Slope
Conservation District.
C. Districts of annexed area. Any territory hereafter added to the
Township shall be considered to be zoned R-1 Residence District until
otherwise classified by action of the Township of Westtown.
D. Lot sizes. No lot shall be so reduced that the area of the lot or the
dimensions of the required open space shall be less than herein
prescribed.
A. The boundaries of all base zoning districts shall be as shown upon the
map attached to and made a part of this chapter, which shall be
designated the Westtown Township Zoning Map. Said Zoning Map and
all notations, references, and other things shown thereon shall be made
a part of this chapter, as if the matters and things shown by said map
were all fully described herein.86
§ 170-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-301
1:509
§ 170-302. Boundaries of districts.
B. The area contained within the Steep Slope Conservation District shall
be as designated in § 170-402C of this chapter. [Amended 9-5-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-3]
A. The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated,
either the center line of streets or railroad rights-of-way or such lines
extended or parallel thereto.
B. Where figures are shown on the Zoning Map between a street and a
district boundary line, they indicate that the district boundary line runs
parallel to the street line at a distance therefrom equivalent to the
number of feet so indicated.
C. Where the boundaries of a single district are indicated as including
directly opposite sides of a street, lane, lake, or watercourse, or the
right-of-way of a power line or other public utility or any portion of its
length, the district so indicated shall be construed to apply to the entire
bed of such street, lane, lake, watercourse, or right-of-way of such
power line, railroad, or other public utility lying within such portion of
its length.
D. Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following a lot
or other property line, such lot or property line shall be construed to be
such boundary.
86.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 170-301 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-302
1:510
ARTICLE IV
Natural Features Protection
§ 170-400. Statement of intent.
The standards and requirements in this article are intended to afford
appropriate levels of protection to those natural features within Westtown
Township that represent significant resource opportunities to the Township
and its surrounding region or which, when subject to undue disturbance,
may constitute threats to public health, safety, and welfare. The Township
considers adherence to these standards a basic prerequisite to any land
development or disturbance otherwise authorized under this chapter or
other regulations, and has designed the balance of this chapter to work in
harmony with the terms of this article. The Township reserves the right to
hire professionals, at the expense of the land owner or developer, to assess
adherence to these standards.
§ 170-401. Floodplain Regulations. [Amended 11-4-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-17; 10-16-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-3; 9-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-3]
A. Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania has, by the passage of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act of 1978, delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations to
promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its citizenry.
Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of the Township does hereby order
as follows.
B. Intent. The intent of this section is to:
(1) Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
(2) Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
(3) Minimize danger to public health and safety by protecting water
supply, sanitary sewage disposal, and natural drainage.
(4) Protect the quality and quantity of surface and subsurface water
supplies adjacent to and underlying floodplain areas.
(5) Contribute to the protection of stream waters against
sedimentation; the prevention of stream bank erosion; the
maintenance of cool water temperatures; and the preservation of
fish and wildlife habitats, through the protection of trees and other
riparian vegetation.
(6) Maintain the scenic and aesthetic character of the streams and
stream valleys, consistent with the goals of the Westtown Township
Comprehensive Plan.
§ 170-400 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-401
1:511
(7) Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its
governmental units, and its residents by preventing the unwise
design and construction of development in areas subject to
flooding.
(8) Fulfill the responsibility of the Township as a trustee of the people's
right to clean air, pure water, and the preservation of the natural,
scenic, historic and aesthetic values of the environment pursuant to
Article I, Section 27 of the Pennsylvania Constitution.
(9) Comply with federal and state floodplain management
requirements.
C. Applicability. Provisions of all other codes, ordinances, and regulations
shall be applicable insofar as they are consistent with the provisions of
this chapter and Westtown Township's need to minimize the hazards
and damage resulting from flooding. It shall be unlawful for any person,
partnership, business or corporation to undertake, or cause to be
undertaken, any construction or development anywhere subject to
floodplain regulations unless a permit has been obtained from the
floodplain administrator.
D. Establishment of floodplain regulations. Floodplain regulations shall be
applicable to those areas of Westtown Township, Chester County, which
are classified as Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRMs) for Westtown Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania,
as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA),
dated September 29, 2017, or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study, and the Soil Survey of Chester and Delaware Counties, as
prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service. The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any
subsequent revisions and amendments are hereby adopted by
Westtown Township and declared to be a part of this section. Floodplain
regulations shall be comprised of three subareas, as follows:
(1) Floodway Area (F1): An area identified as the "floodway" as
established in the Flood Insurance Study referenced above and
shown on the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map as Zone AE.
The term shall also include floodway areas which have been
identified in other available studies or sources of information for
those floodplain areas where no floodway has been identified in the
Flood Insurance Study. The floodway area is required to carry and
discharge the waters of the base flood elevation without increasing
the water surface elevation at any point more than one foot above
existing conditions.
(2) Flood-Fringe Area (F2): An area identified as an AE Zone in the
Flood Insurance Study referenced above and shown on the
§ 170-401 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-401
1:512
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map, where a floodway has
been delineated.
(a) AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an
AE zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA
for which base flood elevations have been provided but no
floodway has been determined. No encroachments, including
fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development shall be permitted in a floodway or an AE Zone
without floodway, unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice that the proposed
development, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, would not result in an increase in flood levels
within the entire community during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
(3) General Floodplain Area (F3): An area subject to inundation by the
base flood, where a detailed study has not been performed, but
where a base flood elevation boundary has been approximated by
the Flood Insurance Study and shown as Zone A on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map referenced above. Where the specific base
flood elevation cannot be determined for this area using other
sources of data such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Floodplain Information Reports, U.S. Geological Survey Flood-
Prone Quadrangles, etc., then the applicant for the proposed use,
development and/or activity shall determine this elevation in
accordance with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications,
who shall certify that the technical concepts, studies, analyses,
computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by the Township.
(4) Revisions, amendments, and modifications.
(a) The delineation of areas subject to floodplain regulations may
be revised, amended and modified by the Westtown Township
Board of Supervisors in compliance with the National Flood
Insurance Program when:
[1] There are changes through natural or other causes.
[2] Changes are indicated by future detailed hydrologic and
hydraulic studies.
[3] Where studies or information provided by a qualified
agency or person documents the need for such revision.
(b) Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such information becomes available, the
§ 170-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-401
1:513
Township shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood
hazard area by submitting technical or scientific data.
E. Boundary dispute. Should a dispute concerning any boundary subject to
floodplain regulations arise, an initial determination shall be made by
the Zoning Officer. Any party aggrieved by this decision may appeal to
the Zoning Hearing Board under the provisions of Article XXI of this
chapter. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
F. Administration.
(1) Designation of the floodplain administrator. The Zoning Officer is
hereby appointed to administer and enforce this ordinance and is
referred to herein as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain
administrator may: (A) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set
forth in these regulations, (B) Delegate duties and responsibilities
set forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan
examiners, inspectors, and other employees, or (C) Enter into a
written agreement or written contract with another agency or
private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these
regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by
another entity shall not relieve the Township of its responsibilities
pursuant to the participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations
at 44 CFR 59.22.
(a) In the absence of a designated floodplain administrator, the
floodplain administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the
Township Engineer.
(2) Permits required. A permit shall be required before any
construction or development is undertaken in areas subject to
floodplain regulations.
(3) Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
(a) The floodplain administrator shall issue a permit only after it
has been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken
will be in conformance with the requirements of this and all
other applicable codes and ordinances.
(b) Prior to the issuance of any permit, the floodplain
administrator shall review the application for the permit to
determine if all other necessary government permits required
by state and federal laws have been obtained, such as those
required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act
1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);
and the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33, U.S.C. 1344. No
permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.
§ 170-401 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-401
1:514
(c) In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the floodplain administrator shall review
the proposed cost of improvements or repairs and the
preimprovement market value of the structure, so that a
substantial improvement/substantial damage determination
can be made, in accordance with FEMA's Substantial
Improvement/Substantial Damage Desk Reference.
(d) In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the floodplain administrator shall review
the history of repairs to the subject building, so that any
cumulative substantial damage concerns can be addressed
before the permit is issued.
(e) During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or
other authorized official shall inspect the premises to
determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the
information provided on the permit application and with all
applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He/she shall make
as many inspections during and upon completion of the work
as are necessary.
(f) In the discharge of his/her duties, the floodplain administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure,
premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to
enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
(g) In the event the floodplain administrator discovers that the
work does not comply with the permit application or any
applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false
statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the
floodplain administrator shall revoke the permit and report
such fact to the Board for whatever action it considers
necessary.
(h) The floodplain administrator shall maintain in perpetuity, or for
the lifetime of the structure, all records associated with the
requirements of this section including, but not limited to,
finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
(i) The floodplain administrator is the official responsible for
submitting a biennial report to FEMA concerning community
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program as
requested.
(j) The responsibility, authority and means to implement the
commitments of the floodplain administrator can be delegated
from the person identified. However, the ultimate
responsibility lies with the person identified in the floodplain
ordinance as the floodplain administrator/manager.
§ 170-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-401
1:515
(k) The floodplain administrator shall consider the requirements
of 34 Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the latest
revision thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(4) Application procedures and requirements.
(a) Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
floodplain administrator on forms supplied by Westtown
Township. Such application shall contain the following:
[1] Name and address of applicant.
[2] Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
[3] Name and address of contractor.
[4] Site location including address.
[5] Listing of other permits required.
[6] Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost,
including a breakout of flood-related cost and the market
value of the building before the flood damage occurred
where appropriate.
[7] A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
(b) If any proposed construction or development is located entirely
or partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient
detail and clarity to enable the floodplain administrator to
determine that:
[1] All such proposals are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and conform with the
requirements of this section and all other applicable codes
and ordinances;
[2] All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage;
[3] Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards;
[4] Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse,
or lateral movement;
[5] Building materials are flood-resistant;
§ 170-401 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-401
1:516
[6] Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have
been used; and
[7] Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed
and located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
(c) Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus
any other pertinent information as may be required by the
floodplain administrator to make the above determination:
[1] A completed permit application form.
[2] A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a
scale of one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing
the following:
[a] North arrow, scale, and date;
[b] Topographic contour lines, if available;
[c] The location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, and other improvements, including the
location of any existing or proposed subdivision and
development;
[d] The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
[e] The location of any existing bodies of water or
watercourses, identified floodplain areas, and, if
available, information pertaining to the floodway, and
the flow of water including direction and velocities.
[3] Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the
following:
[a] The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed
building based upon North American Vertical Datum
of 1988;
[b] The elevation of the base flood;
[c] Supplemental information as may be necessary under
34 Pa. Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC, or the
latest revision thereof as adopted by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[4] The following data and documentation:
[a] Detailed information concerning any proposed
floodproofing measures and corresponding elevations.
§ 170-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-401
1:517
[b] If available, information concerning flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and
other factors associated with a base flood.
[c] Documentation, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, to show that the cumulative
effect of any proposed development subject to
floodplain regulations (see § 170-401D) when
combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not cause any increase in the base
flood elevation.
[d] A document, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, which states that the proposed
construction or development has been adequately
designed to withstand the pressures, velocities,
impact and uplift forces associated with the base
flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which
have been incorporated into the design of the
structure and/or the development.
[e] Detailed information needed to determine compliance
with § 170-401I, Activities specifically prohibited
when subject to floodplain regulations, including:
[i] The amount, location and purpose of any
materials or substances referred to in § 170-401I
which are intended to be used, produced, stored
or otherwise maintained on site.
[ii] A description of the safeguards incorporated into
the design of the proposed structure to prevent
leaks or spills of the dangerous materials or
substances listed in § 170-401I during a base
flood.
[f] The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for
Land Development."
[g] Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan
meeting the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Protection, to implement and maintain
erosion and sedimentation control.
(d) Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee,
payable to the municipality based upon the estimated cost of
the proposed construction as determined by the floodplain
administrator.
§ 170-401 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-401
1:518
(5) Review of application by others. A copy of all plans and applications
for any proposed construction or development subject to floodplain
regulations to be considered for approval may be submitted by the
floodplain administrator to any other appropriate agencies and/or
individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer, etc.)
for review and comment.
(6) Changes. After the issuance of a permit by the floodplain
administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to the
application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other
documents submitted with the application without the written
consent or approval of the floodplain administrator. Requests for
any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to floodplain administrator for consideration.
(7) Placards. In addition to the permit, the floodplain administrator
shall issue a placard, or similar document, which shall be displayed
on the premises during the time construction is in progress. This
placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance, and be signed by the floodplain administrator.
(8) Start of construction. Work on the proposed construction or
development shall begin within 180 days after the date of issuance
of the development permit. Work shall also be completed within 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall
expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the
floodplain administrator. The issuance of development permit does
not refer to the zoning approval.
(a) The actual start of construction means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it
include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
(b) Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is
submitted by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and
reasonable cause for the floodplain administrator to approve
such a request and the original permit is compliant with the
§ 170-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-401
1:519
ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the extension is
granted.
(9) Enforcement and penalties. Any person who fails to comply with
any or all of the requirements or provisions of this article or who
fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order of direction of the
floodplain administrator or any other authorized employee of the
Township shall be subject to the procedures, enforcement action,
fines and/or penalties as set forth within Chapter 170, Articles XXI
and XXIII, of the Township's Zoning Ordinance.
(10) Appeals.
(a) Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the
floodplain administrator concerning the administration of the
provisions of this article may appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board as specifically provided for in Chapter 170, Article XXI,
of the Township Zoning Ordinance. Such appeal must be filed,
in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the floodplain administrator.
(b) Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider the appeal in accordance with the Municipalities
Planning Code and Article XXI of the Township Zoning
Ordinance.
(c) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing
Board may seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as
provided by the laws of this state including the Pennsylvania
Flood Plain Management Act.
G. Uses permitted in floodways area (F1).
(1) The following uses (exclusive of buildings and paving) are
permitted in the floodway area. However, within any floodway area
(F1), no new construction, development, use, activity, or
encroachment shall be permitted unless the effect of such
development on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying
stream improvements which have been approved by all appropriate
local and/or state authorities. When a landowner or developer
proposes to offset the effects of development in the floodway area
by construction of stream improvements, he/she shall submit a
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice which fully evaluates the effects of
such construction. The report shall use the base flood as herein
defined as the basis of analysis. All adjacent communities and the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development shall be notified by the landowner and/or developer
by certified mail of all such intended activities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse and shall submit copies of
such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
In addition, the landowner and/or developer shall assure the
§ 170-401 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-401
1:520
Township, in writing, that the flood-carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion of the water course in question will be
maintained.
(a) Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, orchard,
grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, and truck farming. Such
activities should be conducted in accordance with a plan
approved by the Chester County Conservation District and
recognized soil conservation practices approved by the
Township.
(b) Selective cutting of trees provided further that desirable
mature shade trees are not totally eliminated, that particular
attention is paid to retaining such trees within 25 feet of any
stream bank, and that no such trees growing within or upon a
stream bank shall be removed unless dead, diseased, or
damaged and threatening the stability of the bank.
(c) Recreational uses, such as park, camp, picnic grounds, golf
course, golf driving range, archery ranges, hiking and riding
trails, fishing areas, game farm, fish hatchery, wildlife
sanctuary, nature preserve and swimming areas.
(d) Passive open space uses, including private yard area.
(e) Construction of crossings of the floodway area by railroads,
roads, bridges, and utility transmission lines that would not
result in any increase in the flood level during the occurrence
of the base flood.
(f) Sealed water supply wells and water pipe lines.
(g) Storm and sanitary sewer outlets, which shall take the shortest
route across the area subject to floodplain regulations to the
point of discharge.
(2) The following shall not be placed or caused to be placed in the
designated floodway area: fences (except that which are necessary
and appurtenant to agricultural uses and are either designed to
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters or collapse
during flood events to permit the unimpeded flow of floodwaters),
other matters which may impede, retard or change the direction of
the flow of water or that will catch or collect debris carried by such
water, or that are placed where the natural flow of the stream or
floodwaters would carry the same downstream to the damage or
detriment of either public or private property adjacent to the
floodplain. The placement of mobile homes shall not be permitted
in any designated floodway area.
H. Uses permitted in flood-fringe area (F2) and general floodplain area
(F3).
§ 170-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-401
1:521
(1) The following uses are permitted in the flood-fringe (F2) and
general floodplain area (F3).
(a) Uses permitted within the floodway area as provided in
Subsection E above.
(b) Sewage treatment plants and pumping stations when
constructed to prevent flooding of the facilities.
(c) Placement of recreational vehicles, provided that when subject
to floodplain regulations recreational vehicles shall:
[1] Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
[2] Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, i.e., on its
wheels or jacking system and attached to the site by quickdisconnect
utilities and security devices with no
permanently attached additions.
(2) No development or use of land shall be undertaken when the effect
of such development or use of land, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, would increase the water
surface elevation at any point above the base flood elevation unless
the effect of such development on flood heights is fully offset by
accompanying stream improvements which have been approved by
all appropriate local and/or state authorities. When an owner and/
or developer proposes to offset the effects of development by
construction of stream improvements or to install fill or alter or
relocate a watercourse, he/she shall submit an engineering study
prepared by a registered professional engineer which fully
evaluates the effects of such construction. The report shall use the
base flood elevation as herein defined as the basis of analysis. All
adjacent communities and the Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development shall be notified by the
developer by certified mail of all such intended activities prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and the developer
shall submit copies of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. In addition, the developer shall assure the
Township, in writing, that the flood-carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion of the watercourse in question will be
maintained.
(3) All uses, activities, and other developments shall be undertaken in
strict compliance with the floodproofing and related provisions
contained herein, and in all other applicable codes, ordinances and
regulations.
(4) No new construction or development shall be located within the
area measured 75 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse.
§ 170-401 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-401
1:522
I. Activities specifically prohibited in areas subject to floodplain
regulations. Any use or activity not authorized as a permitted use under
the terms of Subsections G and H above shall be prohibited in areas
subject to floodplain regulations. In particular, the following activities,
whether proposed in conjunction with a permitted use or otherwise,
shall not occur in any area subject to floodplain regulations:
(1) Clear-cutting of trees, or the clearing of vegetation, except where
such clearing is necessary:
(a) To prepare land for a use permitted by Subsections G and H
above, or by action of the Zoning Hearing Board. Where clearcutting
is proposed in conjunction with the site of a stormwater
management basin, such clear-cutting shall be authorized only
when in accordance with an approved plan for development
which the basin is to serve;
(b) As a reforestation measure; or
(c) As a means to eliminate dead, diseased, or hazardous tree
stands. Where a clear-cutting operation is deemed permissible
for one of the above reasons, it shall be consistent with the
terms of a woodland management plan approved by the Board
of Supervisors. Under no circumstances shall a clear-cutting
operation be conducted within 25 feet of a stream.
(2) Sod farming.
(3) Storage of any material which, if inundated, would float, or of any
flammable or toxic material or any other material which, if
inundated or otherwise released to the stream, would degrade or
pollute the stream, or cause damage if swept downstream.
(4) Toxic chemicals.
(a) Storage of, and the construction, enlargement or expansion of
any structure which would be used for the production, storage,
or maintenance of, a supply of the following toxic chemicals
which are dangerous to human or animal life:
[1] Acetone.
[2] Ammonia.
[3] Benzine.
[4] Calcium carbide.
[5] Carbon disulfide.
[6] Celluloid.
[7] Chlorine.
§ 170-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-401
1:523
[8] Hydrochloric acid.
[9] Hydrocyanic acid.
[10] Magnesium.
[11] Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
[12] Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
[13] Phosphorus.
[14] Potassium.
[15] Sodium.
[16] Sulfur and sulfur products.
[17] Herbicides or pesticides (including insecticides,
fungicides and rodenticides).
[18]Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are
not otherwise regulated.
[19] Any other dangerous materials or substances regulated by
the appropriate federal or state agencies.
(b) Further, any substantial improvement to an existing structure
which will be used for the production or storage of any such
materials or substances, or which will be used for any activity
requiring the maintenance of a supply (more than 110 gallons
or other comparable volume or any amount of radioactive
substances) of any such materials or substances on the
premises, shall be prohibited.
(5) Installation of individual or community on-lot sewage disposal
systems.
(6) The construction, enlargement, or expansion of mobile homes,
mobile home parks, mobile home subdivisions, manufactured
homes, or manufactured home parks or subdivisions.
(7) The construction, enlargement, or expansion of hospitals (public or
private).
(8) The construction, enlargement, or expansion of nursing homes
(public or private).
(9) The construction, enlargement, or expansion of jails or prisons.
(10) Junkyard.
J. Nonconforming structures and uses subject to floodplain regulations.
Nonconforming structures and uses of land subject to floodplain
§ 170-401 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-401
1:524
regulations shall be regulated under the provisions of Article XIX of this
chapter, but the following additional regulations also shall apply.
(1) Existing nonconforming structures or uses located in the floodway
area (F1) shall not be expanded or enlarged.
(2) The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of any kind to a nonconforming structure or use in a
floodway area (F1) and the modification, expansion, enlargement,
alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a
nonconforming structure or use located in a flood-fringe area (F2)
or general floodplain area (F3) must be authorized as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board under the provisions of
Article XX of this chapter. In considering such special exceptions,
the Zoning Hearing Board shall apply the following standards and
criteria:
(a) The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or
improvement of any structure in the floodway area (F1) shall
be permitted only where the rise in flood heights caused by the
proposed development is fully offset by accompanying
improvements.
(b) The proposed change is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and
intent of this chapter.
(c) The proposed use is feasible and suitable in relation to the land
use capabilities of the property in question, particularly its
capabilities in terms of a suitable water supply, drainage,
sewage disposal, topography, soil conditions, and ecological
consideration.
(d) The proposed change will serve the best interests of the
Township, the convenience of the community, where
applicable, and the public welfare.
(e) The adequacy of sanitation and public safety provisions, where
applicable, is assured and a certificate of adequacy or permit
for sewage and water facilities has been obtained from the
Chester County Health Department or other appropriate
governmental agencies required herein or deemed advisable
by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(f) If improvements to the floodway area (F1), or any filling or
alterations to the elevation of the ground in the floodway area
(F1), flood-fringe area (F2) or general floodplain area (F3), or
any alterations or relocations of any perennial stream are
contemplated, the Zoning Hearing Board shall determine that
the developer has complied with the provisions of Subsections
E and F, above, with regard to the effect of such filling or
alterations on base flood elevations and has notified in writing,
by certified mail, all adjacent communities which may be
§ 170-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-401
1:525
affected by such alterations and has submitted copies of such
notification to the Township, the Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development, and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and has, in addition, obtained
a permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
(g) Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, expansion,
or improvement of any kind to a nonconforming structure or
use located in the floodway area to an extent or amount less
than 50% of its market value shall be elevated and/or
floodproofed to the greatest extent possible.
(h) Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, expansion,
or improvement of any kind to a nonconforming structure or
use, regardless of location within areas subject to floodplain
regulations, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its
market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with
the provisions of this and any other applicable ordinances.
(i) All structures shall be constructed and placed on the lot so as
to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall
be designed to have a minimum obstruction effect upon the
flow and height of floodwater.
(j) Any structure or site listed in or determined eligible for the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) undergoing repair
or rehabilitation that would constitute a "substantial
improvement" as defined in this chapter shall comply with all
ordinance requirements that do not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation
that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the
structure from the NHRP or the State Inventory of Historic
Places shall be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or
the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from
ordinance requirements shall be the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(k) Nonconforming structures and uses shall be undertaken in
strict compliance with the floodproofing and related provisions
contained herein, and in all other applicable federal, state and
local codes, ordinances and regulations, including those of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the
Chester County Conservation District.
(3) If an existing manufactured home has incurred substantial damage
as a result of a flood, the home must:
(a) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest
floor is elevated 1 1/2 feet or more above the base flood
elevation; and
§ 170-401 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-401
1:526
(b) Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
K. Alteration or relocation of watercourses. Any alteration or relocation of
any perennial stream required for the construction or conduct of
permitted uses subject to floodplain regulations, including
nonconforming uses, and any of the aforesaid modifications,
alterations, or relocations required in order to gain access across land
subject to floodplain regulations shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the following:
(1) The developer shall submit a copy of a notification prepared, in
writing, by certified mail to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development, and to adjacent communities which may be affected
by modifications to the elevation of ground in a floodplain, or
alterations or relocations of streams.
(2) The developer shall submit a copy of a permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office, for the modifications to the grade or alterations or
relocations to the stream, or evidence from the said Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office that such
a permit is not required.
(3) Proposed fills shall meet the following minimum standards. Plans
submitted under the provisions of this subsection shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Board of Supervisors according to
procedures set forth in Chapter 149, Subdivision of Land.
(a) Fill shall consist of soil or rock materials only. Sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted.
(b) Fill material shall be compacted to provide the necessary
stability and resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling.
(c) Fill slopes shall be no steeper than one vertical on three
horizontal, unless substantiating data justifying steeper slopes
are submitted to and approved by the Zoning Officer.
(d) Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not
adversely affect adjacent properties.
(e) Care shall be taken to prevent erosion and sedimentation due
to proximity to the stream. The Township Engineer shall
approve the proposed erosion/sedimentation control
methodology.
(4) Modifications to the floodplain or stream courses shall be
undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing and related
provisions contained herein, and in all other applicable federal,
state and local codes, ordinances and regulations, including those
§ 170-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-401
1:527
of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and
the Chester County Conservation District.
L. Special requirements for subdivisions and land development. All
subdivision proposals and land development proposals containing at
least 50 lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified
floodplain areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall
be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that
determine base flood elevations and floodway information. The analyses
shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format
required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) and
letter of map revision (LOMR). Submittal requirements and processing
fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
M. Installation of utility facilities subject to floodplain regulations. Where
utility lines or on-site facilities are required to be installed or replaced
in an area subject to floodplain regulations, the following minimum
standards shall apply:
(1) Water facilities. All new or replacement water facilities, whether
public or private, shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system, and be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities. All new or replacement sanitary sewer
facilities, and private package sewage treatment plants (including
all pumping stations and collector systems, whether public or
private) shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into
the floodwaters. In addition, they should be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and
impairment.
(3) Drainage. Storm drainage facilities, whether public or private, shall
be designed to convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and
efficient manner.
(4) All other new or replacement public or private utilities and facilities
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system, and be located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damages.
N. Minimum floodproofing standards. Where a special exception has been
requested under the provisions of Subsection H above, in which it is
anticipated that a structure or use will be modified, altered, repaired,
reconstructed, expanded or improved in any way, when a sewage
treatment plant or pumping station is contemplated under the
provisions of Subsection F above, or where a special exception or
variance is granted under the provisions of Subsection L below, the
following minimum standards shall apply to floodproofing:
§ 170-401 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-401
1:528
(1) Within any floodway area (F1), flood-fringe area (F2) or general
floodplain area (F3), the lowest floor (including basement) of any
new or improved residential structure shall be not less than 1 1/2
feet above the base flood elevation. Any nonresidential structure,
or part thereof, made watertight below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the W1 or W2
space classification standards contained in the publication entitled
"Flood-Proofing Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other
equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect which states that the
proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance
with the above referenced standards. There should be a statement
submitted with the permit application and a statement submitted
with the as-built floodproofing certificate prior to the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy.
(2) If fill is used to raise the finished surface of the lowest floor to the
base flood elevation, such fill shall extend beyond a structure for a
sufficient distance to provide acceptable access. For residential
structures, fill shall extend laterally 15 feet beyond the building
line from all points. For nonresidential structures, fill shall be
placed to provide access acceptable for intended use. At-grade
access, with fill extending laterally 15 feet beyond the building line,
shall be provided to a minimum of 25% of the perimeter of a
nonresidential structure.
(3) For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully or
partially enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) located within the floodplain which will be used solely
for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage
in an area other than a basement shall be designed and constructed
to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must be certified by a registered
professional engineer and must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
installed on two separate walls.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
§ 170-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-401
1:529
(4) All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks located at or below the
base flood elevation shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation.
(5) Depending on the type of structure involved, the following
information shall also be included in the application and
maintained on record by the Zoning Officer:
(a) For structures to be elevated to the base flood elevation:
[1] A plan showing the size of the proposed structure and its
relation to the lot where it is to be constructed.
[2] A determination of elevations of the existing ground,
proposed finished ground, lowest floors, to be certified by
registered professional engineer, surveyor or architect.
[3] Plans showing the method of elevating the proposed
structure, including details of proposed fills, pile
structures, retaining walls, foundations, erosion protection
measures, etc. These plans shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer or architect.
[4] Plans showing the methods used to protect utilities
(including sewer, water, telephone, electric, gas, etc.) from
flooding to the base flood elevation at the building site.
(b) For structures to be floodproofed to the base flood elevation
(nonresidential structures only):
[1] A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop the structural design, specifications, and plans
showing details of all floodproofing measures, and
showing the size of the proposed structure and its relation
to the lot where it is to be constructed. The plan must
include a determination of elevations of existing ground,
proposed finished ground, lowest floors and floodproofing
limits.
[2] A certificate prepared by the registered professional
engineer or architect who prepared the plans in
§ 170-401F(4), above, that the structure in question,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, is
designed so that:
[a] Below the base flood elevation the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water.
[b] The structure will withstand the hydrostatic,
hydrodynamic, buoyant impact and other forces
resulting from the flood depths, velocities, pressures,
and other factors associated with the base flood
elevation.
§ 170-401 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-401
1:530
[3] A certificate must be provided to the Township which
includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) in North American Vertical Datum of 1988 to which
the structures are floodproofed to be maintained with the
Township Zoning Officer.
(6) Structures accessory to a principal building need not be elevated or
floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a minimum, with
the following requirements:
(a) The structure shall not be designed or used for human
habitation, but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to
the storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the
principal use or activity.
(b) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(c) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(d) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be at least 1 1/2 feet above
the base flood elevation.
(e) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(f) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(g) Lateral movement and shall be designed to automatically
provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(h) If a variance is granted, a signed declaration of land restriction
(nonconversion agreement) shall be recorded on the property
deed prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
(i) The storage of hazardous materials in accessory structures is
prohibited.
O. Hardships.
§ 170-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-401
1:531
(1) When the provisions of this § 170-401 are deemed by the applicant
to be unreasonable or to create a substantial hardship, the
applicant shall have a right to:
(a) In the case of applications for permitted uses under
Subsections G or H, above, make an appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with the provisions of Article XXI
of this chapter.
(b) In the case of an appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board for a
special exception under the provisions of Subsection J, above,
supply additional testimony and evidence to the Zoning
Hearing Board as part of his request for relief from such
hardship.
(2) All decisions on such appeals shall adhere to the following criteria:
(a) Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the
floodplain administrator concerning the administration of the
provisions of this section may appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days
after the decision, determination or action of the floodplain
administrator.
(b) The Zoning Hearing Board shall not grant a variance or special
exception for any construction, development, use or activity
within an area subject to floodplain regulations that would
cause any increase in the base flood elevation.
(c) The Zoning Hearing Board shall grant special exceptions only
upon a showing of good and sufficient cause; a determination
that failure to grant the appeal would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant; and a determination that the
granting of an appeal will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, creation of nuisance, fraud on or victimization of the
public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(d) The Zoning Hearing Board shall grant a special exception only
upon determination that it is the minimum necessary to afford
relief, considering the flood hazard. In the case of
requirements for floodproofing, the highest feasible class of
floodproofing as defined by floodproofing regulations
promulgated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, shall be
provided.
(e) The Zoning Hearing Board shall not grant a special exception
for new construction and substantial improvements of
residential structures within Zones AE and A as shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map having the lowest floor (including
basement) 1.5 feet above base flood elevation.
§ 170-401 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-401
1:532
(f) The Zoning Hearing Board shall notify the applicant in writing
over the signature of the Chairman of the Zoning Hearing
Board that the issuance of a decision to allow construction of a
structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance; and such construction
below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and
property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of
all decisions as required in Subsection O(2)(g) below.
(g) The Zoning Hearing Board shall maintain a record of all
decisions including justification for their issuance and report
such decisions issued in its annual report submitted to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(h) No special exception or variance shall be granted for any
requirement pertaining to developments which may endanger
human life [as described in § 170-401I(4), (6), (7), (8), and (9)
of this chapter], hospitals, nursing homes, jails/prisons or
manufactured home parks in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Flood Plain Management Act, P.L. 851, No. 166 of 1978, as
amended.
(i) Upon receiving an application for a special exception or
variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall, prior to rendering a
decision thereon, require the applicant to furnish such of the
following material as is deemed necessary by the Board:
[1] Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions and elevation of the lot and existing
and proposed uses; photographs showing existing uses
and vegetation; soil types and other pertinent information.
[2] A series of cross-sections at twenty-five-foot intervals
along the lot shoreline, showing the stream channel and
elevation of adjoining land areas to be occupied by the
proposed uses, and high water information. Cross-sections
shall be field-run topography based on a known USGS
benchmark.
[3] Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel.
[4] Specifications for building materials and construction,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, storage, and
water supply and sanitary facilities.
[5] Computation of the increase, if any, in the height of the
base flood which would be attributable to any proposed
uses.
[6] A deed notation or lease notation, to be placed on record to
run with the land, which notation shall contain the
following provision: "This lot is entirely (partially) within
§ 170-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-401
1:533
§ 170-402. Steep Slope Conservation District.
an area subject to floodplain regulations as defined by
Article IV of the Westtown Township Zoning Ordinance."
(j) In considering any application for a special exception or
variance, the Zoning Hearing Board may request at the
hearing the testimony of any Township Board, Commission, or
technical advisor concerning the extent to which the proposed
use would diminish the capacity of areas subject to floodplain
regulations to store and absorb floodwaters, to moderate flood
velocities, and to accommodate sediment; be subject to flood
damage; cause erosion and impair the amenity of areas subject
to floodplain regulations; or adversely affect the area
contiguous to areas subject to floodplain regulations as well as
areas downstream; or on any other pertinent aspect of the
case.
(k) In all proceedings before the Zoning Hearing Board, including
application for special exception from the provisions of this
section, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant to show
that the use required will be in general conformity with the
objectives of this section, that proper safeguards will be
observed, and that the use will not be injurious to the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
(l) The applicant shall demonstrate that the use will be in
accordance with all applicable federal, state and local agency
codes, ordinances and regulations including those of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the
Chester County Conservation District, and that permits will be
obtained from these agencies as a condition of receiving a
building or construction permit from Westtown Township for
the work identified in the application to the Zoning Hearing
Board.
(m) Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning
Code and any other local ordinance.
(n) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing
Board may seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as
provided by the laws of this state, including the Pennsylvania
Flood Plain Management Act.
A. Intended purposes. The purposes of this section are as follows:
(1) To promote the public health, safety and welfare by the protection
of steep slope areas and by encouraging the retention of open
space located and designed so as to constitute a harmonious and
§ 170-401 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-402
1:534
appropriate part of the physical development of Westtown
Township.
(2) To permit only those uses of steep slope areas which are
compatible with the conservation of natural conditions and which
maintain stable soil conditions by minimizing disturbances to
vegetative ground covers and restricting the regrading of steep
slope areas.
(3) To limit soil erosion and the resultant destruction of the land,
siltation of streams, and damage to the property of individuals.
(4) To protect low-lying areas from flooding by limiting the increase in
stormwater runoff caused by grading of sloped areas, changes of
ground cover, or the erection of structures.
(5) To maintain the ecological integrity and habitat value of steeply
sloped areas, i.e., indigenous vegetation and wildlife, which could
be adversely affected by otherwise permitted disturbances.
(6) To allow the continuing replenishment of groundwater resources
and the maintenance of springs.
B. General provisions.
(1) Compliance. No area within the Steep Slope Conservation District
shall hereafter be used without full compliance with the terms of
this section and other applicable regulations.
(2) Steep Slope Conservation District overlay concept. The Steep Slope
Conservation District shall be deemed an overlay on any zoning
district(s) now or hereafter enacted to regulate the use of land in
Westtown Township.
(a) The Steep Slope Conservation District shall have no effect on
the permitted uses in the underlying zoning district, except
where said uses are intended to be located within the
boundaries of the Steep Slope Conservation District, as defined
herein, and said uses are in conflict with the permitted uses set
forth in this section.
(b) In those areas of the Township where the Steep Slope
Conservation District applies, the requirements of the Steep
Slope Conservation District shall supersede the requirements
of the underlying zoning district(s).
(c) Should the Steep Slope Conservation District boundaries be
changed as a result of legislative or administrative actions or
judicial decision, the zoning requirements applicable to the
area in question shall revert to the requirements of the
underlying zoning district(s) without consideration of this
section.
§ 170-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-402
1:535
(d) For any parcel or any part thereof on which the Steep Slope
Conservation District is an overlay, should the underlying
zoning classification(s) be changed as a result of legislative or
administrative actions or judicial decision, such change(s) in
classification shall have no effect on the boundaries of the
Steep Slope Conservation District, unless an amendment to
said boundaries was included as part of the proceedings from
which the subsequent change(s) originated.
(3) Preservation of other restrictions. It is not intended by this section
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants,
or deed restrictions. However, where this section imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this section shall prevail.
(4) Municipal liability. Any determination that a proposed use complies
with this chapter, or any approval of a subdivision or land
development plan, or any issuance of a building permit within or
near the Steep Slope Conservation District shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the
Township, or by any official or employee thereof, of the
practicability or safety of the proposed use and shall create no
liability upon the Township, its officials or employees. This chapter
does not imply that areas outside the Steep Slope Conservation
District boundaries or land uses permitted within said District will
always be totally free from the adverse effects of erosion, or other
effects of nearby steep slopes.
C. Designation and interpretation of district boundary.
(1) The Steep Slope Conservation District consists of two areas which
are delineated and defined as follows: [Amended 5-20-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-5]
(a) Prohibitive slope. Prohibitive slopes are those of greater than
25% delineated and measured over a six-foot or greater
difference in vertical elevation, as based on a site survey or on
the United States Geological Survey Topographic Maps of the
Regional Base Map Series of 1973 for the West Chester
Quadrangle (i.e., sloping more than 25 feet vertical over a
distance of 100 feet horizontal), where such slope exists over
any continuous horizontal distance of 50 feet or more, as
measured parallel to the contour lines.
(b) Precautionary slope. Precautionary slopes are those of 15% to
25% delineated and measured over a six-foot or greater
difference in vertical elevation, as based on a site survey or on
the United States Geological Survey Topographic Maps of the
Regional Base Map Series of 1973 for the West Chester
Quadrangle (i.e., sloping 15 to 25 feet vertical over a distance
of 100 feet horizontal), where such slope exists over any
§ 170-402 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-402
1:536
continuous horizontal distance of 50 feet or more, as measured
parallel to the contour lines.
(2) Accurate topography shall be shown. If a more detailed
topographic survey has not been completed, see the topographic
mapping of the Chester County Department of Computing and
Information Services. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(3) Boundary interpretation and appeals procedure.
(a) Each application for construction or land disturbance within
the Steep Slope Conservation District shall be submitted in
accordance with § 170-402E(1) below. Any area of the Steep
Slope Conservation District that falls within the subject lot or
lots shall be interpolated and shown on the site plan required
under § 170-402E(1)(a) through shading of such area or areas.
The site plan shall contain a certification by the registered
professional engineer or surveyor having prepared the plan as
to the accuracy of the slopes as depicted on the plan. Areas
shown as less than 10% slope may be based on United States
Geological Survey information. Any area shown as 10% or
greater slope shall be delineated on the basis of an actual field
survey of the topography of the site.
(b) Where the exact location of the boundaries of the district in
relation to a given parcel is in question, the applicant's site
plan may be supplemented by a topographic survey of the
property and any other documentation deemed pertinent. The
Township Engineer shall evaluate all such material submitted
and shall make a written report of the results of his
determination, a copy of which shall be provided to Board of
Supervisors.
(c) Any party aggrieved by any such determination of the
Township Engineer or other decision or determination under
this section may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. The
party contesting the location of the district boundary shall
have the burden of proof in case of any such appeal.
D. Permitted uses.
(1) Standards applicable to all uses within the steep slope conservation
district.
(a) All grading shall be minimized, and no grading shall be
undertaken within any area of the Steep Slope Conservation
District except where approved in conjunction with a use
permitted under the terms of this section.
(b) Finished slopes of all cuts and fills shall not exceed 33%, unless
the applicant can demonstrate that steeper slopes can be
stabilized and maintained adequately.
§ 170-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-402
1:537
(2) Uses permitted in areas of prohibitive slope. The following are the
only uses permitted as of right in areas of prohibitive slope. Such
uses also shall be in compliance with the base zoning district, and
shall not involve the erection of buildings, construction of streets,
installation of sewage disposal systems, or permanent removal of
topsoil.
(a) Parks and outdoor recreational uses, consistent with the goals
of watershed protection.
(b) Logging and woodcutting, where such activity is limited to
highly selective removal of trees. Maximum precautions shall
be taken to avoid destruction of or injury to understory brush
and trees.
(c) Grading for the minimum portion of a driveway necessary to
access a single-family dwelling when it can be demonstrated
that no other routing which avoids slopes exceeding 20% is
feasible.
(d) Yard area of any permitted building, so long as such building is
itself not within the prohibitive slope area. The yard area may
not be disturbed by grading or clearing.
(3) Uses permitted in areas of precautionary slope; lot area;
impervious coverage. [Amended 5-20-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5;
3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(a) In areas of precautionary slope, the same uses shall be allowed
as provided in the underlying zoning district.
(b) All grading of precautionary slope shall be conducted in a
manner that minimizes alteration of the landscape, that
maximizes preservation of natural vegetation and that avoids
erosion.
(c) The Zoning Officer may require that the applicant for activity
within areas of over 15% slopes submit an erosion and
sedimentation control plan for review and approval by the
Chester County Conservation District and/or Township
Engineer, and/or submittal and approval of a stormwater
management plan by the Township Engineer.
[1] The Zoning Officer shall place conditions upon any permit
to incorporate mitigation measures to ensure compliance
with this chapter and state regulations and to provide for
stable slopes, based upon any review of the Township
Engineer or Conservation District. If such reviews are
required, the applicant shall be required to fund the costs
of such reviews.
§ 170-402 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-402
1:538
[2] The procedures and standards contained in § 170-402E
shall also apply.
(d) Any vegetation removal shall be conducted in a selective
manner that minimizes erosion.
(e) Any road or driveway shall be designed in a manner that
minimizes alteration of slopes over 15%. To the maximum
extent feasible, roads and driveways shall follow the natural
topography to minimize cuts and fills.
(f) If the total of all area(s) of precautionary slopes on a lot exceed
25% of the total area of a lot, then no more than 50% of the
precautionary slopes on that lot shall be disturbed, graded or
modified.
(g) Alteration shall not occur in areas of natural springs. Alteration
shall be minimized around other important groundwater
resource features.
E. Administration. Administration of this section is governed by Article XX
of this chapter. In addition, the following requirements shall apply:
[Amended 5-20-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5; 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
(1) Application procedures. Before a permit is issued for any
construction or land disturbance activity on land within or affecting
the Steep Slope Conservation District, the following material, in
full or in pertinent parts, shall be submitted for review by the
Township Engineer:
(a) An earthmoving plan of the property which indicates existing
grades with contour lines at two-foot intervals. Proposed
grades within the area of any proposed activity, disturbance, or
construction also shall be shown. All areas within the Steep
Slope Conservation District shall be shaded accordingly.
(b) A site plan indicating existing and proposed structures, other
impervious surfaces, storm drainage facilities, and retaining
walls. The site plan also shall locate and identify existing
vegetation and ground cover within areas of prohibitive and
precautionary slopes, as well as proposed landscaping material
to be installed.
(c) Architectural plans, elevations, and sections.
(d) A statement, signed and sealed by a registered architect or
engineer, explaining the building methods to be used in
overcoming foundation and other structural problems created
by slope conditions, preserving the natural watersheds, and
preventing soil erosion and excessive surface water runoff to
neighboring properties and/or streets.
§ 170-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-402
1:539
§ 170-403. Wetlands; soils with seasonally high water table.
(e) Plan, profile, and typical cross sections of any proposed street,
emergency access, or driveway, with the seal of a registered
professional engineer thereon.
(f) A statement, signed by the owner or future occupant at the
time of subdivision, land development, or building permit
application, that there is a full understanding of any difficulties
associated with access stemming from steep slopes.
No approval or building permit shall be authorized by the
Zoning Officer without the Township Engineer's review of this
material and his recommendation thereon.
A. Soils with seasonally high water table. No on-site sewer system, or any
portion thereof, shall be constructed or located on or within any soil
area where the seasonal high water table, according to the Soil Survey
of Chester and Delaware Counties (Soil Conservation Service, 1063), is
within one foot of the ground surface.
B. Wetlands. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(1) Wetlands shall be determined to exist when indicated by one or
more of the following:
(a) The National Wetlands Inventory Maps, as prepared by the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service;
(b) Hydric soils, as depicted in the Soil Survey of Chester and
Delaware Counties; and
(c) The existence of hydrophytic vegetation or hydrologic
conditions, as determined by on-site investigations.
C. Should the existence of wetlands be indicated as per the requirements
of § 170-403B(1) above, a wetlands delineation shall be performed by a
licensed professional engineer, hydrogeologist, soil scientist, or
similarly qualified professional experienced in wetlands ecology, the
selection of such at the discretion of the applicant. Plans shall be
submitted to the Township for review which show the delineation and
indicate any disturbance of wetlands anticipated. The qualifications of
the consultant performing the delineation shall be submitted with such
plans. Further, unless it is clearly evident in such plans that no
disturbance to the designated wetlands is anticipated, the delineation
performed shall be submitted to the appropriate regulatory agencies,
including but not limited to the US Army Corps of Engineers and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) for
boundary confirmation and/or requisite wetlands permits. All potential
impacts on wetlands shall conform to applicable regulations, as
amended. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
§ 170-402 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-403
1:540
§ 170-404. Existing vegetation; management practices.
D. Should the Township conclude per the requirements of § 170-403B(1)
that wetlands exist on the site, contrary to the applicant's findings, the
Township shall, at its discretion, request that either the Corps of
Engineers or PADEP verify the Township's findings and perform a
delineation. In the event such agencies verify the Township's findings,
the applicant will be required to secure any required wetlands permits,
unless the applicant's activity clearly will not impact existing wetlands.
[Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
E. Where wetlands exist and disturbance permits and/or mitigation
activities are required, final plan approval or granting of applicable
permits from the Township shall be contingent upon the applicant
receiving all necessary permits from the PADEP. [Amended 3-3-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-2]
A. Conservation of woodlands and other vegetation.
(1) Except in conjunction with routine property maintenance,
disturbance to the following shall be minimized:
(a) Healthy, well-stocked woodlands. In instances where
disturbance or tree cutting is unavoidable or considered
desirable in accordance with sound forest management
practice, an effort shall be made, with consultation from a
qualified professional, to retain as much of the woodland as
possible, of a size and configuration which would promote its
growth and natural regeneration.
(b) Vegetation, other than woodlands, providing wildlife food and
cover or visual amenity. This may include, but not necessarily
be limited to, single or groups of specimen trees, hedgerows,
and other vegetation not considered as woodland.
(2) Disturbance or removal of vegetation occupying environmentally
sensitive areas shall be undertaken only when necessary and on a
limited, selective basis to minimize the adverse impacts of such
actions. This shall include but not necessarily be limited to
vegetation performing important soil stabilizing functions on
floodplains, stream and pond banks, and sloping lands.
B. Protection of vegetation from mechanical injury and grading change.
(1) All woody vegetation to be retained within 25 feet of a building site,
parking area, or other proposed improvement shall be protected
from equipment damage by snow fencing or other effective
barriers.
(2) Heavy equipment operators shall minimize damage to existing tree
trunks and root systems by not driving heavy equipment within the
area circumscribed by the drip line of any tree. In addition, roots
§ 170-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-404
1:541
shall not be cut or disturbed within the area circumscribed by the
dripline of any tree.
(3) Tree trunks and exposed roots damaged during construction shall
be protected from further damage by fencing or other structural
barrier. Treatment of damaged areas shall be dictated by the
nature of the injury, e.g., damaged bark shall be cut back to a point
where the bark is intact and tight to the tree, exposed roots shall be
cleaned up and covered with topsoil.
(4) Trees shall not be used for roping, cables, signs, or fencing. Nails
and spikes shall not be driven into trees.
(5) The area around the base of existing woody vegetation shall be left
open. No impervious cover, storage of equipment, materials,
debris, or fill shall be allowed within the dripline of any existing
tree.
(6) Grade changes to occur at any location on the property shall not
result in an alteration to soil or drainage conditions which would
adversely affect existing vegetation to be retained following site
disturbance, unless adequate provisions are made to protect such
vegetation and its root systems.
C. Protection of vegetation from excavations.
(1) When digging trenches for utility lines or similar uses, disturbance
to the root zones of all woody vegetation shall be minimized.
(2) If trenches must be excavated in the root zone, all disturbed roots
shall be cut as cleanly as possible. The trench shall be backfilled as
quickly as possible, avoiding soil compaction.
D. Vegetated area maintenance standards for all districts.
(1) Intent of regulations. It is the intent of these regulations that,
within or adjacent to predominantly residential areas, property
owners shall not permit vegetation to become overgrown to the
point of becoming unsightly and/or unhealthy. At the same time,
plants that are grown for a useful or ornamental purpose, fields in
agricultural use, and areas of significant natural value should not
be subjected to excessive, unnecessary, or hindering standards of
maintenance.
(2) Terms of management. Where applicable [as determined by
Subsection D(3) and (4) below], the following practices for the
control of vegetation on properties within Westtown Township shall
be adhered to:
(a) On developed properties, grassed areas shall be controlled to a
maximum height of 12 inches during the growing season.
§ 170-404 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-404
1:542
(b) Mowing shall be timed for the most effective control of the
specific vegetation (e.g., ragweed and Canada thistle to be
mowed in midsummer before flower buds are set).
(c) Selective control of noxious vegetation, as defined, may be
practiced by means other than mowing. Selective control shall
include the following, in order of preferred method: hand
pulling, mechanical removal, burning, trimming; use of
herbicides shall be the least preferable means of control. No
method shall be used which would completely strip vegetation
off the soil.
(3) Conditions of applicability.
(a) Except as exempted under Subsection D(4) below, the terms of
this section shall apply to:
[1] Any lot within a subdivision or land development in which
average lot size is two acres or less; or
[2] Any preexisting lot of two acres or less, whether or not
created through a prior subdivision.
(b) Lots shall be considered established, for purposes of this
section, upon final approval by the Township and recording in
the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Chester County.
(4) Exemptions from the terms of this section.
(a) Character of the lot: uses, existing vegetation. The terms of
this section, where otherwise applicable, may be waived when
a lot, or portion thereof, exhibits one or more of the following
uses and/or vegetative characteristics:
[1] Floodplain (as delineated in § 170-401 of this chapter) or
marsh;
[2] Meadow, wildflower meadow, berry patch;
[3] Hedgerow;
[4] Agriculture, including land left fallow for up to one year;
and
[5] Areas undergoing a directed process of natural
succession.
(b) Character of abutting uses.
[1] The terms of this section may be waived where:
[a] None of the lands abutting or across a road from the
lot are being put to development uses (residential,
institutional, commercial, industrial); or
§ 170-404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-404
1:543
§ 170-405. Agriculturally suited soils conservation.
§ 170-406. Topsoil retention.
[b] All abutting developed lands are owned by (and
occupied by no one other than) the party owning the
lot in question, and/or abutting landowners waive
enforcement of the terms of this section against the
lot.
[2] The waivers in Subsection D(4)(a) and (b) above shall not
apply to that portion of the lot within 50 feet of an existing
road surface, said portion still requiring vegetation control
as per § 170-404D(2) above.
(5) Enforcement.
(a) Interpretation, administration, and enforcement of the terms
of this section shall be the responsibility of the Westtown
Township Zoning Officer. Any appeal from his decision shall be
handled in accordance with the terms of Article XXI of this
chapter.
(b) In evaluating the applicability of these requirements and
exemptions, the Zoning Officer shall, as he/she deems
necessary, consult with the Township Engineer or other
organizations or individuals with conservation expertise. Such
consultation shall, to the maximum extent possible, involve the
affected landowner, and shall be conducted for the purpose of
attaining the greatest consistency with the stated intent of
these regulations.
E. This § 170-404 shall not apply to forestry that meets the requirements
of § 170-408. [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
F. Subdivision and land development. See also the tree preservation and
replacement requirements in § 149-924D of the Township Code.
[Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
A. In any use or development of a tract where permanent open space is to
be created and/or retained, the landowner or applicant shall, whenever
possible and in conjunction with other applicable ordinances, include in
such open space those agriculturally suited soils whose acreage,
configuration, and location offer future opportunity for agricultural use.
B. In the siting of individual structures on lots, areas of agriculturally
suited soils should be left free of structures or paving whenever
possible, to allow opportunities for gardens and other agricultural uses.
A. Permission to remove required. No person shall excavate or otherwise
remove topsoil for sale or for use other than on the premises from
which the topsoil shall be taken, except in connection with the
§ 170-404 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-406
1:544
construction or alteration of a building on such premises in conjunction
with an approved plan, and excavation or grading incidental thereto,
without first having procured permission therefor from the Board of
Supervisors.
B. Application.
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall not consider any application for the
removal of topsoil from the premises for sale or otherwise unless
and until the owner of the premises shall first file with the Zoning
Officer an application requesting such permission, together with a
map of the premises prepared by a registered surveyor, showing
the contour lines and proposed contour grades resulting from such
intended removal of topsoil in relation to the topography of the
premises, and the proposed contour lines, proposed grades, and an
estimate of the amount of topsoil in cubic yards to be removed,
shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
(2) An erosion and sedimentation control plan and erosion control
permit approved by the Chester County Conservation District must
accompany the application for the removal of topsoil from the
premises.
(3) No such permission for topsoil removal shall be issued until such
map plan and permit has been filed, and until the proposed contour
lines and grades have been approved by the Board of Supervisors.
C. Review procedure. A hearing before the Board of Supervisors shall be
granted to an applicant for permission to remove topsoil within 30 days
after the applicant request such a hearing. The Board of Supervisors in
considering and reviewing the application and in arriving at its decision
shall be guided and take into consideration the public health, safety or
general welfare and particular consideration shall be given to the
following factors.
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land values and land uses.
(6) Such other factors that may relate to the public health, safety or
general welfare.
D. If after examining the application and the map provided for in
§ 170-406B(2) of this chapter, and after the hearing in the event a
hearing is requested by the applicant, and the Board of Supervisors is
of the opinion that the proposed topsoil removal will not create
§ 170-406 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-406
1:545
conditions inimical to the public health, welfare or safety, and will
not result in the creation of any sharp declivities, pits or depressions,
topsoil erosion or fertility problems, depressed land values, nor create
any drainage, sewerage problems or other conditions of danger,
permission to remove the topsoil shall be granted.
E. Conduct of operation:
(1) If permission to remove the topsoil shall be granted, the owner or
person in charge shall so conduct the operations that there shall be
no sharp declivities, pits or depressions and in such a manner that
the area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of debris, and graded
to conform with the contour lines and grades as approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
(2) The topsoil removal operations shall not be permitted within 60
feet of a property line.
(3) The owner of the premises or the person in charge of the removal of
topsoil, when permission has been duly granted, shall not remove
from the premises the top layer of arable soil to a depth of six
inches, but such top layer of arable soil to a depth of six inches shall
be set side for retention on the premises, and shall be respread
over the premises when the rest of the soil has been removed,
pursuant to levels and contour lines approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
(4) The soil removal operation may not take place during the months of
December, January, and February.
(5) Dust and mud on public roads resulting from the topsoil removal
operation shall be removed or controlled within 24 hours of notice
by the Township to the owner or person in charge.
(6) All areas where topsoil has been stored, or removed and respread
shall be reseeded with an appropriate ground cover within 30 days.
F. Permit required:
(1) No excavation shall be made and no topsoil shall be removed under
the provisions of this chapter unless a permit therefor shall have
been first obtained as provided herein, and no excavation shall be
made and no topsoil shall be removed except in conformity with the
provisions of this section and Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land
Development. At the time of application, a fee to the order of the
Township shall be paid by the applicant for the permit for removal
of the topsoil from the premises. Said fee shall be as provided for in
§ 170-2304 of this chapter.
(2) In the event of refusal of the topsoil removal permit the fee paid by
the applicant shall be refunded, except that all monies and costs
incurred by the Township for engineering surveys and reports,
§ 170-406 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-406
1:546
§ 170-407. Setback from perennial creek. [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-2; amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
§ 170-408. Forestry. [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
inspection fees and legal fees shall be retained by the Township and
balance remaining shall be refunded to the applicant, together with
a statement of the costs and expenses incurred by the Township in
the processing of said application.
G. Guarantees. The Board of Supervisors shall require a guaranty in the
form of a bond or escrow funds, to be provided prior to issue of the
permit for removal of topsoil from the premises. The bond or funds shall
be furnished under such conditions and form with surety as shall be
approved by the Board to guarantee the operation pursuant to the
application and map, Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan, and
§ 170-406D of this chapter. The amount of the bond shall not be less
than $10,000.
A. No new principal or accessory building or use, parking or commercial
or industrial storage area shall be located within a minimum of 75 feet
from the top bank of a perennial creek.
B. Where the majority of existing trees and shrubs are removed from areas
between a perennial creek and a distance of 75 feet from the top bank
of such creek, new trees and shrubs shall be planted and maintained
that will have the same or better impact upon controlling erosion and
filtering pollutants from runoff.
A. Forestry, as defined by § 170-201, shall be permitted by right in all
zoning districts. These provisions in § 170-408 shall only apply to the
removal of trees for use as firewood or wood products that are
unrelated to any current or prospective development of land or
buildings. Tree cutting as part of current or prospective development
shall be regulated by § 170-404. The cutting down of trees of less than
six inches trunk diameter is not regulated by this § 170-408. For the
purposes of this section, all trunk diameters shall be measured at 3.5
feet above the ground level.
B. On any lot, a maximum of 10% of the trees of six inches or more trunk
diameter may be cut down in any calendar year without a zoning
permit.
C. On any lot, if more than 10% of the trees of six inches or more trunk
diameter are proposed to be cut down in any calendar year, then a
Township zoning permit shall be required. This § 170-408 shall not
regulate Christmas tree farms. If such forestry involves more than one
acre of forested land, then the following additional requirements shall
apply:
§ 170-406 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-408
1:547
(1) The applicant shall submit a written forest management plan
prepared by a professional forester that shows that the land will be
managed according to accepted professional standards to result in
the long-term productivity of the forest and that shows and
describes the extent of tree cutting. The forestry shall comply with
the management plan.
(2) The applicant shall submit and comply with a soil and
sedimentation control plan. This plan shall include, but not be
limited to, measures to address creek and wetland crossings and
logging roads.
(3) Clearcutting shall be prohibited, except for areas that need to be
cleared to construct a use or structure that has received Township
approval.
(4) A minimum of 20% of the forest cover (canopy) shall be kept and
residual trees shall be well distributed.
D. No cutting down of live trees shall occur within a street right-of-way
without a Township permit, except for forestry conducted by Penn DOT
or its contractors or public utilities.
E. In any forestry operation, the majority of trees with trunks located
within 20 feet of a lot line or street right-of-way shall not be cut down or
otherwise killed.
F. Debris from any forestry operation shall be removed, except as
otherwise provided for in the forest management plan.
§ 170-408 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-408
1:548
ARTICLE V
A/C Agricultural/Cluster Residential District
§ 170-500. Statement of intent.
In addition to the general goals in the preamble, the purpose, and the
community development objectives, it is the purpose of this article to
preserve the traditional agricultural and rural residential character of
appropriate areas of the Township, provide housing opportunities for
residential development at low densities consistent with such character, and
provide for clustering of housing as an option to preserve and enhance the
natural, scenic, and historic character of the landscape.
§ 170-501. Use regulations. [Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-3;
5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2; 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
A. Uses by right. A building may be erected, altered, or used, and a lot may
be used or occupied, by right, for any one of the following principal
purposes and no other:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Agricultural use, in accordance with the provisions § 170-1609 of
this chapter. A principal dwelling may be permitted as a use by
right on the same premises as a principal agricultural use.
(3) Buildings, structures, and/or uses owned and operated by
Westtown Township.
(4) Accessory uses. Only the following accessory uses shall be
permitted, in addition to a permitted principal use:
(a) Uses customarily accessory to agricultural or residential uses,
including but not limited to those uses described in
§ 170-1603B and C of this chapter.
(b) Minor home occupation, in accordance with the terms of
§ 170-1605 of this chapter.
(c) Swimming pool, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 170-1611 of this chapter.
(d) Display and sale of farm products meeting the requirements of
§ 170-1603B.
B. Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception, in
accordance with the terms of this article and the standards and criteria
contained in § 170-2108 of this chapter. The design standards for uses
permitted by special exception, as contained in § 170-503 of this article,
shall apply to all uses permitted by special exception in the A/C District.
§ 170-500 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-501
1:549
§ 170-502. Area and bulk regulations.
The following regulations shall apply:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast facility, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 170-1607 of this chapter.
(2) Day camp, riding academy, swimming club, athletic field, golf
course (excluding golf driving range and miniature golf course),
provided the Board concludes there is sufficient acreage available
for such uses. The area and bulk regulations contained in
§ 170-702E(2) through E(10) shall apply.
(3) Religious use or primary or secondary school, which shall comply
with § 170-702E of this chapter.
(4) Major home occupation, in accordance with the terms of
§ 170-1605 of this chapter.
(5) Accessory dwelling unit, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 170-1603A of this chapter.
(6) Conversion of a single-family dwelling, in accordance with the
provisions of § 170-1608 of this chapter.
(7) Farm-related business meeting the requirements of § 170-1616.
(8) Conversion of an accessory dwelling unit into a rental, in
accordance with the provisions of § 170-1619. [Added 5-6-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-02]
C. Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted only upon
approval as a conditional use by the Board of Supervisors in accordance
with the terms of this article and § 170-2009 of this chapter.
(1) Adult community development meeting the requirements of
§ 170-503, § 170-1615, and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter, but which shall not be required to meet the provisions of
§ 170-502.
(2) Residential development, in accordance with the provisions of the
flexible development procedure as set forth in Article IX of this
chapter.
(3) Solar energy system as a principal use subject to § 170-1618C.
[Added 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3]
(4) Wind energy system as a principal use subject to § 170-1618D.
[Added 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3]
A. The maximum density of use on any tract within the A/C District shall be
as determined by § 170-1519B of this chapter.
§ 170-501 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-502
1:550
§ 170-503. Design standards. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
B. Single-family detached dwelling: [Amended 5-1-1995 by Ord. No.
95-2; 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(1) Lot size: two acre minimum.
(2) Lot width at minimum building setback line: 200 feet minimum.
(3) Lot width at street line: 100 feet minimum (cul-de-sac: 50 feet).
(4) Impervious coverage: 15% maximum.
(5) Minimum building setback line: 50 feet minimum, except no
structure shall be located within 100 feet of the future right-of-way
line of Route 202 or Route 3, regardless of lot lines.
(a) An undeveloped area within this required setback shall not be
subdivided from the remainder of the tract.
(b) The land within this required setback may be accepted as part
of the requirements for open space of this chapter and Chapter
149, Subdivision and Land Development, and may be deed
restricted or conveyed in accordance with such.
(6) Side yards: 50 feet minimum.
(7) Rear yard: 50 feet minimum.
(8) Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 38 feet.
C. Agricultural use: As required by the standards in § 170-1609 of this
chapter.87
D. Residential development as per flexible development procedure: As
required by the standards in Article IX of this chapter.
E. Accessory uses: Accessory uses may be located in side and rear yards,
but only in conformance with the standards of § 170-1502 of this
chapter.
F. Uses permitted by special exception: As required by § 170-501B of this
chapter.
G. Conditional uses: Residential conditional uses, as applicable, shall
conform to the standards for single-family detached dwellings in
§ 170-502B above. Nonresidential conditional uses shall conform to the
standards for nonresidential uses in Article VII, § 170-702E of this
chapter.
87.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding residential cluster development, which
immediately followed, was repealed 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1. This ordinance also
redesignated former Subsections E through H as D through G, respectively.
§ 170-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-503
1:551
A. The following standards, as applicable, shall govern all uses permitted
by right, special exception and conditional use in the A/C District:
(1) Parking: as required by Article XVII.
(2) Lighting: as required by § 170-1514.
(3) Screening: as required by § 170-1508.
(4) Storage: as required by § 170-1509.
(5) Signs: as required by Article XVIII.
(6) Landscaping: as required by § 170-1507.
(7) Access and traffic control: as required by §§ 170-503C and
170-1510. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1]
(8) Interior circulation: as required by § 170-1513.
B. Residential development as per flexible development procedure: As
required by the design standards in Article IX, where those standards
exceed, or address matters not covered by, the requirements of
Subsection A above.
C. Any applicant shall, as a condition of any applicable zoning, subdivision
or land development approval, prove to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that the proposed use or development will provide safe and
efficient vehicular and pedestrian traffic access, circulation and control,
consistent with the following: [Added 9-15-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-1]
(1) Traffic access shall be fully coordinated with adjacent existing and
future development, including but not limited to providing and
promoting appropriate traffic access to/from adjacent properties.
(2) Traffic access to use(s) within any development site shall be
provided by a fully developed internal network of local roads or
private drives, paths and trails which also shall link any proposed
use or development to existing or proposed intersections or other
points of controlled and/or signalized access to collector and/or
arterial highway(s).
(3) Continuous collector street(s) and trail(s) shall be developed as
part of the subject use or development to provide internal through
connection(s) between existing collector and/or arterial streets and
trail(s), as applicable, and as required by the Board of Supervisors
to provide reasonable access to the subject use or development.
(Examples may include but are not limited to: a through collector
street connecting the intersection of Skiles Boulevard and U.S.
Route 202 with West Pleasant Grove Road and PA Route 926); a
through collector street connecting Walnut Hill/Shady Grove Roads
§ 170-503 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-503
1:552
to Westtown Road; and a through collector street connection to PA
Routes 352 and 926.)
(4) The number of access points onto existing perimeter public roads
shall be kept to the minimum number necessary for safe and
efficient traffic access, circulation and control. Vehicular accesses
to public roads shall:
(a) Incorporate traffic control and auxiliary lanes designed to
accommodate the full build out of the proposed use or
development to the extent permitted by PennDOT, as well as
cross traffic from adjacent properties.
(b) Be provided in accordance with the standards set forth in
§§ 170-1511 and 170-1512.
(5) Vehicular access to the internal network from proposed uses or
development shall be provided in accordance with the standards
set forth in §§ 170-1501 and 170-1510.
(6) Interior streets, interconnected parking lots, shared driveways,
access easements and/or stubbed streets shall be used as
necessary to maximize efficiency and safety of internal circulation
and minimize the number of access points onto existing perimeter
public roads.
§ 170-503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-503
1:553

ARTICLE VI
R-1 Residential District
§ 170-600. Statement of intent.
In addition to the general goals in the preamble, the purpose, and the
community development objectives, it is the purpose of this article to
provide housing choices for residential development at low densities which
will preserve and enhance the open space, natural, and scenic landscape
character of existing residential and agricultural areas.
§ 170-601. Use regulations.
A. Uses by right. In the R-1 District, a building may be erected or used,
and a lot or premises be used or occupied, by right, for any one of the
following principal purposes and no other: [Amended 9-15-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-3; 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Agricultural use, in accordance with the provisions of § 170-1609 of
this chapter. A principal dwelling may be permitted as a use by
right on the same premises as a principal agricultural use.
(3) Buildings, structures and uses owned and operated by Westtown
Township.
(4) Accessory uses. Only the following accessory uses shall be
permitted, in addition to a permitted principal use:
(a) Uses customarily accessory to agricultural or residential uses,
including but not limited to those uses described in
§ 170-1603B and C of this chapter.
(b) Swimming pool, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 170-1611 of this chapter.
(c) Minor home occupation, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 170-1605 of this chapter.
(d) Display and sale of farm products meeting the requirements of
§ 170-1603B.
B. Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception, in
accordance with the terms of this article and the standards and criteria
contained in § 170-2108 of this chapter. The design standards for uses
permitted by special exception, as contained in § 170-603 of this article,
shall apply to all uses permitted by special exception in the R-1 District.
[Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-3; 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
§ 170-600 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-601
1:555
(1) Bed-and-breakfast facility, in accordance with provisions of
§ 170-1607 of this chapter.
(2) Day camp, riding academy, swimming club, athletic field, golf
course (excluding golf driving range and miniature golf course),
provided the Board concludes that there is sufficient acreage
available for such uses. Area and bulk regulations contained in
§ 170-702E(2) through E(10) shall apply.
(3) Religious use or primary or secondary school, or college or
university, which shall comply with § 170-702E of this chapter. Any
dormitory shall meet all of the following additional requirements:
(a) Be restricted to occupancy by full-time students and staff of an
accredited college or university,
(b) Be located on a lot with a minimum lot area of 25 acres (which
may extend into another municipality), and
(c) Be setback a minimum of 250 feet from any line of an existing
dwelling that is not owned by the college or university.
(4) Noncommercial recreational use such as nonprofit swimming pool,
provided that the principal activity shall not be one which is
customarily carried on as a business and provided that all services
shall be for members and their guests. Area and bulk regulations
contained in § 170-702E shall apply.
(5) Major home occupation, in accordance with the terms of
§ 170-1605 of this chapter.
(6) Accessory dwelling unit, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 170-1603A of this chapter.
(7) Conversion of a single-family dwelling, in accordance with the
provisions of § 170-1608 of this chapter.
(8) Farm-related business meeting the requirements of § 170-1616.
(9) Conversion of an accessory dwelling unit into a rental, in
accordance with the provisions of § 170-1619. [Added 5-6-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-02]
C. Conditional use. The following use shall be permitted only upon
approval as a conditional use by the Board of Supervisors in accordance
with the terms of this article and § 170-2009 of this chapter: [Amended
3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2; 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
(1) Residential development in accordance with the provisions of the
flexible development procedure as set forth in Article IX of this
chapter.
§ 170-601 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-602
1:556
§ 170-602. Area and bulk regulations.
The following regulations shall apply:
A. The maximum density of use on any tract within the R-1 District shall be
as determined by § 170-1519B of this chapter.
B. Single-family detached dwellings. [Amended 5-1-1995 by Ord. No.
95-2; 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(1) Lot size: one acre minimum.
(2) Lot width at building: 150 feet minimum setback line.
(3) Lot width at street line: 50 feet minimum, except 250 feet minimum
at the future right-of-way lines of Routes 202, 352, 3, or 926, if the
lot would have direct access onto any of these routes.
(4) Impervious coverage: 20% maximum.
(5) Minimum building setback line: 60 feet minimum except, no
structure shall be located within 100 feet of the future right-of-way
line of Route 202 or Route 3, regardless of lot lines.
(a) This requirement shall be reduced to 60 feet minimum for lots
of record existing prior to the adoption of this chapter that
have a lot depth from the future right-of-way line of Route 202
or Route 3 of less than 150 feet.
(b) The land within this required setback may be accepted as part
of the requirements for open space of this chapter and Chapter
149, Subdivision and Land Development.
(6) Side yards: 25 feet minimum.
(7) Rear yard: 50 feet minimum.
(8) Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 38 feet.
C. Agricultural use: As required by standards in § 170-1609 of this chapter.
D. Residential cluster development: As required by the standards in
§ 170-1612 of this chapter.
E. Residential development as per flexible development procedure: As
required by the standards in Article IX of this chapter.
F. Uses by special exception: as required by § 170-702E of this chapter.
[Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
G. Accessory uses: Accessory uses may be located in side and rear yards,
but only in conformance with the standards of § 170-1502 of this
chapter.
§ 170-602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-602
1:557
§ 170-603. Design standards. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
H. Conditional uses: Residential conditional uses, as applicable, shall
conform to the standards for single-family detached dwellings in
§ 170-602B above. Nonresidential conditional uses shall conform to the
standards for nonresidential uses in Article VII, § 170-702E, of this
chapter.
A. The following standards, as applicable, shall govern all uses permitted
by right, special exception and conditional use in the R-1 District:
(1) Screening: As required by § 170-1508.
(2) Storage: As required by § 170-1509.
(3) Landscaping: As required by § 170-1507.
(4) Access and traffic control: As required by § 170-1510.
(5) Interior circulation: As required by § 170-1513.
(6) Parking: As required by Article XVII.
(7) Lighting: As required by § 170-1514.
(8) Signs: As required by Article XVIII.
B. Residential development as per flexible development procedure: As
required by the design standards in Article IX, where those standards
exceed, or address matters not covered by, the requirements of
Subsection A above.
§ 170-602 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-603
1:558
ARTICLE VII
R-2 Residential District
§ 170-700. Statement of intent.
In addition to the goals listed in the statements of general purpose and
community development objectives in this chapter, it is the purpose of this
article to provide housing choices for residential development at medium
densities. It also is the purpose of this article to encourage efficient
investment in public improvements associated with more intensive levels
of development at locations near existing residential areas of this type,
and near major highways, commercial areas, and/or centers of employment.
Restrictions are provided to maintain suitable areas of open space between
residences to create a suburban atmosphere adequate for family needs.
§ 170-701. Use regulations. [Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-3;
3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
A. Uses by right. A building may be erected, altered, or used, and a lot or
premises may be used or occupied, by right, for any one of the following
principal purposes and no other:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Agricultural use, in accordance with the provisions of § 170-1609 of
this chapter.
(3) Buildings, structures, and uses owned and operated by Westtown
Township.
(4) Accessory uses. Only the following accessory uses shall be
permitted, in addition to a permitted principal use:
(a) Uses customarily accessory to principal agricultural or
residential uses, including but not limited to those uses
described in § 170-1603B and C of this chapter.
(b) Swimming pool, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 170-1611 of this chapter.
(c) Minor home occupation, in accordance with the terms of
§ 170-1605 of this chapter.
B. Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception, in
accordance with the terms of this article and the standards and criteria
contained in § 170-2108 of this chapter. The area and bulk regulations
for uses permitted by special exception, as contained in § 170-702E of
this article, and the design standards for uses permitted by special
exception, as contained in § 170-703 of this article, shall apply to all
uses permitted by special exception in the R-2 District.
§ 170-700 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-701
1:559
§ 170-702. Area and bulk regulations.
The following regulations shall apply:
(1) Greenhouse, when not considered by the Zoning Officer to be a
permitted accessory use.
(2) Noncommercial recreational use, such as nonprofit swimming pool,
provided the principal activity shall not be one which is customarily
carried on as a business and provided that all services shall be for
members and their guests.
(3) Religious use or primary or secondary school, which shall comply
with § 170-702E of this chapter.
(4) Golf course and buildings customarily incidental thereto, excluding
driving range or miniature golf course as a principal use.
(5) Major home occupation, in accordance with the terms of
§ 170-1605 of this chapter.
(6) Conversion of single-family dwelling, in accordance with the
provisions of § 170-1608 of this chapter.
(7) Accessory dwelling unit in accordance with the provisions of
§ 170-1603A on a lot of not less than 18,000 square feet if the
principal dwelling unit and accessory dwelling unit are, or will be,
connected to public sewer and water. If both units cannot be
connected to public sewer and water, a minimum lot size of 40,000
square feet is required, also subject to the provisions of
§ 170-1603A. [Added 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4; amended
5-21-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-5]
(8) Conversion of an accessory dwelling unit into a rental, in
accordance with the provisions of § 170-1619. [Added 5-6-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-02]
A. The maximum density of use on any tract within the R-2 District shall be
as determined by § 170-1519B of this chapter.
B. Single-family detached dwelling.
(1) With on-site sewage and on-site water service: [Amended
3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(a) Lot area: one acre minimum.
(b) Lot width at building: 150 feet minimum setback line.
(c) Impervious coverage: 20% maximum.
(2) With on-site sewage and off-site water service, or public off-site
sewage and on-site water service: [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-2]
§ 170-701 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-702
1:560
(a) Lot area: one acre minimum.
(b) Lot width at building: 125 feet minimum setback line.
(c) Impervious coverage: 20% maximum.
(3) With both public off-site sewage and water service:
(a) Lot area: 22,000 square feet minimum.
(b) Lot width at building: 100 feet minimum setback line.
(c) Impervious coverage: 25% maximum.
(4) All single-family detached dwellings:
(a) Lot width at street line: 50 feet minimum, except 250 feet
minimum at the future right-of-way line of Routes 202, 3, 352
or 926, if the property would have direct access onto any of
these routes.
(b) Building setback line: 40 feet minimum, except:
[1] No structure shall be located within 100 feet of the future
right-of-way line of Route 202 or Route 3. The land within
the required setback may be accepted as part of the
requirements for open space of this chapter or Chapter
149, Subdivision and Land Development.
[2] Sixty feet minimum from the future right-of-way line of
Route 926 or Route 352.
(c) Side yards: 10 feet minimum for each, with 25 feet total for
both yards.
(d) Rear yard:30 feet minimum.
(e) Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 38 feet.
[Amended 5-1-1995 by Ord. No. 95-2]
C. Agricultural uses: As required by the standards in § 170-1609 of this
chapter.
D. Accessory uses: Accessory uses may be located in side and rear yards,
but only in conformance with the standards of § 170-1502 of this
chapter.
E. Nonresidential uses permitted by special exception, specifically
excluding major home occupations which are considered accessory to a
residential use: [Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord. No. 94-6; 5-1-1995
by Ord. No. 95-2; 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2; 5-2-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-4]
(1) Minimum lot area: two acres.
§ 170-702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-702
1:561
§ 170-703. Design standards.
(2) Minimum lot width at building setback: 200 feet.
(3) Side yard minimum width:
(a) One: 50 feet.
(b) Both: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
(5) Maximum building coverage (all uses): 20%.
(6) Maximum total impervious coverage: 40%.
(7) Minimum front yard: 50 feet, except that, for uses in the vicinity of
major roads, as noted below:
(a) One hundred feet minimum from the future right-of-way line of
Route 202 or Route 3.
(b) Sixty feet minimum from the future right-of-way line of Route
926 or Route 352.
(8) Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet minimum, except 250 feet
minimum at the future right-of-way line of Routes 202, 3, 352, or
926, if the use would have direct access onto any of these routes.
(9) Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 38 feet.
(10) Buffer requirements. In addition to the requirements of § 170-1508
of this chapter, there shall be a fifty-foot buffer strip maintained on
the property containing a use permitted by special exception when
such use abuts any A/C, R-1, R-2, or R-3 District. Such buffer strip
shall be in addition to any and all applicable area and bulk
regulations, including setback regulations. The buffer strip shall be
planted and shall not include any paved area.
F. Conditional uses: Residential conditional uses shall, as applicable,
conform to the standards for single-family detached dwellings in
§ 170-702B above. Nonresidential conditional uses shall conform to the
standards for nonresidential uses in § 170-702E above.
A. The following design standards of this chapter shall, as applicable,
govern all uses permitted by right, special exception, and conditional
use in the R-2 District:
(1) Parking. As required by Article XVII of this chapter.
(2) Lighting. As required by § 170-1514 of this chapter.
B. The following additional design standards of this chapter shall, as
applicable, govern any use permitted by special exception or
conditional use in the R-2 District:
§ 170-702 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-703
1:562
(1) Screening. As required by § 170-1508.
(2) Storage. As required by § 170-1509.
(3) Landscaping. As required by § 170-1507.
(4) Access and traffic control. As required by § 170-1510.
(5) Interior circulation. As required by § 170-1513.
§ 170-703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-703
1:563

ARTICLE VIII
R-3 Residence-Office District
§ 170-800. Statement of intent.
§ 170-801. Use regulations.
A. In addition to the goals presented in the general purpose and the
community development objectives sections of this chapter, the purpose
of this district is to make specific provisions for appropriate multifamily
residential, limited office and visual arts center uses in selected
locations, particularly along major highways, which can serve as logical
transitional districts between single-family residential development and
areas of heavier traffic, and which produce fewer hazards and less
interference with highway traffic than conventional commercial areas
by: [Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-6]
(1) Providing for higher density in selected areas capable of accepting
the increased density without overburdening services;
(2) Accommodating market demand and recognizing the economics of
multifamily residential development;
(3) Accommodating increased population on smaller tracts of land
while preserving open space;
(4) Providing for a balance of choice in residential structural types and
to provide for adequate traffic, fire, landscaping, and screening
controls, so as to present an attractive and safe addition to
residential development patterns in the Township; and
(5) Providing for office uses that produce fewer hazards and less
interference with highway traffic than traditional commercial uses
and are thereby compatible with high-density residential
development.
(6) Providing for a visual arts center (VAC) use that promotes,
educates, entertains, informs and advances the visual arts in the
community.
B. The design standards contained in this article are intended to be
consistent with zoning purposes regarding appropriate density and
intensity of use, avoidance of congestion, and adequacy of light and air.
A. Uses by right. A building may be erected, altered, or used, and a lot or
premises may be used or occupied, by right, for any of the following
purposes and no other: [Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-3;
3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(1) Multifamily dwellings, except that townhouse dwellings shall be
permitted only as a conditional use, as stipulated in § 170-801B,
below.
§ 170-800 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-801
1:565
(2) Accessory uses. Only the following accessory uses shall be
permitted:
(a) Swimming pool, in accordance with provisions of § 170-1611 of
this chapter.
(b) Minor home occupations, in accordance with the terms of
§ 170-1605 of this chapter.
(c) Uses customarily accessory to multifamily residential use,
including but not limited to:
[1] Parking areas and private garages;
[2] Storage buildings, areas, or garages;
[3] Laundry, provided that it is for the exclusive use of
residents of the site. Any laundry drying area shall be
indoors;
[4] Community recreation, eating, or medical care facility,
provided it is for the exclusive use of residents of the site
and their guests; and
[5] Patios or terraces.
(3) Twin dwellings, which shall meet the requirements of § 170-802E.
(4) Single-family detached dwellings, which shall meet the
requirements of § 170-802F.
B. Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted only upon
approval as a conditional use by the Board of Supervisors in accordance
with the terms of this article and § 170-2009 of this chapter:
(1) Conversion of a single-family dwelling, in accordance with the
provisions of § 170-1608 of this chapter.
(2) Integrated townhouse development, in accordance with the terms
of Article X of this chapter.
(3) Professional or business office, the normal attributes of which do
not involve on-the-premises retailing or the direct sale of
merchandise to the general public.
(4) Professional or business offices in combination with multifamily
residential use, in the form of either apartment or townhouse
dwellings, only in accordance with the provisions of this article and
of Article X of this chapter pertaining to the uses as proposed.
(5) Educational or religious uses. [Amended 10-20-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-5]
(6) Day-care center. [Amended 10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 97-5]
§ 170-801 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-801
1:566
§ 170-802. Area and bulk regulations.
The following regulations shall apply:
(7) Institutional uses, excluding hospitals, sanitariums, penal or
corrective institutions and related rehabilitative facilities.
[Amended 10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 97-5]
(8) Residential care facilities for senior citizens. [Amended
10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 97-5]
(9) Banking or financial institution only where in combination with a
professional or business office as provided in § 170-801B(3) or (4).
[Added 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
(10) Visual arts center (VAC) meeting § 170-802G. [Added 12-16-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-6]
A. The maximum density of use on any tract within the R-3 District shall be
as determined by § 170-1519B of this chapter.
B. Apartment dwellings.
(1) Minimum tract area: five acres, as determined by § 170-1519A of
this chapter. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(2) Maximum density shall be as stipulated in § 170-1519B. [Amended
3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(3) Minimum floor area per dwelling unit:
(a) One bedroom or less: 700 square feet of floor area.
(b) Two bedrooms: 850 square feet of floor area.
(c) Three bedrooms or more: 1,100 square feet of floor area.
(4) Minimum tract width at building setback line: 280 feet.
(5) Minimum tract width at street line: 50 feet.
(6) Maximum impervious coverage: 50%. [Amended 12-5-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-6]
(7) Distance between buildings: To encourage flexibility in site design,
maintain and protect views for occupants of buildings, ensure
privacy, and assure sufficient light and air, the minimum distance
between buildings shall be:
(a) Two times the height of the taller of two buildings where
fenestrated facades face each other, or where one fenestrated
facade faces an unfenestrated facade (wall, end, or corner), but
in no case less than 60 feet; and
§ 170-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-802
1:567
(b) Twenty-five feet, where two buildings abut end to end, corner
to corner, or end to corner (where corners and ends are
unfenestrated).
(8) Minimum setback from tract boundaries:
(a) All buildings shall be set back from the right-of-way line of any
street which the development abuts, and from any boundary
line of the tract, a distance of not less than 100 feet. Where
proposed apartment buildings will abut tracts containing other
apartment buildings, this distance may be reduced to 50 feet.
(b) In cases where a multiple dwelling building abuts a tract zoned
A/C, R-1, or R-2, this one-hundred-foot distance is to include at
least a fifty-foot planted buffer (containing no paving), and a
fifty-foot setback which shall not intrude into the buffer.
(9) Unit width: No unit shall be less than 20 feet in width.
(10) Maximum building length: 100 feet.
(11) Building height: Building height shall be limited to three stories
and shall not exceed 38 feet. [Amended 5-1-1995 by Ord. No.
95-2]
(12) Minimum common open space: 40% of the gross area of the tract.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses may be located in side and rear yards,
but only in conformance with the standards of § 170-1502 of this
chapter. Maximum height for accessory buildings shall be 20 feet.
D. Conditional uses.
(1) For any integrated townhouse development, the area and bulk
standards of Article X applicable to such use shall govern in the R-3
District.
(2) For professional or business office use, as permitted under
§ 170-801B(3) and B(4), and for uses in § 170-801B(5) and B(6)
above, the following standards shall apply: [Amended
10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 97-5]
(a) Minimum tract area: two acres, as determined by § 170-1519A
of this chapter
(b) Minimum setback from tract boundaries: [Amended
3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
[1] All buildings shall be set back from the right-of-way line of
any street which the development abuts, and from the
boundary line of the tract, a distance of not less than 100
feet. Where proposed buildings will abut tracts containing
similar uses, this distance may be reduced to 50 feet.
§ 170-802 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-802
1:568
[2] In cases where a professional or business office use abut a
tract zoned A/C, R-1, or R-2, this one-hundred-foot
distance is to include at least a fifty-foot planted buffer
(containing no paving), and a fifty-foot setback which shall
not intrude into the buffer.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.30. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-2; 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
(d) Maximum impervious coverage: 60%. [Amended 12-5-1994
by Ord. No. 94-6]
(e) Standards for lot width, distance between buildings, building
length, building height, and common open space shall be those
stipulated in § 170-802B above, except for the following:
[Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
[1] The 100 feet maximum building length shall not apply.
[2] In place of the 40% common open space requirement, a
minimum of 40% of the tract shall be maintained in areas
covered with vegetative ground cover with substantial
numbers of trees and shrubs.
(f) The Board of Supervisors may, in its sole discretion, permit the
units within the professional or business office buildings to be
constructed upon lots which are held in single and separate
ownership and which conform in lot area to the footprint of the
foundation of each such unit. In lieu of a lot measured by the
unit footprint, the developer may elect to provide for
condominium ownership.
(g) Where professional or business office use is to be developed in
combination with apartment or townhouse use, as provided in
§ 170-801B(4), each of the two combined uses shall be required
to comply with the standards for development (area and bulk
regulations, density and design standards, site conditions,
open space and other applicable standards) set forth in this
chapter and applicable to each such use, if developed
independently of the other. In the case of an integrated
townhouse development, combined with the said office use, the
Board of Supervisors may, in its sole discretion, permit a lot
size which conforms to the footprint of the townhouse
foundation. In lieu of either the lot of 1,200 square feet or the
lot measured by the unit footprint, the developer may elect to
provide for condominium ownership. In the conditional use
review process where such a combination of uses is proposed,
each area of the lot being developed and devoted to a
particular use shall be designated and shall be considered a
separate lot for review purposes and for application of the
§ 170-802 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-802
1:569
respective development standards of this chapter applicable
thereto.
(h) With respect to areas of common ownership, the developer
shall make adequate provision for the maintenance of common
areas, giving the Board the authority to enter and maintain the
area, together with the right to lien the property as provided
for in §§ 170-907 and 170-908 of this chapter.
(3) Institutional uses. [Amended 10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 97-5]
(a) Minimum tract area:
[1] Three acres for an institution housing up to four residents/
clients and any associated supervisory personnel.
[2] An additional 1/2 acre of lot area shall be required above
the three-acre minimum for every two additional
residents/clients and associated supervisory personnel, or
any portion of such increment.
(b) Minimum setback from tract boundaries shall be that
stipulated in § 170-802D(2)(b) above.
(c) Maximum floor area ratio: .40.
(d) Maximum impervious coverage: 60%.
(e) Standards for lot width, distance between buildings, building
length, and building height shall be that stipulated in
§ 170-802B above.
(f) Minimum requirements for off-street parking shall be those
applicable to a single-family dwelling as specified in Article
XVII for an institution housing up to four resident/clients and
associated supervisory personnel. One additional parking
space shall be required for each additional two resident/clients
and associated personnel.
(g) The applicant shall demonstrate that all necessary approvals
and permits from the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry have been obtained or waived, particularly with
respect to fire protection, safety measures, construction
standards, and design standards to accommodate the
handicapped. The Board of Supervisors may authorize
approval of the conditional use contingent upon the requisite
approvals being obtained.
(h) The Board of Supervisors shall consider the proximity of the
proposed use to any other similar institution within the
Township and/or to similar facilities in adjacent municipalities
and shall not approve any such request where resulting
proximity might unduly alter the intended character of the
§ 170-802 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-802
1:570
neighborhood through the relative concentration and scale of
such uses.
(4) Residential care facilities for senior citizens. Refer to Article XVI,
§ 170-1613, Standards for residential care facilities for senior
citizens. [Amended 10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 97-5]
E. Twin dwellings. [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(1) Maximum density: four dwelling units per acre of tract area, based
upon § 170-1519. Each dwelling shall be on its own fee-simple or
condominium lot. Each dwelling shall be physically placed so that
all of the dimensional requirements could be met as if each
dwelling was on its own lot. However, such lot lines do not need to
be legally established.
(2) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(3) Maximum impervious coverage: 60%.
(4) Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
(5) Minimum building setback line from the right-of-way of a minor
street: 25 feet, 10 feet of which may be occupied by a front porch.
(6) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(7) Minimum building setback from the future right-of-way line of an
arterial street: 100 feet.
(8) Minimum building setback from the future right-of-way line of a
collector street: 50 feet.
(9) Minimum lot width at minimum building setback line: 50 feet per
dwelling unit.
(10) Maximum building height: three stories or 38 feet, whichever is
most restrictive.
(11) Minimum common open space: 30% of the gross area of the tract.
(12) Minimum lot area: 4,800 square feet per dwelling unit.
F. Single-family detached dwelling. [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
(1) Maximum density: four dwelling units per acre of tract area, based
upon § 170-1519. Each dwelling shall be on its own fee-simple or
condominium lot. Each dwelling shall be physically placed so that
all of the dimensional requirements could be met as if each
dwelling was on its own lot. However, such lot lines do not need to
be legally established.
(2) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
§ 170-802 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-802
1:571
(3) Maximum impervious coverage: 65%.
(4) Minimum side yard: two required, each with a minimum of 10 feet.
(5) Minimum building setback line from a minor street: 25 feet, 10 feet
of which may be occupied by a front porch.
(6) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(7) Minimum building setback from the future right-of-way line of an
arterial street: 100 feet.
(8) Minimum building setback from the exterior boundaries of the tract
and any future right-of-way line of a collector street: 50 feet.
(9) Minimum lot width at the minimum building setback line: 50 feet
per dwelling unit.
(10) Maximum building height: three stories or 38 feet, whichever is
most restrictive.
(11) Minimum common open space: 20% of the gross area of the tract.
(12) Minimum lot area: 8,000 square feet.
G. Visual Arts Center (VAC). [Added 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-6]
(1) A visual arts center (VAC) is intended to provide for uses where all
aspects of the visual arts discipline are permitted. The VAC use
shall be accessible to the public in an effort to promote, educate,
entertain, inform and advance the visual arts in the surrounding
community as a continuing benefit to the public welfare and culture
of Westtown Township. The portions of a building not dedicated to a
VAC or related accessory use shall be occupied by any use
permitted under the R-3 Residence-Office District regulations
without need for any additional conditional use approval, if
required, and such uses shall only be governed by the regulations
and standards applicable to a VAC under this chapter.
(2) Tract location, area and frontage. The following shall be provided:
(a) The tract shall be located in the R-3 Residence-Office District;
(b) The tract shall have a minimum of 300 feet of street frontage
along West Chester Pike (Route 3);
(c) The tract area shall have a minimum of three acres. Tract area
shall be the net area of the tract excluding existing street
rights-of-way. Tract area for a VAC shall not be calculated
according to § 170-1519.
(d) Any building containing a VAC shall be located a minimum of
100 feet from the R-1 or R-2 Residential Zoning Districts.
(3) Area and bulk regulations. The following shall be provided:
§ 170-802 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-802
1:572
(a) Minimum front yard building setback: 25 feet.
[1] Front yard setbacks shall be measured from the ultimate
right-of-way line.
[2] Where the tract is a corner lot having two or more street
frontages or where 10% or more of the tract is
environmentally constrained and undevelopable, one of
the two required front yard building setbacks may be
reduced to 10 feet.
(b) Minimum side yard building setback: 10 feet.
[1] Side yards shall be measured from the corresponding
property line.
(c) Minimum rear yard building setback: 35 feet.
[1] Rear yards shall be measured from the corresponding
property line.
(d) Maximum building height: four stories.
(e) Maximum impervious coverage: 65%.
(f) Maximum building coverage: 35%.
[1] Building coverage shall be calculated using the gross tract
area (including any ultimate right-of-way) with no
deductions or exclusions.
(4) Design standards. The following shall apply:
(a) Signage (not applicable to a VCT): in accordance with
§ 170-1800 et seq.
(b) Landscaping: in accordance with § 170-1507.
(c) Screening: in accordance with § 170-1508.
(d) Off-street parking and loading: Off-street parking spaces
required for a VAC use shall be calculated based upon the
gross leasable floor area of the building containing the VAC
use. Where appropriate, off-street parking for a VAC use may
be shared parking under § 170-1706. The off-street parking
requirement for a VAC use may be satisfied off premises
provided the off-premises parking is located within 650 feet of
the property on which the VAC use is located. A VAC use shall
be required to provide a minimum number of off-street parking
spaces in accordance with the following:
[1] One parking space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
allocated to a VAC use.
§ 170-802 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-802
1:573
[2] One parking space per 350 square feet of gross floor area
allocated to uses accessory to a VAC use.
(e) Off-street loading: in accordance with § 170-1710.
(f) Lighting (not applicable to a VCT): In accordance with
§ 170-1514 et seq.
(g) Architecture and facade of VAC building: The architecture and
facade of the VAC building shall, in and of itself, be a form of
visual art. The VAC building facade shall incorporate unique or
distinctive architectural design elements. As part of a
conditional use application for a VAC, the applicant shall
submit conceptual architectural facade renderings and
elevations together with a general list of proposed building
materials for review and approval by the Township and
Township architect. The relative cost of construction of the
VAC building shall be a factor considered in the feasibility of a
recommended VAC building design. Based upon comments
received from the Township and/or Township architect, the
applicant shall be permitted to revise the conceptual VAC
building architecture and facade as may be necessary to obtain
Township approval. Revisions to a conceptual VAC building
architecture and facade shall not be considered a substantial
change or amendment to a pending application for approval of
a VAC.
(5) Visual communication technology (VCT). The following shall apply:
(a) A building containing a VAC use may incorporate a maximum
of two VCTs into the exterior building facade. A VCT shall be
structurally integrated into the building facade as much as
possible and face toward vehicular travelled rights of way. A
VCT shall be consistent with the aesthetic and architectural
design of the building containing the VAC.
(b) A VCT shall have a maximum surface area of 500 square feet.
(c) The VCT shall be permitted to display or advertise: onpremises
businesses or activity, off-premises businesses or
activity, public announcements, civic events, and emergency
messages or alerts. The VCT shall not display or advertise any
content prohibited by 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903.
(d) Illumination of the VCT must be internal and can be provided
by using light-emitting diodes (LED), fiber optics, projection
technology or other similar illumination technologies.
(e) The VCT shall not be illuminated between the hours of 12:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 170-802 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-802
1:574
§ 170-803. Design standards.
(f) The VCT shall not display any moving, flashing, scrolling, or
animated text or video.
(g) The brightness of the VCT shall not exceed 0.3 footcandle of
light above the normal ambient light levels. The VCT
luminance shall be determined by a footcandle metering device
held at a height of five feet and aimed toward the VCT from a
distance of 250 feet from a location perpendicular to the center
of the VCT as a white screen as seen in plain view. The VCT
shall utilize ambient light sensors to automatically reduce the
intensity of illumination during periods of darkness.
A. The following design standards, to the extent not modified in § 170-802
above, as applicable, shall govern all uses permitted by right and by
conditional use in the R-3 District: [Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord. No.
94-6; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-6]
(1) Screening: As required by § 170-1508 of this chapter.
(2) Storage: As required by § 170-1509.
(3) Landscaping: As required by § 170-1507.
(4) Access and traffic control: As required by § 170-1510.
(5) Interior circulation: As required by § 170-1513.
(6) Lighting: As required by § 170-1514.
(7) Parking: As required by Article XVII.
(8) Signs: As required by Article XVIII.
(9) All utility services are to be installed underground.
(10) Open space: As required by § 170-907A.
B. Special site design standards for apartments:
(1) Whenever a rear entry to an apartment house faces a public street
or dwelling, there shall be a continuous vision screening wall,
fence, or appropriate landscaping not less than six feet in height
between the public street or dwelling and the apartment house.
(2) Inner courtyards. All such courts shall have a minimum of two
openings permitting access from outside the building groups into
the courts. These openings shall be at least 12 feet in width
between buildings and may be covered by a roof, but not by any
other part of the building. At least one opening shall be without
cover and accessible to an interior drive or fire lane easement.
§ 170-802 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-803
1:575
(3) Walls, fences, and appropriately landscaped areas may be placed
anywhere on the apartment tract, unless specifically restricted by
any section contained in this chapter. All planting required to be six
feet in height shall be of such species and size as will produce a
substantial visual screen within five years from the date of approval
of the plan by the Board.
(4) Off-street parking space may be provided as an individual garage or
carport or a parking area adjacent to or near the apartment it
serves, but not closer than 20 feet to the apartment wall, except
when located within the apartment house.
(5) Parking access shall be screened by a masonry wall, fence, or
appropriately landscaped area, with a height of not less than six
feet. No parking space shall be located within any front yard,
except that parking areas may be located within 10 feet of front lot
lines, provided that the parking areas are screened by a continuous
solid masonry wall, not less than six feet high and interrupted only
at entrances and exits.
§ 170-803 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-803
1:576
ARTICLE IX
Flexible Development Procedure
§ 170-900. Statement of intent.
A. In addition to the general goals listed in the preamble and the
community development objectives, the Board acknowledges that the
technology of land development and the demand for housing is
undergoing substantial and rapid change, and recognizes the
applicability of the objectives set forth in Article VII of Act 247, the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10701 et seq).
B. Therefore, the specific intent of this article is to:88
(1) Encourage innovations in residential development and renewal so
that the growing demand for housing may be met by greater variety
in type, design, and layout of dwellings and by the conservation and
more efficient use of open space ancillary to said dwellings;
(2) Provide greater opportunities for better housing and recreation for
all who are or will be residents of the Township;
(3) Encourage a more efficient use of land and public service and to
reflect changes in the technology of land development so that the
economies so secured may enure to the benefit of those who need
homes;
(4) Encourage more flexible land development which will respect and
conserve natural resources such as streams, lakes, floodplains,
groundwater, wooded areas, steeply sloped areas, and areas of
unusual beauty or importance to the natural ecosystem;
(5) Encourage innovations in residential developments that are
designed to minimize energy consumption and maximize recycling
of materials in their layout, transportation, climate control, energy
sources, and solid and liquid waste treatment systems; and
(6) Provide a procedure which can relate the type, design, and layout
of residential development to the particular site and the particular
demand for housing existing at the time of development in a
manner consistent with the preservation of the property values
within existing residential areas, and to assure that the increased
flexibility of regulations over land development established hereby
is carried out pursuant to sound, expeditious, and fair
administrative standards and procedures.
88.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1), regarding uniform treatment, which immediately
followed, was repealed 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1. This ordinance also redesignated
former Subsection B(2) through (7) as B(1) through (6), respectively.
§ 170-900 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-901
1:577
§ 170-901. Applicability of flexible development procedure.
[Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
For purposes of this article, the flexible development procedure is defined
as applying to:
§ 170-902. Applicability to base zoning districts.
A. Land under single ownership, planned and developed as a whole;
B. In a single development operation or a programmed series of
development operations including all lands and buildings;
C. Dwellings and related subordinate facilities;
D. Comprehensive and detailed plans which include not only streets,
utilities, lots or building sites, and the like, but also site plans, site
analyses, floor plans and elevations for all buildings as intended to be
located, constructed, used and related to each other, detailed plans for
other uses and improvements on the land as related to the buildings,
lighting, landscaping; and
E. A program for provision, operation and maintenance of such areas,
improvements, and facilities as will be for common use by some or all of
the occupants of the development, but will not be provided, operated or
maintained at general public expense unless acceptable to or found
necessary by the Board of Supervisors.
A. Where approved by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use, the
flexible development procedure may be applied in the A/C Agricultural/
Cluster Residential District and the R-1 Residential District where
tracts suitable in location and character for the proposed development
are to be developed under a unified plan, in accordance with the
requirements and procedures set forth herein. In consideration of
conditional use approval, the Board of Supervisors shall determine the
reasonableness of the increase in density potentially authorized under
this section, in the context of the physical characteristics of the site,
and in the context of justification of increased density through provision
for additional public and/or private amenities and/or through increased
efficiency in public services. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
B. Unified tract(s) of land for flexible development may be of any size.
Flexible development on tract(s) containing less than 10 acres shall be
permitted to include only residential uses consisting of single-family
detached dwellings and shall not be eligible for bonus density as
otherwise provided in § 170-904A(2) herein. [Amended 3-3-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-2]
C. Flexible development shall be appropriately located with respect to the
general pattern of community development, existing or proposed, and
to public and private facilities and services, existing or clearly to be
§ 170-901 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-902
1:578
§ 170-903. Permitted uses. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
The uses permitted in a flexible development shall be subject to conditional
use approval and shall be limited to:
available by the time development reaches the stage where they will be
required. The following specific requirements shall be met:
(1) Flexible development shall be so located with respect to major
streets and highways or other transportation facilities as to provide
direct access to such developments without creating traffic along
minor streets in residential neighborhoods outside such
developments.
(2) The site shall be suitable for development in the manner proposed
without hazards to persons or property, on or off the site, from
probability of flooding, erosion, subsidence or slipping of the soil,
or other dangers, annoyances, or inconveniences. Condition of soil,
groundwater level, drainage and topography shall be appropriate
to both kind and pattern of use intended.
(3) Each area of land to be developed pursuant to this article shall be
in one ownership, except that an area made up of two or more
parcels in separate ownership may be so developed provided that
all applications made under this article with respect to any portion
of the area shall be the joint application of all of the landowners. If
an area is developed with two or more parcels, all parcels shall be
contiguous to each other. In the event of development of two or
more parcels under one application, the owners shall present a
written agreement which agreement shall have been recorded and
shall run with the land, that the development will be in accordance
with a single plan with common authority and common
responsibility.
D. The location and conformity of the area shall be such that the flexible
development thereof pursuant to this article would be consistent with
the Westtown Township Comprehensive Plan.
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Twin dwellings.
C. Multifamily dwellings, including four-family dwellings and townhouse
or single-family attached dwellings, but excluding apartment dwellings
in the R-1 District. In the A/C District, apartment dwellings shall be
permitted where located not less than 200 feet from any existing public
road or highway bordering the tract subject to flexible development and
not less than 100 feet from the boundary of any adjacent lot or tract
whereupon any single-family detached dwelling exists. [Amended
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1]
§ 170-902 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-903
1:579
§ 170-904. Density standards. [Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord. No.
94-6; 5-1-1995 by Ord. No. 95-2; 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
The following standards shall govern the density of dwelling units on the
land in flexible development:
D. Agricultural use, in accordance with the provisions of § 170-1609 of this
chapter. A principal dwelling may be permitted on the same premises as
a principal agricultural use.
E. Farm-related business meeting the requirements of § 170-1616.
F. Open space and/or noncommercial recreational uses deemed
appropriate by the Board of Supervisors for incorporation into the
design of the development.
G. Building, structures, and/or uses owned or operated by Westtown
Township.
H. If a flexible development meets the age restrictions for residents that
apply to an adult community development, the flexible development
also may include the following uses:
(1) Community center facility.
(2) Swimming club.
(3) Uses or facilities customarily accessory to an age-restricted adult
community and primarily intended to serve residents of the
development and their occasional invited guests.
I. Uses customarily accessory to permitted residential, agricultural and
open space uses. As a condition of approval, the Board may specifically
limit accessory uses potentially available to dwellings other than singlefamily
detached dwellings and may require the applicant for flexible
development to establish appropriate restrictions and/or covenants.
A. Permitted base density and potential bonus density.
(1) Base density. In a flexible development, subject to compliance with
all applicable standards, criteria and requirements herein, and as a
condition of conditional use approval, the Board of Supervisors may
approve a plan that provides for a greater number of dwelling units
per acre than would be permitted by the Township zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject tract(s). Except
where bonus density is permitted subject to the provisions of
§ 170-904A(2) below, the maximum density computed over the
entire flexible development shall not exceed 1.1 dwelling units per
acre of tract area, calculated in accordance with the provisions of
§ 170-1519B of this chapter. In calculating density, including bonus
density where applicable, fractions shall be rounded to the next
lower whole number.
§ 170-903 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-904
1:580
(2) Bonus density. The maximum density established in accordance
with § 170-904A(1) above may be further increased, where
approved by the Board of Supervisors subject to conditional use
approval, and in accordance with the standards herein. Bonus
density for any purpose shall be added to the base density,
calculated in dwelling units per acre. Bonus density shall not be
construed as a multiplier to be applied to the base density
calculation. Any use of bonus density shall be subject to compliance
with the performance standards of § 170-904A(3). In no case shall
the maximum total density exceed 1.5 dwelling units per acre of
tract area, notwithstanding the ability of the applicant to
potentially justify further density increase based on provisions in
§ 170-904A(2)(a) and/or (b) below:
(a) For every 5% of the gross area of the tract that is permanently
preserved as common open space above the minimum
established under § 170-904C below and meeting the criteria
of § 170-904A(3), the maximum density may be increased by
0.075 dwelling units per acre. For example, if 50% of the gross
area of a tract in the R-1 District proposed to be developed for
single-family detached dwellings is provided as common open
space, representing an addition of two increments of 5% each
(40 + 5 + 5), then the maximum density may be increased to
1.25 dwelling units per acre (1.1 + 0.075 + 0.075).
(b) In addition, a maximum density bonus of up to 0.3 dwelling
units per acre above the density that would otherwise be
permitted shall be approved if the applicant proves to the
satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that the applicant will
complete or fund substantial public improvements to mitigate
one or more significant off-site impacts of the development.
[1] Substantial public improvements shall be limited to
improvements to public streets, public recreation and
open space, public water supply systems, public sanitary
sewage systems, and public stormwater management
systems which are identified by the Township at the time of
the conditional use approval process and which will
significantly reduce the need for public expenditures to
resolve a clear public need. In consideration of potential
substantial public improvements, the Township shall give
preference to such improvements as clearly benefit the
neighborhood(s) most immediately affected by the
proposed flexible development. Provision of additional
open space resulting in the approval of bonus density
under § 170-904A(2)(a) above shall not also be considered
a substantial public improvement.
[2] No density bonus shall be granted for any improvement(s)
that an applicant for a development would otherwise be
required to complete or fund under a Township, Township
§ 170-904 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-904
1:581
Authority, state or federal requirement. For example, in
the case of public street improvements, no density bonus
shall be granted for improvements to a segment of an
existing street immediately adjacent to the applicant's
property where such improvements would otherwise be
required by the Township and/or the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
[3] At the time of conditional use application, the applicant
shall identify the specific proposed substantial public
improvement(s) for which bonus density is requested and
shall indicate the anticipated cost(s) of completing
proposed substantial public improvement(s). [Amended
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1]
[4] The amount of density bonus granted for any substantial
public improvement(s) shall not exceed the maximum
incremental density increase calculated as set forth in
§ 170-904A(2)(b) above and shall be established by the
Board of Supervisors as a condition of approval based on a
preponderance of evidence as follows: Bonus density,
measured in an incremental increase in dwelling units,
shall be determined by roughly equating the incremental
cost to the developer of providing substantial public
improvement(s), with a reasonable value to the developer
for the increase in unit count. [Amended 9-15-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-1]
[5] Commitment to complete or fund any substantial public
improvement(s) shall be in a legally binding form
acceptable to the Township Solicitor.
(c) Special bonus density for historic preservation. In addition to
the maximum total permitted density, including bonus density
as provided in § 170-904A(2)(a) and (b) above, and not subject
to the overall density cap of 1.5 dwelling units per acre,
additional dwelling units may be approved as follows: [Added
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1]
[1] Bonus dwelling units for preservation of historic sites and
landscapes. One additional dwelling unit may be provided
for each two acres comprising a lot (or open space parcel)
which contains any Township-, state- or federally
designated historic site or historic building or any historic
site or building included or eligible for inclusion in the
Chester County Historic Sites Survey and where such
acreage otherwise meets all applicable criteria for open
space. The use of this bonus shall be limited to no more
than four bonus dwelling units for each distinct historic
landscape preserved and shall be subject to the following
criteria:
§ 170-904 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-904
1:582
[a] The Township shall approve the configuration of the
lot and/or restricted open space created to
accommodate preservation of the historic landscape,
which shall include, at a minimum, those portions of
the property that contain outbuildings or ruins
associated with the historical use of the principal
historic building(s) and/or those areas of greatest
public visibility.
[b] In order to be eligible for this bonus, the historical
setting, including all acreage used to calculate bonus
dwelling units, and the principal facades of any
historical structures shall be preserved through
establishment of a conservation easement acceptable
to the Township. Such easement shall be recorded
prior to or simultaneously with the recording of
approved land development plans and prior to
issuance of building permits, as applicable, for any
situation where this bonus shall be utilized.
[c] Land(s) utilized for calculation of this bonus also may
be counted toward the calculation of required or
bonus open space, where applicable open space,
criteria are met.
[2] Additional bonus dwelling units for historic restoration/
rehabilitation. Where preservation of historic sites, as
provided in § 170-904A(2)(c)[1] above, includes
restoration or rehabilitation of historic structures
approved by the Township, one additional dwelling unit
may be provided for each 2,000 square feet, or portion
thereof exceeding 1,000 square feet, of habitable floor
area on all floor levels in the historic sections of such
structures, subject to the following requirements:
[a] Eligible structures shall have been used historically as
principal residential or agricultural structures or
structures accessory to a principal residential use and
shall be included or be eligible for inclusion as part of
a Township-, state- or federally designated historic
site or shall be included in the Chester County
Historic Sites Survey;
[b] For the purposes of this section, measurement of
habitable floor area may include previously
nonhabitable space converted or to be converted to
habitable floor area as a result of rehabilitation (e.g.,
barn space converted into habitable floor area);
[c] The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Township, submitting copies of appropriate plans
§ 170-904 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-904
1:583
and other documentation as necessary, that such
structures have been or shall be restored and/or
rehabilitated in accordance with plans prepared by
a qualified restoration architect and in general
compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's
Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Structures;
[d] All principal facades of eligible historic structures
shall be preserved through establishment of
conservation easement(s) acceptable to the Township;
[e] This bonus shall not apply if the integrity and scale of
eligible historic structures have been or will be altered
by additions that overwhelm their historic integrity
due to the size of such addition(s) or to the use of
modern or inappropriately scaled or proportioned
materials, including exterior skins, windows, doors,
chimneys, porches, and other features.
[3] Limitation to use of historic preservation bonus. No
historic preservation bonus shall be applicable if the
owner or developer of the subject property shall, or has
within three years of the development application period
or during actual development, and without the express
approval of the Township, destroyed or demolished any
historic site or historic building identified on the Chester
County Historic Sites Survey or other relevant study on file
with the Township.
(3) Performance standards for use of bonus density. In addition to all
other applicable standards of this chapter, conditional use approval
for any flexible development utilizing bonus density in accordance
with § 170-904A(2) shall be subject to compliance with the
following standards and criteria unless modified at the discretion of
the Board of Supervisors; the applicant shall submit plan(s),
narrative and graphic material(s) as necessary to adequately
demonstrate compliance with these standards:
(a) Open space. In addition to compliance with all other applicable
criteria herein, and in particular the standards of § 170-907,
the following additional standards shall be applied to open
space within any flexible development utilizing bonus density:
[1] All open space used toward calculation of compliance with
minimum open space requirements shall comply with all
applicable standards separately from any additional open
space that is utilized toward calculation of bonus density.
[2] All open space used incrementally toward calculation of
bonus density as provided in § 170-904A(2)(a) shall, in
addition to full compliance with all other applicable
standards herein, fully exclude from calculation of open
§ 170-904 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-904
1:584
space area any existing or proposed impervious surfaces,
stormwater management facilities, wetlands, water
bodies, watercourses, prohibitive slope (including created
slopes exceeding 25%), and any lands subject to floodplain
regulations. [Amended 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
(b) Scenic views.
[1] Historical landscapes and scenic views within or across
any tract subject to flexible development shall be
protected to the greatest extent practicable.
[2] Introduced landscaping, utilizing predominantly native
vegetation and replicating landscape features
characteristic to Westtown and its environs, shall be used
to mitigate scenic impacts of development from public
roads and neighboring residential properties where such
views shall be altered by proposed development, grading,
or other improvements necessary to accommodate
proposed development. For purposes of this subsection,
mitigation shall not require a complete visual screen,
where the Township agrees that a filtered or diffuse screen
is augmented by other landscaping or site conditions to
deflect prominent lines of sight from development impacts
or otherwise minimize the visual impacts of development.
(c) Stormwater management.
[1] Stormwater management facilities shall be designed to
optimize the capture of stormwater at the sources of
generation, maximize recharge to the subsurface
groundwater system and minimize discharge to surface
water flow. Guidance for stormwater management shall
use the most current best management practices such as
those promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
[2] Collectively, in addition to compliance with the design
criteria for stormwater management set forth in Chapter
149 of the Code of the Township of Westtown, the design of
stormwater management facilities across the tract subject
to flexible development shall result in groundwater
infiltration of stormwater equal in volume to the
incremental increase of the two-year storm,
predevelompent to postdevelopment. For purposes of
calculating the predevelopment volume of the two-year
storm, predevelopment land cover conditions shall be
assumed to be woodland-good for any area predominantly
under cover of trees and meadow-good for any other area,
regardless of actual cover conditions. The applicant shall
be required to submit soil percolation test results and
§ 170-904 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-904
1:585
other credible evidence including a maintenance program
satisfactory to demonstrate long-term feasibility of
required groundwater infiltration. Where groundwater
infiltration of the full incremental volume of the two-year
storm is not practicable, the Township may require
employment of other means to mitigate potential
groundwater impacts.
B. The amount of acreage contained within the tract area, for purposes of
calculating maximum density within a flexible development, shall be
determined in accordance with the provisions of § 170-1519A of this
chapter.
C. The following percentages of the gross area of the tract shall be set
aside as common open space for the use and benefit of the residents of
the development and/or Township:
(1) A/C Agricultural/Cluster Residential District: 60%. [Amended
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1]
(2) R-1 Rural-Suburban Residential District, where single-family
detached dwellings are provided: 40%.
(3) R-1 Rural-Suburban Residential District, where twin dwellings are
provided: 50%.
(4) R-1 Rural-Suburban Residential District, where permitted
multifamily dwellings are provided: 60%. Where more than one
dwelling unit type is provided in the R-1 District, the minimum
open space shall be calculated proportionally to the relative
proportion of each unit type, as provided in Subsection C(3), (4)
and/or (5) above. Additional open space also may be required as a
condition of approval of applicable bonus densities.
D. A developer may construct flexible development in stages if the
following criteria are met:
(1) The application for conditional use approval covers the entire
flexible development and shows the location and approximate time
of construction for each stage, in addition to other information
required by this chapter.
(2) At least 15% of the dwelling units in the plan given conditional use
approval are included in each stage, unless otherwise approved by
the Board of Supervisors.
(3) The second and subsequent stages are completed consistent with
the plans accompanying conditional use application and are of such
size and location, including a sufficient degree of completion of the
road network and other infrastructure, that they constitute
economically sound units of development.
§ 170-904 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-904
1:586
(4) Each stage shall include common open space in amounts and at
locations deemed acceptable by the Board to meet, at minimum,
the open space needs generated by that stage and to assure
protection of the sensitive features of the tract.
(5) In the case of a flexible development proposed to be developed over
a period of years, a variation in each stage to be developed from the
density of use established for the entire flexible development may
be permitted. A greater concentration of density of land use within
one or more stages of development may be allowed, whether it be
earlier or later in the development than others, provided that final
approval shall not be given to any stage if the residential density of
the area which includes stages already finally approved and the
stage for which final approval is being sought exceeds by more than
20% the residential density allowed for the entire flexible
development in the tentatively approved plan. In no case shall a
flexible development be developed over a period greater than three
years, unless an extension is approved by the Board of Supervisors.
E. The following standards apply to the housing sites within the flexible
development:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings, twin dwellings and permitted
multifamily dwellings may be arranged so as to provide for
individual lots for each unit, or may be arranged as rental units or
condominiums. Sufficient yard areas shall be set aside and
designated on the plan for each type of housing, so that on an
average throughout the development:
(a) The maximum net residential density for permitted multifamily
areas shall not exceed 10 dwelling units per acre of tract area
designated for such use.
(b) The maximum net residential density for twin dwelling units
shall not exceed six dwelling units per acre of tract area
designated for such use.
(c) The maximum net residential density for single-family
detached housing areas shall not exceed four units per acre of
tract area designated for such use.
(d) The acreage set aside for common open space rights-of-way of
public streets shall not be used for computation of net
residential density for any residential use.
(2) Permitted multifamily dwellings shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with the following standards:
(a) Maximum dimensions. No row of townhouses or single
structure containing single-family attached dwellings shall
exceed 120 feet in any dimension, nor shall exceed five
dwellings in a single structure or continuous row. No other
§ 170-904 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-904
1:587
structure containing permitted multifamily dwellings shall
exceed 100 feet in any dimension.
(b) All buildings within an integrated townhouse development
shall be set back from the right-of-way line of any street the
development abuts a distance of not less than 100 feet.
(c) Maximum impervious coverage. Not more than 45% of the
gross area of the tract shall be covered by impervious surfaces.
(d) Design standards.
[1] Streets within an integrated townhouse development shall
be designed in accordance with the terms of Chapter 149,
Subdivision and Land Development; provisions for the
maintenance of any private streets shall be an essential
part of the plan for development. The Township may, but is
not required to, accept dedication of the streets within the
integrated townhouse development for public use. It may
require the posting of security in an amount and form
satisfactory to it for the construction of such streets, as set
forth in Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development.
[2] Parking requirements.
[a] Except where part of a shared parking arrangement
authorized under the terms of Article XVII, all
required off-street parking shall be developed within
the boundaries of the townhouse development tract.
[b] Parking for each dwelling unit shall be provided either
at the rear of the unit or shall be grouped into one or
more parking areas serving a number of dwelling
units. Individual curb cuts shall be permitted only for
access to garages contained in units. Other front yard
parking and individual curb cuts at the street line for
access to parking shall be discouraged.
[c] Provisions for pedestrian circulation paths from the
parking lot(s) to the buildings shall be provided. These
paths shall be constructed of an all-weather surface.
[d] No parking space shall be more than 250 feet from an
entrance to the building it serves.
[3] Screening: As required by § 170-1508 of this chapter.
[4] Storage: As required by § 170-1509 of this chapter.
[5] Landscaping: As required by § 170-1507 of this chapter.
[6] Access and traffic control. Routes for vehicular and
pedestrian access and parking shall be designed and
§ 170-904 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-904
1:588
situated so as to create no nuisances or detractions from
privacy. Design of the site shall comply further with the
standards in §§ 170-1510, 170-1511, 170-1512, and
170-1513 of this chapter. Townhouse structures shall be
arranged so as to reduce the amount of roads required
to serve the development and to provide for an adequate
open space design.
(3) The developer shall make adequate provision for the maintenance
of buildings and land within yard areas set aside for condominium
development by the organization of a condominium corporation
with the responsibility for collection of sufficient levies or fees to
pay the cost of such maintenance. Such maintenance may be
conducted in conjunction with the requirements of § 170-908,
where a condominium corporation owns and maintains common
open space. Any such terms and provisions shall be consistent with
the requirements of the Uniform Condominium Act of 1980.89
(4) All housing shall be designed with regard to topography and
natural features of the site in conjunction with the requirements of
§ 170-905A. The effects of prevailing winds, seasonal temperatures,
and hours of sunlight on the physical layout and form of the
proposed land use and buildings shall be taken into account.
(5) To create architectural interest in the layout and character of
housing fronting streets, variations in building line shall be
encouraged.
(6) All housing should be sited so as to provide privacy and to ensure
natural light in all principal rooms.
(7) Building height shall be limited to three stories not to exceed 38
feet.
(8) Routes for vehicular and pedestrian access and parking areas shall
be convenient without creating nuisances or detracting from
privacy.
(9) The approximate location and arrangement of buildings and open
spaces must be shown on tentative plans so that the Board may
review the intensity of land use and serve the public interest by
protecting neighboring land uses.
(10) The following requirements shall apply:
(a) No structure shall be within 30 feet of the curb of access roads.
(b) No single-family detached dwelling or twin dwelling may be
erected within 30 feet of any other structure.
89.Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 170-904 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-904
1:589
§ 170-905. Design standards.
(c) The distance between buildings containing multi-family
dwellings shall be determined in accordance with the
requirements of § 170-802B(7).
(d) At its sole discretion, and for purposes of promoting innovative
and preferred design of dwellings and structures, the Board
may vary the terms of this § 170-904E(10) where deemed
appropriate.
(11) Single-family detached dwellings, and uses accessory thereto, shall
be a minimum of 50 feet, and all other structures shall be a
minimum of 100 feet, from the property lines of the tract. Where
proposed structures other than single-family detached dwellings
will abut tracts containing similar uses, this distance may be
reduced to 50 feet. Landscaping shall be required in these
boundaries, regardless of the use being proposed. In cases where a
one-hundred-foot setback from the tract boundary is required,
including where twin dwellings are provided, at least 50 feet shall
be a planted buffer conforming to the requirements of § 170-1508
and containing no paving.
(12) Where permitted, apartment dwellings shall comply with the
minimum floor area provisions set forth in § 170-802B(3). [Added
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1]
A. Conservation design. Any flexible development shall comply with the
provisions of § 170-1617. In addition, the natural features protection
standards contained in Article IV of this chapter shall be applicable to
any flexible development and to any lot created within a flexible
development. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(1) Site analysis. As part of application for conditional use approval of
any flexible development, the applicant shall prepare and submit to
the Township a site analysis which identifies the items listed below
and which complies with applicable requirements of § 170-1617,
Conservation design.
(a) Degree of slope, in the following ranges: less than 15%, as
measured at two-foot contour intervals; 15%-25% and greater
than 25%, as measured at five-foot contour intervals.
(b) Areas subject to floodplain regulations, including floodway,
flood-fringe, and approximated floodplain areas, as delineated
by the Flood Insurance Study for Westtown Township prepared
by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
and the Federal Insurance Administration. [Amended
9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
(c) Water bodies and watercourses, both perennial and seasonal.
§ 170-904 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-905
1:590
(d) Drainage basin and subbasins.
(e) Wetlands, as defined by this chapter.
(f) Generalized soil types as designated in the Soil Survey of
Chester and Delaware Counties (USDA, 1963).
(g) Generalized geological characteristics, including rock
formation type(s).
(h) Existing vegetation, denoted as to type, including tree masses,
treelines, and hedgerows; individual freestanding trees over
six inches dbh; wetland vegetation; meadow, pasture, or
cropland; orchard; cultivated and ornamental garden areas;
etc.
(i) Existing structures and other improvements.
(j) Historic resources, including structures, ruins, sites, traces,
and relationship to the bounds of any National Register
historic district.
(k) Existing paths and trails.
(l) Scenic views.
(m) All lands visible from any adjacent public road. Visibility shall
be measured as viewed from a height of four feet above the
surface of the road looking in any direction or angle across the
subject property, and shall be based on winter conditions
(whether actual or estimated at the time of inventory) when
existing vegetation offers the least obstruction of view. Areas
predominantly obscured from view may be excluded from
inventory of visible lands subject to Township approval.
(2) Finished topography: The finished topography of the site shall
adequately facilitate the proposed development without excessive
earthmoving, tree clearance, or destruction of natural amenities.
Natural features such as lakes, streams, and wooded slopes shall
be preserved and incorporated into the final landscaping of the
development wherever possible and desirable. The applicant shall
demonstrate the means whereby trees and other natural features
shall be protected during construction.
(3) Stormwater management: The applicant shall submit a proposed
stormwater management plan, to be approved by the Township
Engineer in accordance with Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land
Development. In addition, the Board may require the submission of
a study of the off-site and overall groundwater impacts of the
proposed stormwater management system.
(4) Site stabilization: Seeding, sodding, and other planting shall be
applied to stabilize the topsoil on disturbed or created slopes in
§ 170-905 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-905
1:591
excess of 15%, and to enhance the appearance of open areas as
required by Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development.
(5) Erosion and sedimentation control: An erosion and sedimentation
control plan shall be filed and implemented in accordance with the
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and the requirements of Chapter 149, Subdivision and
Land Development.
B. Streets and parking.
(1) Streets: Streets within a flexible development shall be related to
land use and to adjacent street systems, and shall be designated as
secondary traffic street (arterial), collector street, or local street
depending upon its function. Streets shall be designed in
accordance with the terms of Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land
Development; provision for the maintenance of such streets shall
be an essential part of the plan for the development.
(2) Parking: Parking for all uses within the flexible development shall
be in accordance with the requirements of Article XVII of this
chapter.
C. Access and traffic control: As required by § 170-1510.
D. Signs: As required by Article XVIII.
E. Lighting: As required by § 170-1514. In particular, adequate lighting
must be provided to the outdoor areas used by residents after dark.
Appropriate lighting fixtures must be provided for walkways and to
identify streets, steps, ramps, directional changes, and signs. Lighting
shall be located to avoid shining directly into habitable room windows
of dwelling units within the development, or into private yard areas
associated with dwelling units. The requirements for lighting may be
waived by the Board where density of development may not justify its
use.
F. Landscaping: Landscaping shall be regarded as an essential feature of
every flexible development. In addition to maximum preservation of the
existing vegetation of the site, careful attention shall be given to
landscaping of parking areas and provisions of street trees as required
by this chapter, specifically § 170-1507, and Chapter 149, Subdivision
and Land Development.
G. Screening: As required by § 170-1508.
H. All utility lines shall be placed underground. As-built plans for all
utilities shall be submitted to the Township.
I. Supplementary project facilities:
§ 170-905 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-905
1:592
§ 170-906. Administration. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
§ 170-907. Open space standards.
(1) Swimming pools, skating rinks, and other recreational areas shall
be located so as not to interfere with the residential character of
adjacent dwelling units.
(2) Refuse stations must be designed with suitable screening, must be
surrounded by a masonry enclosure on three sides, placed in
locations convenient for collection and removal, and not be
offensive to the occupants of adjacent dwelling units.
A. The flexible development procedure may be applied where approved by
the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use. The prospective
developer is strongly encouraged to submit a sketch plan to the
Township for informal discussion prior to the submission of tentative
and final development plans. The Board of Supervisors shall refer all
plans for such developments to the Township Planning Commission and
the Chester County Planning Commission for review and comment.
B. The Planning Commission shall act as the principal agent for the Board
in reviewing and commenting on proposals for flexible development. As
such, it shall receive and review the plans and documents, particularly
with reference to the criteria for location and design as contained in
§§ 170-902, 170-904, and 170-905 of this chapter. In addition, the
Planning Commission shall evaluate the consistency of the proposed
development with the Westtown Township Comprehensive Plan, and
other matters required for consideration by the Board in § 170-2009 of
this chapter.
C. The Planning Commission may, in reviewing a flexible development,
meet with the prospective developer and advise him/her of changes
required to comply with the terms and spirit of this chapter. The
Planning Commission shall report to the Board, in writing, regarding its
findings and recommendations not less than five days prior to the public
hearing scheduled for consideration of the conditional use application.
D. In consideration of conditional use approval, the Township may require
the applicant to submit a development impact study which considers
the impact of the proposed flexible development on:
(1) Natural and cultural resources, including all items identified in the
site analysis submitted in accordance with § 170-905A(1);
(2) Traffic volume and safety; and
(3) The provision of municipal services and the burden on taxpayers in
making provision thereof, including, but not limited to, sewers,
water, fire safety and police. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-1]
§ 170-905 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-907
1:593
A. Use and design standards. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(1) The open space shall be laid out to the satisfaction of the Board in
accordance with the best principles of site design, and shall be
consistent with the intent of the Township's Comprehensive Plan
and Parks, Recreation and Open Space Plan.
(2) Within the required acreage of open space, or elsewhere on the
tract, an area equivalent to at least 10% of the net tract acreage
shall be suitable and available to serve the particular recreational
needs of the residents of the development. The Board may require
that all, or a portion of, this recreational area be suitable for active
recreation, and may further require that such area be prepared and
developed for such purposes.
(3) Where applicable or deemed appropriate or contained in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan or Parks, Recreation and Open
Space Plan, provision for pedestrian trails for public and/or private
use shall be provided. This provision need not be in addition to the
10% requirement of Subsection A(2) above unless the Board
determines that the entire 10% minimum must be designated for
active recreation.
(4) Where ownership of portions of the required open space is retained
by the original owner of the tract or by the developer, use of the
area may be consistent with the uses described in Subsection A(5)
below and may include the following:
(a) Crop land or pasture;
(b) Cultivation of nursery stock or orchard trees;
(c) Public park or outdoor recreation area operated by a
governmental agency, nonprofit organization, watershed
association, or similar entity; and
(d) Woodland, game preserve, or similar conservation-oriented
activity.
(5) The plan shall designate the use of common open space, the type of
maintenance to be provided, and a planting plan or schedule. In
designating use and maintenance, the following classes may be
used:
(a) Lawn. A grass area with or without trees which may be used by
the residents for a variety of purposes and which shall be
mowed regularly to insure a neat and tidy appearance.
(b) Natural area. An area of natural vegetation undisturbed during
construction, or replanting. Meadows shall be maintained as
such. Maintenance may be minimal but shall prevent the
proliferation of undesirable plants. Litter, dead trees, and
§ 170-907 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-907
1:594
brush shall be removed and streams kept in free-flowing
condition.
(c) Recreation area. An area designated for a specific recreational
use, including by way of example tennis, swimming, playfields,
and totlots. Such areas shall be located and maintained in such
manner as not to create a hazard or nuisance and shall
perpetuate the proposed use.
(d) Crop land or pasture; cultivation of nursery stock or orchard
trees. Under the flexible development procedure, existing
dwellings and farm-related buildings shall be permitted in the
open space set-aside provided the open space is retained for
agricultural purposes.
(e) Areas used for subsurface infiltration or land application
(irrigation) of stormwater and/or treated wastewater. Open
storage or settling ponds may be included where accessory to
infiltration facilities. All other stormwater and wastewater
facilities may be physically located in open space areas but
shall be excluded from measurement of the minimum required
open space.
(6) At least 50% of the minimum required common open space area
shall be located outside floodplain areas, wetland areas, and areas
of greater than twenty-five-percent slope. [Amended 9-15-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-1]
(7) The following design standards, as deemed appropriate by the
Board, shall apply to areas of common open space. Such areas shall
be:
(a) Not less than 75 feet in width at any point and not less than 1/2
acre of contiguous area.
(b) Interconnected with common open space areas on abutting
parcels wherever possible, including provisions for pedestrian
pathways for general public use to create linked pathway
systems within the Township;
(c) Provided with sufficient perimeter parking when necessary,
and with safe and convenient access from adjoining public road
frontage or other rights-of-way or easements capable of
accommodating pedestrian, bicycle, and maintenance and
vehicle traffic, and containing appropriate access
improvements. Areas required for parking may be included in
calculating the minimum acreage required for open space;
(d) Undivided by any crossings of public or private roads, except
where necessary for proper traffic circulation, and then only
upon recommendation of the Township Engineer and Planning
Commission;
§ 170-907 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-907
1:595
(e) Free of all structures, except those related to outdoor
recreational use or as otherwise provided herein;
(f) Suitably landscaped by retaining existing natural cover and
wooded areas and/or by a landscaping plan which is consistent
with the purposes of this article and which minimizes
maintenance costs; and
(g) Made subject to such agreement with the Township and such
deed restrictions, duly recorded in the office of the Chester
County Recorder of Deeds, as may be required by the Board of
Supervisors for the purpose of preserving the common open
space for such use.
B. Ownership and maintenance standards.
(1) Ownership of a portion of the open space may be retained by the
developer and/or the original owner of the development tract,
provided that the open space and recreational needs of the
residents are adequately met by that portion not retained. The
developer and/or original owner of the tract shall make this
determination; however, the Board, at its discretion, may require
that the developer and/or original owner of the tract put aside more
open space for the use of the residents if, in its opinion, the amount
set aside by the developer and/or original landowner is not
sufficient.
(2) The following standards shall apply to that portion of open space
(common open space) not retained by the developer and/or original
owner:
(a) Ownership. Any of the following methods may be used, either
individually or together, to preserve, own, and maintain
common open space: condominium, homeowners' association,
dedication in fee simple, dedication of easements, and transfer
of fee simple title and easements to a private conservation
organization. Such land shall not be eligible for transfer to
another party except for transfer to another method of
ownership permitted under this section, and then only where
there is no change in the open space ratio. The following
specific requirements are associated with each of the various
methods:
[1] Homeowners' association. The common open space may
be held in common ownership by a homeowners'
association. This method shall be subject to all of the
provisions for homeowners' associations set forth in
Subsection B(2)(b) below, and the homeowners'
association agreement shall be recorded.
[2] Fee simple dedication. The Township may, but shall not be
required to, accept any portion or portions of the common
§ 170-907 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-907
1:596
open space, provided such land is accessible to the
residents of the Township, there is no cost of acquisition
(other than any costs incidental to the transfer of
ownership, such as title insurance), and the Township
agrees to and has access to maintain such lands. As a
condition of approval of any flexible development, the
Board of Supervisors may require that a maximum of 20%
of the required common open space be dedicated to the
Township for recreational purposes. [Amended 3-3-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-2]
[3] Transfer to a private conservation organization. With
permission of the Township, an owner may transfer either
the fee simple title, with appropriate deed restrictions
running in favor of the Township, or a conservation
easement to a private nonprofit organization, among
whose purposes is to conserve open space land and/or
natural resources, provided the organization is acceptable
to the Township is a bona fide conservation organization
with perpetual existence; the conveyance contains
appropriate provision for proper reverter or retransfer in
event that the organization becomes unwilling or unable to
continue carrying out its functions; and a maintenance
agreement acceptable to the Township is reached.
[4] Dedication of easements. The Township may, but shall not
be required to, accept easements for public use of any
portion or portions of open space land, title to which is to
remain in ownership by condominium or homeowners'
association, provided that such land is accessible to the
residents of the Township; there is no cost of acquisition
(other than any costs incidental to the transfer of
ownership, such as title insurance); and a maintenance
agreement acceptable to the Township is reached.
[5] Condominium. The common open space may be controlled
through the use of condominium agreements. Such
agreements shall be in conformance with the Uniform
Condominium Act of 1980 (68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3107 et seq.). All
such common open space land shall be held as "common
element."
(b) Maintenance.
[1] In the event that the organization established to own and
maintain common open space, or any successor
organization, shall at any time after establishment of the
development fail to maintain the common open space in
reasonable order and condition in accordance with the
development plan, the Township may serve written notice
upon such organization or upon the residents and owners
§ 170-907 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-907
1:597
of the development, setting forth the manner in which
the organization has failed to maintain the common open
space in reasonable condition, and said notice shall
include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance
be cured within 30 days thereof, and shall state the date
and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held within
14 days of the notice. At such hearing the Township may
modify the terms of the original notice as to the
deficiencies and may give an extension of time within
which they shall be corrected. If the deficiencies set forth
in the original notice or in the modifications thereof shall
not be corrected within said 30 days or any extension
thereof, the Township, in order to preserve the taxable
values of the properties within the development and to
prevent the common open space from becoming a public
nuisance, may, in its discretion, enter upon said common
open space and maintain the same for a period of one
year. Said entry and maintenance shall not constitute a
taking of said common open space, and shall not vest in
the public any rights to use the common open space except
when the same is voluntarily dedicated to the public by the
residents and owners and such dedication is acceptable
to the Township. Before the expiration of said year, the
Township shall, upon its initiative or upon the request
of the organization theretofore responsible for the
maintenance of the common open space, call a public
hearing upon notice to such organization, or to the
residents and owners of the development, to be held by
the Township, at which hearing such organization or the
residents and owners of the development shall show cause
why such maintenance by the Township shall not, at the
election of the Township, continue for a succeeding year.
If the Township shall determine that such organization is
ready and able to maintain said common open space in
reasonable condition, the Township shall cease to maintain
said common open space at the end of said year. If the
Township shall determine such organization is not ready
and able to maintain said common open space in a
reasonable condition, the Township may, in its discretion,
continue to maintain said common open space during the
next succeeding year and, subject to a similar hearing and
determination, in each year thereafter. The decision of the
Township in any case shall constitute a final administrative
decision subject to judicial review.
[2] The cost of such maintenance and enforcement
proceedings by the Township shall be assessed ratably
against the properties within the development that have a
right of enjoyment of the common open space and shall
become a lien on said properties. Said assessments or
§ 170-907 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-907
1:598
§ 170-908. Specific requirements for homeowners' association.
If a homeowners' association is formed, it shall be governed according to
the following regulations:
charges shall be subordinate in lien to the lien of any prior
mortgage or mortgages on the property which is subject
to such assessments or charges. The Township, at the time
of entering upon such said common open space for the
purpose of maintenance, shall file notice of such lien, in
the office of the Prothonotary of Chester County, upon the
properties affected by such lien within the development.
[3] Included in any terms of ownership shall be protection of
the open space against development in perpetuity by
means of a conservation easement prohibiting
development. The required easement shall be conveyed
either to the Township directly (in which case the
development's property owners shall be named as third
party beneficiary) or to a conservation organization
acceptable to the Board (in which case the Township and
property owners of the development shall be named as
third party beneficiaries). [Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-6]
A. The developer shall provide to the Township a description of the
organization, including its bylaws and documents governing common
open space maintenance and use restrictions.
B. The organization shall be established by the developers and shall be
operating (with financial subsidization by the developers, if necessary)
before the sale of any lots within the development.
C. Membership in the organization is mandatory for all purchasers of
homes therein and their successors.
D. The organization shall be responsible for maintenance of and insurance
on common open space. The organization shall be responsible for real
estate taxes on common open space only where the following preferred
alternative is not utilized: The developer of any cluster development
proposed to contain any area(s) of common open space may arrange
with the County Board of Assessment a method of assessment of the
open space which will allocate to each tax parcel in the cluster
development a share of the total assessment for such open space.
Where this alternative is to be utilized, the method of allocation shall be
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
E. The members of the organization shall share equitably the costs of
maintaining and developing common open space, in accordance with
the procedures established by them.
§ 170-907 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-908
1:599
§ 170-909. through § 170-915. (Reserved)90
F. In the event of any proposed transfer of common open space land by the
homeowners' association or of the assumption of maintenance of
common open space land by the Township as hereinafter provided,
notice of such action shall be given to all property owners within the
cluster development by the homeowners' association.
G. The organization shall have or hire adequate staff, as necessary, to
administer common facilities and maintain common open space.
H. Lease agreement.
(1) The homeowners' association may lease back open space lands to
the developer, his heirs or assigns, or to any other person or
corporation qualified to manage open space for operation and
maintenance of open space lands, but such a lease agreement shall
provide:
(a) That the residents of the cluster development shall at all times
have access to the open space lands contained herein;
(b) That the common open space to be leased shall be maintained
only for the purposes set forth in this chapter; and
(c) That the operation of open space facilities may be for the
benefit of the residents of the cluster development only or may
be open to the residents of the Township.
(2) The lease shall be subject to the approval of the Township, as shall
any transfer or assignment of the lease. Lease agreements so
entered upon shall be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of
Chester County within 30 days of their execution and a copy of the
recorded lease shall be filed with the Township.
90.Editor's Note: Former § 170-909 through § 170-915 were repealed 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2.
§ 170-908 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-909
1:600
ARTICLE X
M-U Multi-Use District
§ 170-1000. Statement of intent.
The purpose of the Multi-Use District is to provide an area within the
Township for many of the uses permitted in other sections of this chapter, as
well as for uses not elsewhere specifically authorized in this chapter when
such uses can be made compatible with the public interest and welfare. It
is intended that the Multi-Use District be a district which has reasonable
access to transportation, both by road and by rail, and is accessible to
off-site water and sewer service, it being the belief that such proximity
will allow for the uses which could not properly locate elsewhere in the
Township.
§ 170-1001. Use regulations.
A. Uses by right. In the Multi-Use District, a building may be erected,
altered, or used, and a lot or premises may be used or occupied, by
right, for any of the following purposes, and no other:
(1) Any use authorized in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and C-1 Districts, subject to
all of the regulations, standards and restrictions applicable within
such districts; provided, however, that:
(a) Flexible development under Article IX shall not be permitted in
the Multi-Use District.
(b) Townhouse dwellings shall be permitted only as a conditional
use, in accordance with the terms of § 170-1001C below.
(2) Accessory uses. Only the following accessory uses shall be
permitted:
(a) Minor home occupation in accordance with the terms of
§ 170-1605 of this chapter. [Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord. No.
97-3]
(b) Any accessory use permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and C-1
Districts which corresponds to a use authorized by this section,
subject to all of the regulations, standards, and restrictions
applicable within those districts.
(3) Small-lot single-family detached development.
B. Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted when
authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, in
accordance with the terms of this article and § 170-2108 of this chapter:
(1) Manufactured/mobile home park, in accordance with the standards
of § 170-1002 of this article. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
§ 170-1000 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1001
1:601
(2) Any other lawful use not provided for in this article, so long as it is
consistent with the health, morals, and general welfare of the
Township and subject to the applicable area and bulk regulations of
§ 170-802 of this chapter and the applicable design standards of
Article XV of this chapter, and subject further to other
supplemental regulations and provisions of this chapter, where
applicable.
(3) Manufacture, testing, assembly, processing, packaging and
accessory storage of precision instruments, electronics,
microelectronics, wood products and items with a closely similar
character. [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(4) Printing and publishing. [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(5) Such other wholesale sales, light industrial, testing and research
uses that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board as a special exception use will meet all of the
following standards: [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(a) The use will not typically generate more than 10 tractor-trailer
trucks entering or leaving any lot per day, and will involve
tractor-trailer trucks being directed to use the most
appropriate access route from the lot as a condition of
approval.
(b) The use will meet all of the performance standards of Article
XV of this chapter, including but not limited to § 170-1506.
(c) The use will be of such character and have such external
effects as to be highly compatible with existing and planned
dwellings within the vicinity.
(d) The use will not create significant risks of environmental,
explosive, fire or genetic hazards, transport of highly
hazardous materials, or noxious odors, based upon a
comprehensive professional analysis.
(e) Limits upon the hours of operation shall be established as a
condition of any special exception approval to minimize
conflicts with dwellings.
(f) As a condition upon special exception approval, the Zoning
Hearing Board may require additional landscaping or earth
berming or solid fencing or walls between business operations
and any residential lots to minimize conflicts with dwellings.
(g) The use will not cause any street or intersection to have a level
of service of D or lower. See traffic impact study required
under Chapter 149 of the Code.
(6) Indoor recreation and fitness facilities. [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-2]
§ 170-1001 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1001
1:602
§ 170-1002. Regulations governing mobile home parks.
§ 170-1003. Regulations governing integrated townhouse
development.
C. Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted only upon
approval by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use, in
accordance with the provisions of this article and § 170-2009 of this
chapter:
(1) Integrated townhouse development.
A. To be eligible for use as a mobile home park, a tract must have a gross
area of not less than five acres. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
B. The maximum gross density for any mobile home park shall be four
dwelling units per acre of tract area, as established by § 170-1519 of
this chapter.
C. A minimum of 20% of the gross area of the tract shall be designated as
common open space and shall comply with the standards in § 170-907
of this chapter.
D. The lot attributable to each mobile home shall be served by an off-site
sewage disposal system and off-site water system approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Chester County
Health Department, and/or Public Utility Commission, as applicable.
E. Mobile home parks shall be governed further by the applicable
provisions of Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development.
F. All mobile homes shall be set back a distance of not less than 100 feet
from the tract boundary, or from the zoning district boundary
separating the Multi-Use District from any other zoning district. The
required one-hundred-foot setback shall include a minimum fifty-foot
buffer which shall be planted and not include any paved areas.
G. Setbacks.
(1) No mobile home shall be closer than 25 feet from:
(a) The cartway edge of an interior street or drive.
(b) Another mobile home.
(2) Accessory structures. Accessory structures shall be located to the
side or rear of the principal structure and not be within 15 feet of
any structure or accessory structure on an adjacent mobile home
lot.
A. Use regulations.
§ 170-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1003
1:603
(1) Permitted uses. Within an integrated townhouse development a
building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied
for the following purposes and no other:
(a) Townhouse dwellings.
(b) Public or private park or recreation areas.
(c) Off-street parking, as required by Article XVII of this chapter.
(d) Private garage accessory to the principal townhouse use, and
other accessory uses customarily incidental to the above uses.
B. Standards for development. The following standards shall govern the
design and development of an integrated townhouse development:
[Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord. No. 94-6; 5-1-1995 by Ord. No.
95-2; 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(1) Site conditions.
(a) To be eligible for use for an integrated townhouse
development, the proposed tract shall have a gross area of not
less than five acres.
(b) Natural features/resource protection: The natural features
protection standards contained in Article IV of this chapter
shall be applicable to any integrated townhouse development.
[1] Site analysis: In conjunction with the provisions of this
section, the applicant shall prepare a site analysis which
identifies the following:
[a] Degree of slope, in the following ranges: less than
15%, as measured at two-foot contour intervals; 15%
to 25% and greater than 25%, as measured at two-foot
contour intervals.
[b] Areas subject to floodplain regulations, including
floodway, flood fringe, and approximated floodplain
areas, as delineated by the Flood Insurance Study for
Westtown Township prepared by the Federal
Insurance Administration. [Amended 9-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-3]
[c] Water bodies and watercourses, both perennial and
seasonal.
[d] Drainage basin and subbasins.
[e] Wetlands, as defined by this chapter.
[f] Generalized soil types as designated in the Soil Survey
of Chester and Delaware Counties (USDA, 1963).
§ 170-1003 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1003
1:604
[g] Generalized geological characteristics, including rock
formation type(s).
[h] Existing vegetation, denoted as to type, including tree
masses, treelines, and hedgerows; individual
freestanding trees over six inch dbh; wetland
vegetation; meadow, pasture, or cropland; orchard;
cultivated and ornamental garden areas; etc.
[i] Existing structures and other improvements.
[j] Historic resources, including structures, ruins, sites,
traces, and relationship to the bounds of any National
Register historic district.
[k] Existing paths and trails.
[2] Finished topography: The finished topography of the site
shall adequately facilitate the proposed development
without excessive earthmoving, tree clearance, or
destruction of natural amenities. Natural features such as
lakes, streams, and wooded slopes shall be preserved and
incorporated into the final landscaping of the development
wherever possible and desirable. The applicant shall
demonstrate the means whereby trees and other natural
features shall be protected during construction.
[3] Stormwater management: The applicant shall submit a
proposed stormwater management plan, to be approved
by the Township Engineer in accordance with Chapter
149, Subdivision and Land Development. In addition, the
Board may require the submission of a study of the off-site
and overall groundwater impacts of the proposed
stormwater management system.
[4] Site stabilization: Seeding, sodding, and other planting
shall be applied to stabilize the topsoil on disturbed or
created slopes in excess of 15%, and to enhance the
appearance of open areas as required by Chapter 149,
Subdivision and Land Development.
[5] Erosion and sedimentation control: An erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall be filed and implemented
in accordance with the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and the
requirements of Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(2) Density and design standards and area and bulk regulations.
§ 170-1003 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1003
1:605
(a) Density. The maximum gross density shall not exceed six
dwelling units per acre of tract area, as established by
§ 170-1519 of this chapter.
(b) Lot area. No dwelling unit shall be constructed upon a lot
containing less than 1,200 square feet. The Board of
Supervisors may, in its sole discretion, permit a lot size which
conforms to the footprint of the townhouse foundation. In lieu
of either the 1,200 square feet lot or the lot measured by the
unit footprint, the developer may elect to provide for
condominium ownership.
(c) Height. Building height shall be limited to three stories and
shall not exceed 38 feet. [Amended 5-1-1995 by Ord. No.
95-2]
(d) Length. No row of townhouses shall exceed 120 feet in length
or five continuous dwelling units in a row, whichever is less.
(e) Width. No townhouse shall be less than 20 feet in width.
However, if garage door(s) for two or more vehicles will face
and be visible from a public street, then the minimum building
width for each townhouse shall be increased to 28 feet.
(f) Distance between buildings. To encourage flexibility in site
design, maintain and protect views for occupants of buildings,
ensure privacy, and assure sufficient light and air, the minimum
distance between buildings shall be:
[1] Two times the height of the taller of two buildings where
fenestrated facades face each other, or where one
fenestrated facade faces an unfenestrated facade (wall,
end, or corner), but in no case less than 60 feet; and
[2] Twenty-five feet, where two buildings abut end to end,
corner to corner, or end to corner (where corners and ends
are unfenestrated).
(g) Setback.
[1] All buildings within an integrated townhouse development
shall be set back from the right-of-way line of any street
the development abuts, a distance of not less than 100
feet.
[2] All buildings within an integrated townhouse development
shall be set back from the edge of the cartway of any
interior road or accessway, a distance of not less than 25
feet.
[3] All buildings within an integrated townhouse development
shall be set back a distance of not less than 100 feet from
the tract boundary, or from the zoning district boundary
§ 170-1003 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1003
1:606
separating the Multi-Use District from any other zoning
district.
[4] The required one-hundred-foot setback shall include a
minimum fifty-foot buffer which shall be planted and not
include any paved areas.
(h) Maximum impervious lot coverage. Not more than 45% of the
gross area of the tract shall be covered by impervious surfaces.
(i) Design standards.
[1] Streets within an integrated townhouse development shall
be designed in accordance with the terms of Chapter 149,
Subdivision and Land Development. Provision for the
maintenance of any private streets shall be an essential
part of the plan for development. The Township may, but is
not required to, accept dedication of the streets within the
integrated townhouse development for public use. It may
require the posting of security in an amount and form
satisfactory to it for the construction of such streets, as set
forth in Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development.
[2] Parking requirements.
[a] Except where part of a shared parking arrangement
authorized under the terms of Article XVII, all
required off-street parking shall be developed within
the boundaries of the townhouse development tract.
[b] Parking for each dwelling unit shall be provided either
at the rear of the unit or shall be grouped into one or
more parking areas serving a number of dwelling
units. Individual curb cuts shall be permitted only for
access to garages contained in units. Other front yard
parking and individual curb cuts at the street line for
access to parking shall be discouraged.
[c] Provisions for pedestrian circulation paths from the
parking lot(s) to the buildings shall be provided. These
paths shall be constructed of an all-weather surface.
[d] No parking space shall be more than 250 feet from an
entrance to the building it serves.
[3] Screening: As required by § 170-1508 of this chapter.
[4] Storage: As required by § 170-1509 of this chapter.
[5] Landscaping: As required by § 170-1507 of this chapter.
[6] Access and traffic control: Routes for vehicular and
pedestrian access and parking shall be designed and
§ 170-1003 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1003
1:607
§ 170-1004. Regulations governing small-lot single-family detached
development.
situated so as to create no nuisances or detractions from
privacy. Design of the site shall comply further with the
standards in §§ 170-1510, 170-1511, 170-1512, and
170-1513 of this chapter.
(3) Supplementary project facilities.
(a) Swimming pools and other recreational areas shall be located
so as not to interfere with the residential character of adjacent
dwelling units.
(b) All buildings within the integrated townhouse development
shall be served by an off-site sewage disposal system and an
off-site water supply. All utilities shall be underground within
the development. As-built plans for all utilities shall be
submitted to the Township.
(c) Refuse stations must be designed with suitable screening,
must be surrounded by a masonry enclosure on three sides,
placed in locations convenient for collection and removal, and
not be offensive to the occupants of adjacent dwelling units.
(d) Lighting shall be provided for in accordance with § 170-1514 of
this chapter.
(4) Open space.
(a) Not less than 30% of the gross area of the tract shall be set
aside as common open space.
(b) The standards for use and design of open space in § 170-907A
of this chapter shall apply to the open space within an
integrated townhouse development.
(c) The provisions of § 170-908 of this chapter concerning
ownership and maintenance of open space shall apply to an
integrated townhouse development.
A. Use regulations.
(1) Permitted uses. Within a small-lot single-family detached
development a building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for the following purposes and no other:
(a) Single-family dwellings.
(b) Common open space, as defined by this chapter.
(c) Off-street parking, as required by Article XVII of this chapter.
§ 170-1003 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1004
1:608
B. Standards for development. The following standards shall govern the
design and development of a small-lot single-family detached
development:
(1) Site conditions.
(a) To be eligible for use for a small-lot single-family detached
development, the proposed tract shall have an area of not less
than five acres. [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
(b) All dwellings within the small-lot single-family detached
development shall be served by an off-site sewage disposal
system and an off-site water supply.
(c) The natural features/resource protection standards set forth in
§ 170-1003B(1)(b) of this chapter shall apply to a small-lot
single-family detached development.
(2) Area, bulk and density regulations.
(a) Density. The maximum density shall not exceed one dwelling
unit per 10,000 square feet of tract area, as established by
§ 170-1519 of this chapter.
(b) Lot area. No dwelling unit shall be constructed upon a lot
containing less than 3,000 square feet.
(c) Lot width at building line. No lot shall be less than 40 feet in
width at the building line.
(d) Perimeter setback. All buildings within a small-lot single-family
detached development shall be set back from the right-of-way
line of any street abutting the development on its perimeter,
any tract boundary, or from the zoning district boundary
separating the Multi-Use District from any other zoning district
a distance of not less than 30 feet. [Amended 10-17-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-5]
(e) Front yard setbacks. Front yard setbacks shall be no less than
30 feet, measured from the center line of the adjacent street,
and shall be no less than 20 feet measured from the inside
curbline or edge of the cartway of the adjacent street,
whichever is greater.
(f) Rear yard setbacks. Rear yard setbacks shall be no less than 10
feet, measured from the abutting property line, or the edge of
the paved shoulder or cartway of any service street as
applicable.
(g) Side yards. Side yards shall total not less than 18 feet
aggregate. Individual side yards may be reduced to five feet.
§ 170-1004 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1004
1:609
(h) Distance between buildings. Not less than 15 feet shall
separate any buildings.
(i) Height. Building height shall be limited to two stories and shall
not exceed 30 feet. [Amended 5-1-1995 by Ord. No. 95-2]
(j) Floor area ratio. For purposes of this section, the floor area
ratio (FAR) shall be calculated excluding uninhabitable
basement area and shall not exceed 50%.
(k) Maximum impervious lot coverage. Not more than 50% of the
area of the lot shall be covered by impervious surfaces.
[Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(l) Tract coverage. Not more than 25% of the area of the tract
shall be covered by impervious surfaces.
(3) Design standards.
(a) Access and traffic control. Routes for vehicular and pedestrian
access and parking shall be designed and situated so as to
create no nuisances or detractions from privacy. Pedestrian
circulation paths shall be constructed of an all-weather
surface. Design of the site shall comply further with the
standards in §§ 170-1510, 170-1511, 170-1512, and 170-1513
of this chapter.
(b) Streets. Streets within a small-lot single-family detached
development shall be designed in accordance with the terms of
Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development. Where offstreet
parking is provided directly abutting a public or private
street, such street shall be no less than 24 feet in cartway
width exclusive of any area devoted to parking. Private streets
including service streets may be permitted to improve
circulation, upon the recommendation of the Township
Engineer. Provision for the maintenance of any private streets,
as required by § 149-408B of Chapter 149, Subdivision and
Land Development, shall be an essential part of the plan for
development. The Township may, but is not required to, accept
dedication of any or all of the streets within the small-lot
single-family detached development for public use. The
Township may require the posting of security in an amount and
form satisfactory to it for the construction of such streets, as
set forth in Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development.
(c) Parking requirements. All required off-street parking shall be
developed within the boundaries of the small-lot single-family
detached development tract. Upon the recommendation of the
Township Engineer, the Township may permit the use of
parallel parking along service streets and/or common parking
areas within the bounds of the development in calculating
compliance with the total number of parking spaces required
§ 170-1004 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1004
1:610
§ 170-1005. Regulations for special exception uses. [Added
3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
The following regulations shall apply for special exception uses allowed by
§ 170-1001B(2) through (6):
as per § 170-1705 of this chapter. In a small-lot single-family
detached development required off-street parking may be
provided directly abutting a public or private street.
(4) Open space.
(a) Not less than 40% of the gross area of the tract shall be set
aside as common open space.
(b) Open space within a small-lot single-family detached
development shall comply with the standards set forth in
§ 170-907A of this chapter.
(c) Ownership and maintenance of open space within a small-lot
single-family detached development shall comply with the
provisions of § 170-907B of this chapter.
(5) Supplementary project facilities.
(a) Where provided, swimming pools and other recreational areas
shall be located so as not to interfere with the residential
character of adjacent dwelling units.
(b) All utilities shall be underground within the development. Asbuilt
plans for all utilities shall be submitted to the Township.
(c) Where utilized, refuse stations must be designed with suitable
screening, must be surrounded by a masonry enclosure on
three sides, placed in locations convenient for collection and
removal, and not be offensive to the occupants of adjacent
dwelling units.
(d) Lighting: As required by § 170-1514 of this chapter.
(e) Screening: As required by § 170-1508 of this chapter.
(f) Storage: As required by § 170-1509 of this chapter.
(g) Landscaping: As required by § 170-1507 of this chapter.
(6) Homeowners' association. Where not accepted for public
dedication by the Township, any common facility or open space or
private street, service street, or parking area shall be under the
ownership, management and maintenance of a homeowners'
association in compliance with the requirements of § 170-907B of
this chapter. Homeowners' association documentation satisfactory
to the Township Solicitor shall be submitted to the Township prior
to plan approval.
§ 170-1004 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1005
1:611
A. Minimum lot area: three acres.
B. Maximum building coverage: 30%.
C. Maximum impervious coverage: 50%.
D. Minimum side yard: 75 feet, except 50 feet where a contiguous lot is
occupied by a principal nonresidential use.
E. Minimum building setback line from a future street right-of-way: 50
feet.
F. Minimum rear yard: 75 feet.
G. Minimum building setback and minimum truck loading/unloading area
setback from the lot line of an existing dwelling: 150 feet, which shall
include a 75 feet minimum width landscaped buffer yard adjoining any
such lot line.
H. Minimum lot width at minimum building setback line: 200 feet.
I. Minimum lot width at street future right-of-way line: 150 feet.
J. Maximum building height: two stories or 38 feet, whichever is most
restrictive.
K. Any new or expanded industrial uses approved after the adoption of this
section shall occur within a completely enclosed building. Any new or
expanded outdoor storage or overnight parking of tractor-trailer trucks
shall be screened by landscaping from view from dwellings and public
streets.
L. The use shall comply with the natural feature protection requirements
of Article IV (including but not limited to setbacks from creeks) and the
performance requirements in Article XV (including but not limited to
controls on lighting, noise, odor, vibration and dust).
§ 170-1005 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1005
1:612
ARTICLE XI
C-1 Neighborhood and Highway Commercial District
§ 170-1100. Statement of intent.
In addition to the goals presented in the general purpose and the
community development objectives sections of this chapter, the purpose of
this district is to provide a unified area, designed according to a plan of
highway-related stores and services which will serve the regional needs of
this area. It is to provide an area in the Township for neighborhood stores
and to provide regulations requiring landscaping, as well as provisions
covering the submission of plans, so that this area may be made to blend
with adjoining uses and designed to prevent congestion and hazards. An
additional major purpose of this district is to ensure a safe and efficient
movement of vehicular traffic along, onto, and off of PA Route 926 (Street
Road), U.S. Route 202, PA Route 352, and PA Route 3, recognizing their
importance as major highways serving traffic traveling through the region.
§ 170-1101. Use regulations. [Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord. No. 94-6;
3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
A. Uses by right. A building may be erected, altered, or used, and a lot or
premises may be used or occupied, by right, for any of the following
purposes and no other:
(1) Retail sales.
(2) Barber shop, hairdresser, dry-cleaning outlets (excluding cleaning
and pressing services) and such other shops for personal service.
(3) Restaurant, retail bakery, or other places preparing, selling, and/or
serving food or beverages, provided that such establishments have
inside service and/or seating (where appropriate) only.
(4) General business, professional, governmental, and administrative
offices.
(5) Banks and similar financial institutions.
(6) Laboratory facilities, medical clinic.
(7) Motel.
(8) Wholesale sales, storage, or distribution facilities.
(9) Customary accessory uses associated with any commercial use
permitted by this section.
(10) Religious use.
(11) Funeral parlor.
§ 170-1100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1101
1:613
B. Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted when
approved as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the terms of this article and § 170-2108 of this chapter:
(1) Restaurant, retail bakery, or other places preparing, selling, and/or
serving food or beverages which have inside service and/or seating
(where appropriate) and which require drive-through window
takeout service.
(2) Public recreational facilities, including bowling alleys, theaters,
and similar forms of amusement.
(3) Automobile service station, provided that all gasoline pumps and
service facilities are set back at least 30 feet from the street line
and provided further that no service station shall be located within
500 feet of another service station on the same side of the street.
(4) Automobile sales and service agency, including used car lot and
repair shop adjacent to and in connection therewith.
(5) Car wash.
(6) Auto service and repair facilities in accordance with the provisions
of § 170-1602 of this chapter.
(7) Adult-oriented establishment, provided that all of the following
additional requirements shall be met:
(a) The applicant shall prove compliance with all applicable state
laws. Any Township zoning approval shall be conditioned upon
compliance with Chapter 55, Title 68 of the Pennsylvania
Consolidated Statutes, and shall be withdrawn if such law is
violated. The applicant shall annually provide the Township
with the legal name and phone number of a local on-site
manager who shall be responsible to ensure that there is
compliance with state laws.
(b) Any building area occupied by the use shall be set back a
minimum of 300 feet from the lot lines of all of the following
existing uses: any dwelling, place of worship, cemetery, park,
playground, school or child day-care center.
(c) The use shall not operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m.
(8) Boardinghouse, provided the lot shall include a minimum of 2,000
feet of lot area per resident, up to total maximum of 20 residents.
(9) Manufactured/mobile home park, which shall meet the regulations
of the MU District, and not the regulations of the C-1 District.
(10) Institutional use meeting § 170-1606.
§ 170-1101 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1102
1:614
§ 170-1102. Area and bulk regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all uses permitted by right and
special exception in the C-1 District:
§ 170-1103. Design standards.
The following design standards shall apply:
§ 170-1104. General standards.
A. Minimum lot area: two acres.
B. Minimum lot width: 300 feet at building setback line; in addition, 300
feet at future right-of-way line of Routes 202, 926, 3, and 352.
C. Maximum building coverage: 25%.
D. Maximum other impervious surface area: 65%. [Amended 3-3-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-2]
E. Maximum floor area ratio: 0.40 times the lot area.
F. Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet for any building or parking area.
G. Minimum side yards:
(1) Fifteen feet minimum for each, except 50 feet from the future rightof-
way line of Route 202 or Route 3 and 30 feet from the future
right-of-way line of Route 926 or Route 352.
H. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
I. Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 38 feet.
[Amended 5-1-1995 by Ord. No. 95-2]
J. Any accessory use or structure shall be located in compliance with
front, side and rear yard requirements of this district.
A. Screening: As required by § 170-1508 of this chapter.
B. Storage: As required by § 170-1509 of this chapter.
C. Landscaping: As required by § 170-1507 of this chapter.
D. Access and traffic control: As required by §§ 170-1510, 170-1511, and
170-1512 of this chapter.
E. Interior circulation: As required by § 170-1513 of this chapter.
F. Lighting: As required by § 170-1514 of this chapter.
G. Off-street parking and loading: As required by Article XVII of this
chapter.
H. Signs: As required by Article XVIII of this chapter.
§ 170-1102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1104
1:615
§ 170-1105. Buffer requirements.
In addition to the requirements of § 170-1508 of this chapter, there shall
be a fifty-foot buffer strip maintained on the property containing any use
authorized within this district, when such use abuts any A/C, R-1, R-2, or
R-3 District. Such buffer strip shall be in addition to any and all applicable
area and bulk regulations, including setback regulations. The buffer strip
shall be planted and shall not include any paved area.
§ 170-1106. Plan submission requirements.
A. No use shall be conducted in the required front, side, and rear yards.
B. No goods shall be displayed in the required front, side, and rear yards.
C. The parcel or parcels shall be in single and separate ownership, or
proof of option shall be furnished at the time of application, or a joint
application shall be filed by separate owners. The proposed tract shall
be capable of an integrated design of a complete commercial center
within its boundary.
A. In order to demonstrate compliance with the terms of this article, any
applicant proposing any use authorized by right within the C-1 District
shall submit a plan (map and text) to the Township Zoning Officer,
describing specifically how the requirements of this article will be
addressed.
B. Where the proposed use constitutes a subdivision or land development,
as defined by Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development, the plan
submission requirements of that chapter shall supersede the provisions
of this section.
C. For any conditional use application, the submission requirements under
§ 170-2009 of this chapter shall govern, and the plan submitted shall
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this article.
D. Any plan also shall include a certification from the Chief of the fire
company responsible for serving the site as to the adequacy of access
for emergency vehicles and the sufficiency of available water for firefighting
purposes. Where the water source is off site, suitable
arrangements to assure access at all times shall be demonstrated by the
applicant.
E. Upon submission of an application for development within the C-1
District, all owners of property within 500 feet of any portion of the
tract on which such development is proposed shall be notified of the
application and of the process through which the application will be
reviewed.
§ 170-1104 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1106
1:616
ARTICLE XIA
C-2 Highway Commercial District
[Added 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-4]
§ 170-11A00. Statement of intent.
In addition to the goals presented in the general purpose and the
community development objectives sections of this chapter, the purpose
of this district is to provide a unified area, designed according to a plan
of highway-related enterprises which will serve the regional needs of this
area. An additional major purpose of this district is to ensure a safe and
efficient movement of vehicular traffic along, onto, and off of U.S. Route
202, recognizing its importance as a major highway serving traffic traveling
through the region, especially in terms of off-premises outdoor advertising.
§ 170-11A01. Use regulations.
A. Uses by right. A building may be erected, altered, or used, and a lot or
premises may be used or occupied, by right, for any of the following
purposes and no other:
(1) Retail sales.
(2) Personal service shops.
(3) Restaurant, retail bakery, or other places preparing, selling, and/or
serving food or beverages.
(4) General business, professional, governmental, and administrative
offices.
(5) Banks and similar financial institutions.
(6) Medical clinic.
(7) Motel.
(8) Storage or distribution facilities.
(9) Customary accessory uses associated with any commercial use
permitted by this section.
(10) Religious use.
B. Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted when
approved as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the terms of this article and § 170-2108 of this chapter:
(1) Restaurant, retail bakery, or other places preparing, selling, and/or
serving food or beverages which require drive-through-window
takeout service.
(2) Automobile service station, provided that all gasoline pumps and
service facilities are set back at least 30 feet from the street line
§ 170-11A00 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-11A01
1:617
§ 170-11A02. Area and bulk regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all uses permitted by right and
special exception in the C-2 District:
§ 170-11A03. Design standards.
The following design standards shall apply:
and provided further that no service station shall be located within
500 feet of another service station on the same side of the street.
C. Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted only upon
approval as a conditional use by the Board of Supervisors in accordance
with the terms of this article and § 170-2009 of this chapter:
(1) Off-premises outdoor advertising sign in accordance with Article
XVIII.
A. Minimum lot area: one acre.
B. Minimum lot width: 200 feet at building setback line; in addition, 200
feet at future right-of-way line of Route 202.
C. Maximum building coverage: 35%.
D. Maximum other impervious surface area: 70%.
E. Minimum front yard setback: 40 feet for any building or parking area.
F. Minimum side yards:
(1) Fifteen feet minimum for each, except 50 feet from the future rightof-
way line of Route 202.
G. Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.
H. Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 38 feet.
I. Any accessory use or structure shall be located in compliance with
front, side and rear yard requirements of this district.
A. Screening: as required by § 170-1508 of this chapter.
B. Storage: as required by § 170-1509 of this chapter.
C. Landscaping: as required by § 170-1507 of this chapter.
D. Access and traffic control: as required by §§ 170-1510, 170-1511, and
170-1512 of this chapter.
E. Interior circulation: as required by § 170-1513 of this chapter.
F. Lighting: as required by § 170-1514 of this chapter.
§ 170-11A01 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-11A03
1:618
§ 170-11A04. General standards.
§ 170-11A05. Buffer requirements.
In addition to the requirements of § 170-1508 of this chapter, there shall
be a forty-foot buffer strip maintained on the property containing any use
authorized within this district, when such use abuts any A/C, R-1, R-2, or
R-3 District. Such buffer strip shall be in addition to any and all applicable
area and bulk regulations, including setback regulations. The buffer strip
shall be planted and shall not include any paved area.
§ 170-11A06. Plan submission requirements.
G. Off-street parking and loading: as required by Article XVII of this
chapter.
H. Signs: as required by Article XVIII of this chapter.
A. No use shall be conducted in the required front, side, and rear yards,
except for permitted signs.
B. No goods shall be displayed in the required front, side, and rear yards.
C. The parcel or parcels shall be in single and separate ownership, or
proof of option shall be furnished at the time of application, or a joint
application shall be filed by separate owners. The proposed tract shall
be capable of an integrated design of a complete commercial center
within its boundary.
A. In order to demonstrate compliance with the terms of this article, any
applicant proposing any use authorized by right within the C-2 District
shall submit a plan (map and text) to the Township Zoning Officer,
describing specifically how the requirements of this article will be
addressed.
B. Where the proposed use constitutes a subdivision or land development,
as defined by Chapter 149, Subdivision of Land, the plan submission
requirements of that chapter shall supersede the provisions of this
section.
C. For any conditional use application, the submission requirements under
§ 170-2009 of this chapter shall govern, and the plan submitted shall
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this article.
D. Any plan also shall include a certification from the Chief of the fire
company responsible for serving the site as to the adequacy of access
for emergency vehicles and the sufficiency of available water for firefighting
purposes. Where the water source is off site, suitable
arrangements to assure access at all times shall be demonstrated by the
applicant.
§ 170-11A03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-11A06
1:619
E. Upon submission of an application for development within the C-2
District, all owners of property within 500 feet of any portion of the
tract on which such development is proposed shall be notified of the
application and of the process through which the application will be
reviewed.
§ 170-11A06 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-11A06
1:620
ARTICLE XII
POC Planned Office Campus District
[Amended 5-1-1995 by Ord. No. 95-2; 10-27-1997 by Ord. No. 97-5;
3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
§ 170-1200. General provisions.
§ 170-1201. Use regulations.
A. Intent. In addition to the goals presented in §§ 170-101 and 170-102,
this district is intended to provide for flexible standards for appropriate
office, administrative, or research development in a campus setting. A
mix of housing types are also allowed. This district is also intended to
assure suitable design for the protection of residential development on
adjacent parcels; minimize traffic congestion and maximize the efficient
movement of vehicular traffic through proper parking, ingress, and
egress along U.S. Route 202, and development of an internal street
system; and preserve and enhance the natural, scenic, aesthetic, and
historic character of the landscape.
B. Traffic improvements. As deemed necessary by the Board of
Supervisors, an approval for uses within the POC District may be
conditioned upon agreement by the applicant to provide selected onsite
and/or off-site transportation improvements. Off-site improvements
shall be limited to those improvements that bear a direct relationship to
the mitigation of impacts from the proposed activity.
A. Use by right. A building may be erected, altered, or used, and a lot may
be used or occupied, by right, for any of the following purposes and no
other:
(1) Office, corporate headquarters, administrative or professional
buildings or centers.
(2) Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted:
(a) Storage in conjunction with a permitted use.
(b) Noncommercial recreation facilities, primarily for the use of
those employed at the site.
(c) Major or minor home occupations.
(3) Buildings, structures and uses owned and/or operated by Westtown
Township.
(4) Funeral home.
(5) Single-family detached dwellings meeting the regulations of the
R-1 District and not the regulations of the POC District.
(6) Medical services. [Added 7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
§ 170-1200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1201
1:621
§ 170-1202. Area and bulk regulations.
The following regulations shall apply in the POC District for uses other than
single-family detached dwellings:
B. Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted only upon
approval as a conditional use by the Board of Supervisors in accordance
with the terms of this article and § 170-2009 of this chapter:
(1) Research and/or laboratory facility for scientific, agricultural, or
industrial research and development, excluding facilities with the
potential for creating environmental or genetic hazards.
(2) Ancillary services designed primarily for the convenience of those
employed at the site, including but not limited to such uses as
pharmacy, coffee shop, restaurant, newsstand (when the previous
uses are totally enclosed in an office building), financial institution,
automated bank machine, financial services, travel consultant,
private club, and other uses of similar character.
(3) Conference facilities.
(4) Private, vocational, business, and professional schools except those
of industrial character.
(5) Day-care center.
(6) Residential care facilities for senior citizens, as regulated in Article
XVI, § 170-1613, of this chapter.
(7) Multifamily dwellings meeting the requirements of § 170-1206 of
this chapter. [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
A. Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be held in single
ownership or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by the
owners of the entire tract, and it shall be agreed that the tract shall be
developed according to a single plan, under single direction, and in a
manner and within a time period approved by the Board of Supervisors.
All contiguous areas zoned POC District that are controlled by an
applicant must be the subject of a single application.
B. Minimum gross area of tract: five acres, not including those areas
within an existing street right-of-way.
C. Minimum vegetative cover. Not less than 40% of the gross area of the
tract shall be planted and maintained with existing and/or installed
vegetative material.
D. Minimum lot area: five acres, except if either of the following apply:
(1) The Township may approve new lots or use of an existing
undersized lot with a minimum of two acres if each lot has fully
§ 170-1201 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1202
1:622
coordinated traffic access onto an interior road and if there is a
coordinated system for stormwater management.
(2) A five-acre tract may be divided through an executed financial
subdivision. With reference to a financial subdivision, where the
Board of Supervisors has approved a multibuilding land
development plan, the owner thereof may subdivide, for mortgage
purposes only, the land upon which such buildings are to be
constructed and the individual lots which are created as a result of
such subdivisions shall be exempt from area, setback, buffer,
frontage and other similar requirements which are intended for
application to the development as a whole.
(a) The foregoing shall be approved only if there is provided a duly
executed and acknowledged agreement, to be recorded at the
time of subdivision in a form acceptable to the Township
Solicitor, which requires each of the subdivided lots to be
operated and maintained as an integral part of the previously
approved development plan in accordance with these
regulations, which insures that each lot will have permanent
means of access and adequate parking and which prohibits
said lots from being treated as separate development parcels
at a future time, and which governs the formation of an
association responsible for the maintenance of all common
areas, said areas to be jointly owned by the owners of the
individual development parcels.
(b) Where parking areas are included within a lot and are intended
to be used by more than one building or lot, such areas shall be
included within the common area maintenance agreement, or
shall be governed by a separate cross-easement agreement.
Such agreement shall further provide that, for all purposes, the
entire development shall be treated as one lot subject to all of
the Township's then-enacted chapters and regulations.
E. Minimum building setbacks. Any building shall be set back not less than
the distance indicated from the following:
(1) Controlled or semi-controlled access highway arterial street: 120
feet.
(2) Collector, local, and other street: 75 feet.
(3) Residentially zoned land: five times the height of the building, but
with an absolute minimum of 120 feet.
(4) Internal streets: 50 feet.
(5) Parking areas: 20 feet.
(6) Lot lines (in separate ownership): 50 feet.
§ 170-1202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1202
1:623
§ 170-1203. Design standards.
The following standards shall apply for all uses:
(7) Adjacent buildings. The distance between buildings shall be
determined in accordance with the requirements of § 170-802B(7).
F. Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
G. Maximum building coverage: 15% of the tract area.
H. Maximum impervious coverage: 55% of the tract area.
I. Maximum building height: 38 feet above natural grade, except that 50%
of the buildings on the tract may be a maximum of 50 feet in height with
the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
J. Maximum floor area ratio: 0.2 times the tract area, as established by
§ 170-1519 this chapter.
A. Natural features/resources protection. The natural features protection
standards contained in Article IV shall apply. In addition:
(1) Accurate detailed topography shall be provided.
(2) Wetlands shall be delineated in accordance with the terms of
§ 170-403B of this chapter.
(3) Existing vegetation shall be denoted as to type, including tree
masses, treelines, and hedgerows; individual freestanding trees
over six inches dbh; wetland vegetation; meadow, pasture, or
cropland; orchard; cultivated and ornamental garden areas; etc.
(4) To the extent possible, floodplains, steep slopes, woodlands, and
other natural features identified in the site analysis shall be
preserved and integrated into the landscape design. In addition,
every effort should be made to preserve scenic views.
(5) Stormwater management. The applicant shall submit a proposed
stormwater management plan, to be approved by the Township
Engineer in accordance with Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land
Development. In addition, the Board may require the submission of
a study of the off-site and overall groundwater impacts of the
proposed stormwater management system.
B. Landscaping and open space. A unified landscaping and open space
plan shall be submitted in accordance with §§ 170-1507 and 170-1508
of this chapter and Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development,
unless otherwise stated below.
(1) Landscaping and/or earth shaping (berming or screening) shall be
used to screen surface parking and mechanical service areas.
§ 170-1202 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1203
1:624
(2) There shall be a landscaped buffer strip of no less than 10 feet
between interior roads and parking areas. Interior drives shall be
landscaped.
(3) Landscaping shall be designed so as not to create hazardous
interior movement, specifically regarding visibility at interior
intersections.
(4) There shall be a landscaped buffer strip of no less than 50 feet from
any tract boundary and from the ultimate right-of-way line of any
arterial or collector street; where the tract fronts collector or
arterial streets, the setback will be from the ultimate right-of-way.
(5) Within the tract, a totally separate pedestrian walkway system shall
link open space to pedestrian places and buildings and provide for
general pedestrian movement among buildings and parking areas.
Such walkways shall be buffered from vehicular traffic through
landscaping and/or earth shaping (berming or screening).
(6) Areas of retention and/or detention as part of an overall approved
stormwater management plan shall be integrated into the overall
open space design.
(7) Where applicable, every effort should be made to retain existing
natural vegetation or utilize existing site vegetation for screening
purposes.
(8) Open space shall be laid out to the satisfaction of the Board in
accordance with the best principles of design. The applicant is
encouraged to provide amenity areas such as benches, sitting areas
or other amenities conducive to the comfort and convenience of the
prospective users of the office campus.
(9) The plan shall designate the type of maintenance to be provided for
landscaped areas, as well as open space areas. A planting plan or
schedule shall be submitted.
(10) As may be required by the Board of Supervisors, open space may
be subject to deed restrictions, duly recorded in the office of the
Chester County Recorder of Deeds, if in the opinion of the Board
such an agreement would facilitate the preservation of open space.
C. Parking: as required by Article XVII of this chapter, provided no parking
area is located within the required buffers or within 50 feet of a
property line.
D. Access and interior circulation. Provisions shall be made for safe and
efficient ingress and egress to and from public streets and highways
serving the development without causing undue confusion or
interference with normal traffic flow. All uses within the POC District
shall take access from a street other than U.S. Route 202. No new street
and no new driveway shall directly enter onto Route 202, unless
§ 170-1203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1203
1:625
specifically required otherwise by the Board of Supervisors and
PennDOT. The Board, with the advice of the Township Engineer, shall
satisfy itself as to the adequacy of the thoroughfares and access points
intended to accommodate the traffic generated by the proposed use
in accordance with the provisions of §§ 170-1510, 170-1511, 170-1512,
and 170-1513. If alternative access is available from a secondary street
without impacting the quality and character of the residential
environment of surrounding neighborhoods, secondary access to the
tract from this street may be allowed.
E. Traffic impact. Provisions shall be made to prevent traffic congestion
and hazards from the tract through the preparation of a traffic impact
study. The traffic impact study shall meet the requirements for such a
study that are established in Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land
Development. The study shall document any on-site or off-site
improvements proposed by the applicant to mitigate any projected
adverse impacts.
F. Signs: Article XVIII shall apply, including but not limited to
§ 170-1804B.
G. Utilities. All utility lines shall be placed underground. As-built plans for
all utilities shall be submitted to the Township.
H. Development in stages. The development of a tract carried out in stages
shall be executed in accordance with a development agreement. The
owner, developer and Township shall enter into said agreement
embodying all details regarding compliance with this article to assure
the binding nature thereof on the overall tract and its development,
which agreement shall be recorded with the final development plan. No
single stage of development shall exceed three years in duration.
I. Loading and unloading. All loading and unloading operations shall be
carried on within the facade of any building(s) in accordance with the
requirements of § 170-1710.
J. Storage: As required by § 170-1509 of this chapter.
K. Lighting. All streets, parking areas, and pedestrian walkways shall be
adequately lit in accordance with § 170-1514. Particular care must be
taken to assure that direct light shines down and that no direct or
reflected light from any lighting fixture creates glare which would be a
potential traffic hazard or negative impact on adjacent land use.
L. Impact on character of surrounding neighborhood. The applicant must
show that the proposed office campus will not adversely effect the
neighborhood by reason of noise, odors, smoke, glare, light, or
vibration. In addition, the Township may prescribe further reasonable
conditions regarding design with respect to the suitability of the office
campus in harmonious relationship to surrounding areas.
§ 170-1203 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1203
1:626
§ 170-1204. Plan submission requirements.
M. Environmental standards: As required by § 170-1506 of this chapter. In
addition, the handling and disposal of red bag waste associated with
medical or veterinary practices shall conform to applicable state
regulations.
A. Any proposal for development within the POC District shall be
submitted in the form of a subdivision or land development plan; such
plan shall comply with all requirements of Chapter 149, Subdivision and
Land Development, and shall, in addition, clearly demonstrate
compliance with all requirements of the POC District. The plan shall
clearly designate the proposed use(s) of each area of the tract. The
applicant is strongly encouraged to submit a sketch plan to the
Township for informal discussion, prior to the submission of a
preliminary plan.
B. The following are specific requirements to be included as part of any
submitted plan, whether or not they are stipulated by Chapter 149,
Subdivision and Land Development:
(1) A plot plan of the tract showing the location, height, and bulk of all
proposed buildings and other structures; pedestrian walkways and
other areas to be devoted to pedestrian use; open space; drives,
including the location and width of such parking lots; loading and
unloading areas and other construction and/or physical features as
required herein and in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
(2) Architectural plans for the facade of any proposed buildings,
including a written description of the types of exterior materials.
(3) A description of any of the land uses proposed in sufficient detail to
indicate the positive and negative impacts of such on-site features,
public and private views, historic resources and public and
community services.
(4) Engineering and architectural plans for the treatment and disposal
of sanitary sewage and surface and stormwater (including the
general drainage system), and provisions of water supply and fire
hydrants as determined by a professional engineer registered in
the State of Pennsylvania.
(5) The stages which will be followed in the construction of the
development.
(6) A description of the on-site improvements and, as deemed
necessary, off-site improvements which are planned, or the
contribution which will be made in lieu of such improvements.
§ 170-1203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1205
1:627
§ 170-1205. Additional standards for conditional uses.
Conditional uses may be subject to such other restrictions and conditions as
are deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors. This may include, but is
not limited to, reasonable limitations on the hours of operation.
§ 170-1206. Regulations for multifamily dwellings. [Added 5-2-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-4]
The following regulations shall apply for multifamily dwellings in place of
the regulations contained in § 170-1202:
A. Minimum lot area: five acres. The lot area shall not be separated by any
public street or other publicly owned vehicle thoroughfare from any
other land area. A rental or condominium form of ownership shall be
allowed.
B. Maximum density:
(1) The maximum density shall be calculated as provided in
§ 170-1519A. The maximum density per acre of tract area shall be:
10 dwelling units per acre for dwellings of one bedroom or less;
eight dwelling units per acre for dwellings of two bedrooms; and
four dwelling units per acre for dwellings of three or more
bedrooms. If a lot includes a mix of numbers of bedrooms in
different units, then the density shall be calculated proportionately.
For example, on a five-acre lot, two acres could be considered as
having one-bedroom units, allowing 20 units and three acres could
be considered as having two-bedroom units, allowing an additional
24 units for a total of 44 units on five acres.
(2) Density and building length bonuses.
(a) Age-restricted bonus. If all of the multifamily dwellings are
limited by deed enforceable by the Township and by lease to
occupancy by persons age 55 and older and their spouses, then
the maximum multifamily dwelling density shall be increased
by 20% above the density that would otherwise be allowed. The
age restrictions shall be in legal form acceptable to the
Township Solicitor.
(b) Landscaping bonus. When a multifamily dwelling development
involves substantially greater amounts and sizes and a higher
quality of landscaping than would otherwise be required by
Township ordinances, as determined by the Board of
Supervisors, then the maximum multifamily dwelling density
shall be increased by 10% above the density that would
otherwise be allowed.
[1] The applicant shall provide a planting plan sealed by a
registered landscape architect.
§ 170-1205 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1206
1:628
[2] The planting plan shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and be subject to approval by the Board of
Supervisors. The determination of whether a planting plan
justifies a bonus under this section should be based upon a
review by an independent landscape architect chosen by
the Township. The Township may require the applicant to
fund the reasonable costs of such independent review.
(c) Architectural bonus. If the Board of Supervisors, based upon
Planning Commission review, determines that the proposed
development would have high architectural quality consistent
with the character of Westtown Township as viewed from
public streets, then an additional density bonus of 5% shall be
approved above the density that would otherwise be allowed.
The Township may require the applicant to fund reasonable
costs for an independent review of the architectural plans by a
registered architect chosen by the Township.
[1] The architectural design shall be intended to blend the
buildings with their surroundings. The architectural
design shall include finishes, textures, extensions,
placement of glass and other features to visually reduce
the bulk of the building as viewed from a street and to
make a large building appear more like two or more
connected smaller buildings.
[2] A preliminary architectural design shall be provided in
accordance with Subsection L below.
(d) The density bonuses shall be added and not multiplied upon
each other. Therefore, if a bonus of 20% and a 5% bonus apply,
the resulting total bonus shall be 25%.
(e) In no case shall the density bonuses of this section result in a
maximum density exceeding 12 dwelling units per acre.
(f) See Subsection H below for how these bonuses also can allow a
longer building length.
C. Minimum vegetative cover. A minimum of 40% of the gross area of the
tract shall be planted and maintained with new and/or preserved trees
and other vegetative material.
D. Minimum building setbacks. Any building shall be set back the
following minimum distances from the following:
(1) Controlled or semicontrolled access highway; arterial street: 120
feet.
(2) Collector, local or other public street with two-way traffic: 75 feet.
(3) Internal street or street with one-way traffic: 50 feet.
§ 170-1206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1206
1:629
(4) Parking areas, other than underground parking: 20 feet.
(5) Lot lines in separate ownership: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum separation distance between principal buildings on the
lot: 35 feet.
E. Maximum building height: four stories or 50 feet, whichever is more
restrictive. A level used for vehicle parking that is in a basement level
shall not be counted towards the maximum number of stories.
Extensions of roof lines above 50 feet shall be permitted to
accommodate architectural roof pitches. However, the horizontal area
that extends above 50 feet shall not be greater than 15% of the
horizontal area covered by the building on the ground level.
F. Maximum building coverage: 20%.
G. Maximum impervious coverage: 55%.
H. Maximum building length. No building shall have a maximum length
greater than 165 feet. However, the maximum building length may be
increased to 200 feet if the landscaping and architectural bonuses
provided in Subsection B(2) are both approved.
I. For a multifamily development, §§ 170-1203 and 170-1204 shall apply,
except for the following:
(1) The minimum landscaped buffer strip provided in § 170-1203B(5)
shall be 30 feet. This 30 feet may be located on two sides of an
existing access drive, so that 20 feet is on one side of the drive and
10 feet on another side of the drive.
(2) The fifty-foot minimum setback for parking in § 170-1203C shall be
reduced to 30 feet.
(3) The sign provisions of the R-3 District shall apply in place of the
sign provisions in § 170-1203. Only one freestanding sign shall be
allowed, with a maximum sign area on each of two sides of 50
square feet. This freestanding sign shall have a maximum total
height of eight feet. This freestanding sign shall not be internally
illuminated, and may be attached to a decorative masonry wall with
a maximum total height of 8 feet and a maximum length of 12 feet.
(4) A market analysis shall not be required.
J. Emergency access. The applicant shall prove that adequate access is
available to all sides of all principal buildings by emergency vehicles.
This access may include, but is not limited to, grass pavers. The access
shall be able to support the weight of emergency vehicles during wet
weather conditions.
K. Maximum floor area ratio (as defined in § 170-201): 0.4: 1.0.
§ 170-1206 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1206
1:630
L. Architectural design. A preliminary architectural rendering or exterior
cross section shall be submitted, showing the proposed designs of sides
of the buildings visible from public streets. Such submittal shall be
based upon a design by a registered architect. The applicant shall
provide a written description of the types of exterior building materials
and finishes. Details of the architectural design may be modified after
conditional use approval, provided that the overall architectural design
and exterior materials are consistent with the plan submitted with the
conditional use, unless the Board of Supervisors specifically allows a
different architectural design as part of land development approval.
§ 170-1206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1206
1:631

ARTICLE XIII
(Reserved)91
91.Editor’s Note: Former Art. XIII, SUO Special Use Overlay District, added 9-15-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-1, was repealed 2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-1.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1206
1:633

ARTICLE XIV
Township District
§ 170-1400. Statement of intent.
§ 170-1401. Use regulations.
A. The Township District is intended:
(1) To recognize and secure the open character of specific areas of the
Township which now exist as Township-owned parkland;
(2) To preserve physical amenities of the Township by reserving
designated natural areas which are suited to park use;
(3) To provide open recreation spaces in the Township in order to
maintain desirable population densities and a proper relationship
between residences and public outdoor areas; and
(4) To provide for appropriate Township buildings and facilities
necessary for the proper functioning of local government and the
provision of obligatory public services.
B. In the Township District, the following regulations shall apply.
A. Permitted uses. In the Township District, land, buildings, and premises
may be used by right for the following purposes, and no other:
(1) Municipal administration, municipal service activities, and other
uses deemed appropriate for the proper functioning of local
government.
(2) Parks, open space, and recreation areas and facilities, in public
ownership.
(3) Uses customarily accessory and incidental to any park, recreation,
or open space use, including parking, refreshment, and service
uses or buildings; and rental uses approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
(4) (Reserved)92
(5) Agricultural use, in accordance with the provisions of § 170-1609 of
this chapter. [Added 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
B. Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted only upon
approval as a conditional use by the Board of Supervisors in accordance
with the terms of § 170-2009 of this chapter: [Added 2-17-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-3]
(1) Solar energy system as a principal use subject to § 170-1618.C.
92.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(4), Communication tower, added 5-1-1995 by Ord. No.
95-3, was repealed 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3.
§ 170-1400 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1401
1:635
§ 170-1402. Area and bulk regulations.
§ 170-1403. Design standards.
The following design standards shall apply:
§ 170-1404. Wireless communications facilities. [Added 5-1-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-3; amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
(2) Wind energy system as a principal use subject to § 170-1618.D.
A. Maximum coverage by buildings and other impervious surfaces shall
not exceed 60% of the tract area. [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-4]
B. Any building or parking area shall be located not less than 25 feet from
any property line.
C. Maximum building height shall be three stories or 38 feet, whichever is
less. [Amended 5-1-1995 by Ord. No. 95-2]
A. Signs: As required by Article XVIII of this chapter.
B. Parking: As required by Article XVII of this chapter.
C. Access and traffic control: As required by § 170-1510 of this chapter.
D. Lighting: As required by § 170-1514 of this chapter.
E. Stormwater management and erosion/sedimentation control: As
required by Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development and in
accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
regulations.
A. Purposes and findings of fact.
(1) The purpose of this section is to establish uniform standards for the
siting, design, permitting, maintenance, and use of wireless
communications facilities in Westtown Township (referred to herein
as the "Township"). While the Township recognizes the importance
of wireless communications facilities in providing high-quality
communications service to its residents and businesses, the
Township also recognizes that it has an obligation to protect public
safety and to minimize the adverse visual effects of such facilities
through the standards set forth in the following provisions.
(2) By enacting these provisions, the Township intends to:
(a) Accommodate the need for wireless communications facilities
while regulating their location and number so as to ensure the
provision for necessary services;
§ 170-1401 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1404
1:636
(b) Provide for the managed development of wireless
communications facilities in a manner that enhances the
benefits of wireless communication and accommodates the
needs of both Township residents and wireless carriers in
accordance with federal and state laws and regulations;
(c) Establish procedures for the design, siting, construction,
installation, maintenance and removal of both tower-based and
non-tower-based wireless communications facilities in the
Township, including facilities both inside and outside the
public rights-of-way;
(d) Address new wireless technologies, including but not limited
to, distributed antenna systems, data collection units, cable Wi-
Fi and other wireless communications facilities;
(e) Minimize the adverse visual effects and the number of such
facilities through proper design, siting, screening, material,
color and finish and by requiring that competing providers of
wireless communications services co-locate their commercial
communications antennas and related facilities on existing
towers;
(f) Ensure the structural integrity of commercial communications
antenna support structures through compliance with
applicable industry standards and regulations; and
(g) Promote the health, safety and welfare of the Township's
residents.
B. General and specific requirements for non-tower wireless
communications facilities.
(1) The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCF:
(a) Permitted in all zoning districts. Non-tower WCF are permitted
in all zoning districts subject to the regulations prescribed
below and subject to applicable permitting by the Township.
(b) Prohibited on certain structures. Non-tower WCF shall not be
located on single- family detached residences, single-family
attached residences, or any residential accessory structure.
(c) Permit required. Any WCF applicant proposing the
construction of a new ton-tower WCF, or the modification of an
existing non-tower WCF, shall first obtain the required permit
from the Township.
(d) Historic buildings. No non-tower WCF may be located upon
any property, or on a building or structure that is listed on
either the National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic
Places, or is eligible to be so listed, or is listed on the Historic
§ 170-1404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1404
1:637
Resources List maintained by the Township, or has been
designated by the Township to be of historical significance.
(e) Nonconforming wireless support structures. Non-tower WCF
shall be permitted to co-locate upon nonconforming wireless
support structures. Co-location of WCF upon existing wireless
support structures is encouraged even if the tower-based WCF
is nonconforming as to use within a zoning district.
(f) Standard of care. Any non-tower WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable
technical, safety and safety-related codes, including but not
limited to the most recent editions of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety
Code, and National Electrical Code. Any WCF shall at all times
be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair by
licensed and qualified maintenance and construction
personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life of any
person or any property in the Township.
(g) Wind. All non-tower WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind according to the standard
designed by the American National Standards Institute as
prepared by the engineering departments of the Electronics
Industry Association, and Telecommunications Industry
Association (ANSI/TIA-222, as amended).
(h) Aviation safety. Non-tower WCF shall comply with all federal
and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(i) Public safety communications. Non-tower WCF shall not
interfere with public safety communications or the reception of
broadband, television, radio or other communication services
enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
(j) Radio frequency emissions. A non-tower WCF shall not, by
itself or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio
frequency emissions in excess of the standards and regulations
of the FCC, including but not limited to, the FCC Office of
Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(k) Removal. In the event that use of a non-tower WCF is
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Township of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the
use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned WCF or
portions of WCF shall be removed as follows:
[1] All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory facilities
shall be removed and the property restored to its original,
§ 170-1404 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1404
1:638
natural condition within two months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved
by the Township.
[2] If the WCF or accessory facility is not removed within two
months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within
any longer period approved by the Township, the WCF
and/or associated facilities and equipment may be
removed by the Township and the cost of removal assessed
against the owner of the WCF or the property owner upon
which the WCF is located.
(l) Timing of approval for applications that fall under the WBCA.
Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application for a
non-tower WCF is filed with the Township, the Township shall
notify the WCF applicant in writing of any information that may
be required to complete such application. Within 90 calendar
days of receipt of a complete application, the Township shall
make its final decision on whether to approve the application
and shall advise the WCF applicant in writing of such decision.
If additional information was requested by the Township to
complete an application, the time required by the WCF
applicant to provide the information shall not be counted
toward the Township's ninety-day review period. The timing
requirements in this section shall only apply to proposed
facilities that fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act. Time extensions may be granted if mutually
agreed upon by all parties.
(m) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a non-tower
WCF shall provide the Township with a certificate of insurance
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount
of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage
in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering
the non-tower WCF.
(n) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a nontower
WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the Township, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against
any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and
property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or
connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers,
agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited
to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of the non-tower WCF. Each person that owns or
operates a non-tower WCF shall defend any actions or
proceedings against the Township in which it is claimed that
personal injury, including death, or property damage was
caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of a non-tower WCF. The obligation to
§ 170-1404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1404
1:639
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees,
court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
(o) Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following
maintenance requirements shall apply:
[1] The non-tower WCF shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
maintenance or emergency repair.
[2] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the facility in order to promote the safety and
security of the Township's residents.
[3] All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than
the best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
[4] Maintenance activities shall not be performed without the
required permit being issued by the Township Zoning
Officer.
(p) Reservation of rights. In accordance with applicable law and as
set forth in more detail in subsequent design and development
standards below, the Township reserves the right to deny an
application for the construction or placement of any non-tower
WCF for numerous factors, which include but are not limited
to, visual impact, design, and safety standards.
(2) The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCF that do
not substantially change the physical dimensions of the wireless
support structure to which they are attached:
(a) Permit required. WCF applicants proposing the modification of
an existing wireless support structure shall obtain the required
permit from the Township. In order to be considered for such
permit, the WCF applicant must submit a permit application to
the Township in accordance with applicable permit policies
and procedures.
(b) Non-tower WCF that do not substantially change the physical
dimensions of the wireless support structure to which they are
attached may be eligible for a sixty-day timeframe for review.
Applicants shall assert such eligibility in writing to the
Township and include documentation reasonably supporting
their request and if warranted, such application shall be
reviewed within the shortened sixty-day timeframe.
§ 170-1404 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1404
1:640
(c) Related equipment. Ground-mounted related equipment
greater than three cubic feet shall not be located within 50 feet
of a lot in residential use or zoned residential.
(d) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Township's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a non-tower WCF or $1,000, whichever is less.
(3) The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCF that do
substantially change the wireless support structure to which they
are attached:
(a) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant(s)
and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the Township in reviewing
and evaluating the application for approval of the WCF and,
once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
violations of the terms and conditions of these WCF provisions.
The WCF applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse
the Township for all costs of the Township's consultant(s) in
providing expert evaluation and consultation in connection
with these activities.
(b) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Township's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a non-tower WCF, as well as related inspection,
monitoring and related costs.
(4) The following regulations shall apply to non-tower WCF located
outside the public rights-of-way that do substantially change the
wireless support structure to which they are attached:
(a) Development regulations. Non-tower WCFs shall be co-located
on existing wireless support structures, subject to the
following conditions:
[1] The total height of any wireless support structure and
mounted WCF shall not exceed 20 feet above the
maximum height permitted in the underlying zoning
district.
[2] In accordance with industry standards, all non-tower WCF
applicants must submit documentation to the Township
justifying the total height of the non-tower WCF. Such
documentation shall be analyzed in the context of such
justification on an individual basis.
[3] If the WCF applicant proposes to locate the related
equipment in a separate building, the building shall
comply with the minimum requirements for the applicable
zoning district.
§ 170-1404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1404
1:641
[4] A security fence of not less than six feet and not more than
eight feet shall surround any separate communications
equipment building. Vehicular access to the
communications equipment building shall not interfere
with the parking or vehicular circulations on the site for
the principal use.
[5] Landscaping shall be required to screen as much of a
newly constructed WCF, equipment building, and related
equipment as possible. The Board may permit any
combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls,
decorative fences or other features instead of landscaping,
if, in the discretion of the Board, they achieve the same
degree of screening.
(b) Design regulations.
[1] Non-tower WCF shall employ stealth technology and be
treated to match the wireless support structure, and shall
be subject to the approval of the Township.
[2] Noncommercial usage exemption. Township residents
utilizing satellite dishes and antennas for the purpose of
maintaining television, phone, and/or internet connections
at their respective residences shall be exempt from the
design regulations enumerated in this section of the
Zoning Ordinance.
(c) Removal, replacement and modification.
[1] The removal and replacement of non-tower WCFs and/or
accessory equipment for the purpose of upgrading or
repairing the WCF is permitted, so long as such repair or
upgrade does not substantially change the overall size of
the WCF or the numbers of antennas.
[2] Any material modification to a WCF shall require written
notice to be provided to the Township, and possible
supplemental permit approval to the original permit or
authorization.
(d) Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any
WCF to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and any other provisions found within the Township
Code or state or federal law. The Township and/or its agents
shall have the authority to enter the property upon which a
WCF is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the
operator, to ensure such compliance.
(5) Additional regulations applicable to all non-tower WCF located in
the public rights-of-way.
§ 170-1404 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1404
1:642
(a) Co-location. Non-tower WCF in the ROW shall be co-located on
existing poles, such as existing utility poles. Efforts shall be
made by the WCF applicant to not collocate on utility poles
containing transformers where practicable. If the WCF
applicant proposes to install replacement poles or to locate its
non-tower WCFs on existing poles that do not already serve as
wireless support structures, then the WCF applicant shall be
required to seek conditional use approval as provided in this
section.
(b) Design requirements.
[1] WCF installations located above the surface grade in the
public ROW including, but not limited to, those on
streetlights and joint utility poles, shall consist of
equipment components that are no more than six feet in
height and that are compatible in scale and proportion to
the structures upon which they are mounted. All
equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly intrusive
equipment feasible.
[2] Antenna and related equipment shall be treated to match
the supporting structure and may be required to be
painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually compatible
with the support structure upon which they are mounted.
(c) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair
and/or removal of all non-tower WCFs in the ROW based on
public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW,
and related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place
and manner requirements shall be consistent with the police
powers of the Township and the requirements of the Public
Utility Code.
(d) Equipment location. Non-tower WCFs and related equipment
shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to
otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined
by the Township. In addition:
[1] In no case shall ground-mounted related equipment, walls,
or landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of
the curb or the edge of pavement, or within an easement
extending onto a privately owned lot.
[2] Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent
possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features.
§ 170-1404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1404
1:643
[3] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to
blend in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of
the Township.
[4] Any graffiti on any wireless support structures or any
related equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of
the owner within 10 business days of the existence of the
graffiti, and if not so removed, the Township may at its
discretion remove the graffiti and assess such costs
against the WCF owner or the property owner upon which
the WCF or related equipment is located.
[5] Any proposed underground vault related to non-tower
WCF shall be reviewed and approved by the Township.
(e) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following
written notice from the Township, or such longer period as the
Township determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter
period in the case of an emergency, an owner of a WCF in the
ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any WCF
when the Township, consistent with its police powers and
applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration
is reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
[1] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of
any Township or other public improvement in the right-ofway;
[2] The operations of the Township or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
[3] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
[4] An emergency as determined by the Township.
C. General and specific requirements for all tower-based wireless
communications facilities.
(1) The following regulations shall apply to all tower-based wireless
communications facilities:
(a) Standard of care. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable
technical, safety and safety-related codes, including but not
limited to, the most recent editions of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety
Code, National Electrical Code, as well as the accepted and
responsible workmanlike industry practices of the National
§ 170-1404 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1404
1:644
Association of Tower Erectors. Any tower-based WCF shall at
all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and
repair by licensed and qualified personnel, so that the same
shall not endanger the life of any person or any property in the
Township.
(b) Engineer inspection. Prior to the Township's issuance of a
permit authorizing construction and erection of a tower-based
WCF, a structural engineer registered in Pennsylvania shall
issue to the Township a written certification of the proposed
WCF's ability to meet the structural standards offered by either
the Electronic Industries Association or the
Telecommunication Industry Association and certify the proper
construction of the foundation and the erection of the
structure.
(c) Permit required for modifications. To the extent protected by
or permissible under applicable state and federal law, any WCF
applicant proposing the modification of an existing towerbased
WCF, which increases the overall height of such WCF,
shall first obtain a building permit from the Township.
(d) Wind. Any tower-based WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind according to the standard
designed by the American National Standards Institute as
prepared by the engineering departments of the Electronics
Industry Association, and Telecommunications Industry
Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222, as amended).
(e) Height. The maximum total height of a tower-based WCF,
which is not located in the public ROW, shall not exceed 150
feet, as measured vertically from the ground level to the
highest point on the structure, including antennas and
subsequent alterations.
(f) Related equipment. Either one single-story wireless
communications equipment building not exceeding 500 square
feet in area or up to five metal boxes placed on a concrete pad
not exceeding 10 feet by 20 feet in area housing the receiving
and transmitting equipment may be located on the site for each
unrelated company sharing commercial communications
antenna(s) space on the tower-based WCF. Any such buildings
or equipment shall comply with applicable area and bulk
requirements in the zoning district where located.
(g) Public safety communications. No tower-based WCF shall
interfere with public safety communications or the reception of
broadband, television, radio or other communication services
enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
(h) Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall
apply:
§ 170-1404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1404
1:645
[1] Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
maintenance or emergency repair.
[2] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the WCF in order to promote the safety and
security of the Township's residents, and utilize the best
available technology for preventing failures and accidents.
[3] Maintenance activities shall not take place without the
issuance of required permits by the Zoning Officer.
(i) Radio frequency emissions. A tower-based WCF shall not, by
itself or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio
frequency emissions in excess of the standards and regulations
of the FCC, including but not limited to, the FCC Office of
Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(j) Historic buildings or districts. A tower-based WCF shall not be
located upon a property, and/or on a building or structure that
is listed on either the National or Pennsylvania Registers of
Historic Places, or eligible to be so listed, or is included in the
Historic Resources List maintained by the Township.
(k) Signs. All tower-based WCFs shall post a sign in a readily
visible location identifying the name and phone number of a
party to contact in the event of an emergency at any time
during a twenty-four-hour period. The only other signage
permitted on the WCF shall be those required by the FCC, or
any other federal or state agency.
(l) Lighting. No tower-based WCF shall be artificially lighted,
except as required by law. If lighting is required, the WCF
applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting,
demonstrating as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect upon
Township residents as is permissible under state and federal
regulations.
(m) Noise. Tower-based WCF shall be operated and maintained so
as not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards
under state law and the Township Code, except in emergency
situations requiring the use of a backup generator, where such
noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis only.
(n) Aviation safety. Tower-based WCF shall comply with all federal
and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(o) Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming tower-based WCF which
are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or
cause may be repaired and restored at their former location,
§ 170-1404 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1404
1:646
but must comply with the terms and conditions of this section
applicable to the new improvements.
(p) Removal. In the event that use of a tower-based WCF is
planned to be discontinued, the owner shall provide written
notice to the Township of its intent to discontinue use and the
date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned
WCF or portions of WCF shall be removed as follows:
[1] All unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within 90 days of the cessation
of operations at the site and the subject property restored
to its original natural condition unless a time extension is
approved by the Township.
[2] If the WCF and/or accessory facility is not removed within
90 days of the cessation of operations at a site, or within
any longer period approved by the Township, the WCF and
accessory facilities and equipment may be removed by the
Township and the cost of removal assessed against the
owner of the WCF or the property owner upon which the
WCF is located.
[3] Any unused portions of tower-based WCF, including
antennas, shall be removed within 90 days of the time of
cessation of operations. The Township must approve all
replacements of portions of a tower-based WCF previously
removed.
(q) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Township's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a tower-based WCF, as well as related inspection,
monitoring, and related costs.
(r) FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF shall submit a copy of its current FCC license, including
the name, address, and emergency telephone number for the
operator of the facility.
(s) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF greater than 40 feet in height shall provide the Township
with a certificate of insurance evidencing general liability
coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence covering the towerbased
WCF. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF 40 feet or less in height shall provide the Township with a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in
the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and
property damage coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence covering each tower-based WCF.
§ 170-1404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1404
1:647
(t) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a towerbased
WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the Township, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against
any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and
property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or
connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers,
agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited
to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of the tower-based WCF. Each person that owns or
operates a tower-based WCF shall defend any actions or
proceedings against the Township in which it is claimed that
personal injury, including death, or property damage was
caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of tower-based WCF. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees,
court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
(u) Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the
construction or placement of a tower-based WCF, the WCF
applicant shall provide to the Township financial security
sufficient to guarantee the removal of the tower-based WCF.
The amount of financial security shall be mutually agreed upon
by the WCF applicant's engineer and the Township's engineer
or consultants, and shall remain in place until the tower-based
WCF is removed.
(2) Conditional use review process and additional regulations.
(a) Tower-based WCF are permitted in specific zoning districts
and along certain roadways by conditional use only as outlined
in § 170-2009 and at the minimum height necessary to satisfy
their function in the WCF applicant's wireless communications
system. No WCF applicant shall have the right under these
regulations to erect a tower to the maximum height specified in
this section unless it proves the necessity for such height.
(b) Notice. Upon submission of an application for a tower-based
WCF and the scheduling of the public hearing upon the
application, the WCF applicant shall mail notice to all owners
of every property within 1,000 feet of the property upon which
the proposed facility is located as measured from the
perimeter of the property. The WCF applicant shall provide
proof of the notification to the Township.
(c) The WCF applicant for such conditional use approval shall
prove to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the WCF
applicant cannot adequately extend or infill its
communications system by the use of equipment such as
§ 170-1404 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1404
1:648
redoes, repeaters, antenna(s) and other similar equipment
installed on existing structures, such as utility poles or their
appurtenances and other available tall structures. The WCF
applicant shall further demonstrate that the proposed towerbased
WCF must be located where it is proposed in order to
serve the WCF applicant's service area and that no other viable
alternative location exists.
(d) The conditional use application shall be accompanied by a
propagation study evidencing the need for the proposed tower
or other communication facilities and equipment, a description
of the type and manufacturer of the proposed transmission/
radio equipment, the frequency range (megahertz band)
assigned to the WCF applicant, the power in watts at which the
WCF applicant transmits, and any relevant related tests
conducted by the WCF applicant in determining the need for
the proposed site and installation.
(e) The conditional use application shall be accompanied by
documentation demonstrating that the proposed tower-based
WCF complies with all state and federal laws and regulations
concerning aviation safety.
(f) Where the tower-based WCF is located on a property with
another principal use, the WCF applicant shall present
documentation to the Board that the owner of the property has
granted an easement for the proposed WTF and that vehicular
access will be provided to the facility.
(g) The conditional use application shall be accompanied by
documentation demonstrating that the proposed tower-based
WCF complies with all applicable provisions in this section,
including specifically, the regulations applicable to all towerbased
WCFs.
(h) Visual appearance and land use compatibility. Tower-based
WCF shall employ stealth technology which may include the
tower portion to be painted silver or another color approved by
the Board in context with its surroundings, or shall have a
galvanized finish. All tower-based WCF and related equipment
shall be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the
surrounding environment and shall maximize the use of a like
facade to blend with the existing surroundings and
neighboring buildings to the greatest extent possible. The
Board of Supervisors shall consider whether its decision upon
the subject application will promote the harmonious and
orderly development of the zoning district involved; encourage
compatibility with the character and type of development
existing in the area; benefit neighboring properties by
preventing a negative impact on the aesthetic character of the
community; preserve woodlands and trees existing at the site
§ 170-1404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1404
1:649
to the greatest possible extent; and encourage sound
engineering and land development design and construction
principles, practices and techniques.
(i) Co-location and siting. An application for a new tower-based
WCF shall not be approved unless the Board of Supervisors
finds that the wireless communications equipment planned for
the proposed tower-based WCF cannot be accommodated on
an existing or approved structure or building. The Board may
deny an application to construct a new tower-based WCF if the
WCF applicant has not made a good-faith effort to mount the
antenna(s) on an existing structure. The WCF applicant shall
demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall structures,
buildings, and towers within a one-quarter-mile radius of the
site proposed, sought permission to install an antenna on those
structures, buildings, and towers and was denied for one of the
following reasons:
[1] The proposed antenna and related equipment would
exceed the structural capacity of the existing building,
structure or tower, and its reinforcement cannot be
accomplished at a reasonable cost.
[2] The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing
equipment for that existing building, structure, or tower
and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable
cost.
[3] Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access, or height to
accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to
perform its intended function.
[4] A commercially reasonable agreement could not be
reached with the owner of such building, structure, or
tower.
(j) Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all towerbased
WCFs, the WCF applicant shall provide the Township
with a written commitment that it will allow other service
providers to co-locate antennas on tower-based WCFs where
technically and economically feasible. The owner of a towerbased
WCF shall not install any additional antennas without
obtaining a building permit if required by the Township.
(k) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant
and/or expert necessary to assist the Township in reviewing
and evaluating the application for approval of the tower-based
WCF and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any
potential violations of the terms and conditions of these
provisions. The WCF applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall
§ 170-1404 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1404
1:650
reimburse the Township for all costs of the Township's
consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and consultation
in connection with these activities.
(l) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a tower-based WCF is filed with the Township,
the Township shall notify the WCF applicant in writing of any
information that may be required to complete such application.
All applications for tower-based WCFs shall be acted upon
within 150 days of the receipt of a fully completed application
for the approval of such tower-based WCF and the Township
shall advise the WCF applicant in writing of its decision. If
additional information was requested by the Township to
complete an application, the time required by the WCF
applicant to provide the information shall not be counted
toward the one-hundred-fifty-day review period. Time
extensions may be granted if agreed upon by all parties.
(m) Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for the conditional
use approval of tower-based WCF shall contain a seal and
signature of a professional structural engineer, licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(3) The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless
communications facilities located outside the public rights-of-way:
(a) Development regulations.
[1] Tower-based WCF shall not be located within 75 feet of
any underground utility or underground utilities
easements (with the exception of water and sewer lines).
[2] Tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in height are
permitted outside the public rights-of-way in certain
zoning district(s) and certain properties by conditional
use, subject to the Township's permission, as follows:
[a] Township District; and
[b] Township-owned properties.
[3] Sole use on a lot. A tower-based WCF may be permitted as
a sole use on a lot. The minimum distance between the
base of a tower-based WCF and any adjoining property line
or street right-of-way line shall equal 110% of the
proposed height of the tower-based WCF. At the Board's
sole discretion, the Board may allow a reduced setback if it
is demonstrated to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board
that in the event of failure the WCF is designed to collapse
upon itself within a setback area less than the required
minimum setback without endangering such adjoining
uses and their occupants.
§ 170-1404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1404
1:651
[4] Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF may be
permitted on a property with an existing use, or on a
vacant parcel in combination with another use, except
residential, subject to the following conditions:
[a] The existing use on the property shall be any
permitted use in the applicable district, and need not
be affiliated with the WCF.
[b] Minimum setbacks. The minimum distance between
the base of a tower-based WCF and any adjoining
property line or street right-of-way line shall equal
110% of the proposed height of the tower-based WCF.
At the Board's sole discretion, the Board may allow a
reduced setback if it is demonstrated to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that in the event
of failure the WCF is designed to collapse upon itself
within a setback area less than the required minimum
setback without endangering such adjoining uses and
their occupants.
(b) Design regulations.
[1] The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact
and shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
[2] Tower-based WCF located outside the public rights-of-way
shall be greater than 40 feet in height in order to increase
coverage, provide for increased co-location capabilities
and result in less need for additional towers of such height
in the Township.
[3] Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to
accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennas and
comparable antennas for future users.
[4] Any tower-based WCF over 40 feet in height shall be
equipped with an anti-climbing device, as approved by the
manufacturer.
(c) Surrounding environs.
[1] The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing
vegetation, trees and shrubs located within proximity to
the WCF structure shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible.
[2] The WCF applicant shall submit a soil report to the
Township complying with the standards of Appendix I:
§ 170-1404 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1404
1:652
Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222, as amended,
to document and verify the design specifications of the
foundation of the tower-based WCF, and anchors for guy
wires, if used.
(d) Fence/screen.
[1] A security fence having a minimum height of 10 feet shall
completely surround any tower-based WCF greater than
40 feet in height, as well as any building housing WCF
equipment.
[2] Landscaping shall be required to screen as much of a
newly constructed tower-based WCF as possible. The
Board may permit any combination of existing vegetation,
topography, walls, decorative fences or other features
instead of landscaping, if, in the discretion of the Board,
they achieve the same degree of screening.
(e) Accessory equipment.
[1] Ground-mounted related equipment associated with, or
connected to, a tower-based WCF shall be placed
underground or screened from public view using stealth
technologies, as described above.
[2] All related equipment, utility buildings and accessory
structures shall be architecturally designed to blend into
the environment in which they are situated and shall meet
the minimum setback requirements of the underlying
zoning district.
(f) Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking
shall be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service
access to tower-based WCF.
(g) Parking. For each tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in
height, there shall be at least one off-street parking space.
(h) Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any
tower-based WCF to ensure compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance and any other provisions found within the Township
Code or state or federal law. The Township and/or its agents
shall have the authority to enter the property upon which a
WCF is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the
operator, to ensure such compliance.
(4) The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless
communications facilities located in the public rights-of-way.
(a) Location and development standards.
§ 170-1404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1404
1:653
[1] Tower-based WCF 40 feet or shorter in height are
prohibited within 50 feet of any underground utility or
underground utility easement.
[2] Tower-based WCF 40 feet or shorter in height shall not be
located in any public right-of-way which fronts or directly
abuts the front yard setback area of a residential dwelling.
[3] Tower-based WCF 40 feet or shorter in height shall be
permitted by conditional use along certain collector roads
and arterial roads, regardless of the underlying zoning
district, as follows:
[a] Route 926;
[b] South New Street;
[c] Route 202;
[d] Little Shiloh Road;
[e] Westtown Road;
[f] South Concord Road (between Route 926 and
Oakbourne);
[g] South Matlack Street;
[h] Oakbourne Road (between Matlack and South
Concord);
[i] South Chester Road; and
[j] West Chester Pike.
[4] Such tower-based WCFs shall be situated on the side of the
road which currently has above ground utilities, such as
existing poles and/or wireless support structures, in place.
[5] Efforts shall be made by the WCF applicant to not colocate
on utility poles containing transformers where
practicable.
(b) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair
and/or removal of all tower-based WCF in the ROW based on
public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW,
and related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place
and manner requirements shall be consistent with the police
powers of the Township and the requirements of the Public
Utility Code.
(c) Equipment location. Tower-based WCF and related equipment
shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
§ 170-1404 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1404
1:654
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to
otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined
by the Township. In addition:
[1] In no case shall ground-mounted related equipment, walls,
or landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of
the curb, or edge of pavement if no curbing in place.
[2] Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent
possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the Township.
[3] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to
blend in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of
the Township.
[4] Any graffiti on the tower or on any related equipment shall
be removed within 10 days of its existence at the sole
expense of the owner, and if not, the Township may at its
discretion remove the graffiti and assess costs for removal
against the WCF owner.
[5] Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township.
(d) Design regulations.
[1] The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact
and shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
[2] Tower-based WCF in the public ROW shall not exceed 40
feet in height.
[3] Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to
accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennas and
comparable antennas for future users.
(e) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following
written notice from the Township, or such longer period as the
Township determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter
period in the case of an emergency, an owner of tower-based
WCF in the ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or
permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of
any WCF when the Township, consistent with its police powers
and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall
determine that such removal, relocation, change or alteration
is reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
§ 170-1404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1404
1:655
[1] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of
any Township or other public improvement in the right-ofway;
[2] The operations of the Township or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
[3] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
[4] An emergency as determined by the Township.
(f) Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as
described in this section, every tower-based WCF in the ROW
is subject to the Township's right to fix annually a fair and
reasonable fee to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW.
Such compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to the
Township's actual ROW management costs including, but not
limited to, the costs of the administration and performance of
all reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and other
ROW management activities by the Township. The owner of
each tower-based WCF shall pay an annual fee to the Township
to compensate the Township for the Township's costs incurred
in connection with the activities described above.
§ 170-1404 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1404
1:656
ARTICLE XV
General Regulations
§ 170-1500. Statement of intent.
In setting forth general regulations in this article, it is the intent of the
Township to establish clear standards for activities and for the design and
impact of site development that may be associated with a variety of zoning
districts or types of land use. In most instances, these regulations are to
be interpreted and applied in conjunction with the requirements of one or
another use district of this chapter; they are limited with respect to the
Zoning Map only as stipulated by the terms of this article.
§ 170-1501. Visibility at intersections.
The following shall apply to all zoning districts:
§ 170-1502. Projections into setbacks and setback exceptions.
[Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
A. On a corner lot or at a point of entry on a public road, nothing shall be
erected, placed, or allowed to grow in a manner which obscures vision:
(1) Above the height of 2 1/2 feet measured from the center line grades
of the intersecting streets; and
(2) Within the area bounded by the center lines of intersecting streets
and a line joining points on these center lines at distances from the
intersection as specified in Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land
Development.
B. There shall be no plantings, ground cover or other objects placed within
the road right-of-way above 18 inches in height.
A. The following components of principal buildings (with or without
accessory dwelling units), may project into any required yard so long as
they are set back at least 15 feet from any lot line: terraces; platforms,
stoops, patios, and other uncovered landings; buttresses; chimneys;
cornices; piers or pilasters; unenclosed fire escapes; and unroofed
steps.
B. In situations where the Board of Supervisors permits a lot size which
conforms to the footprint of a building, such components or decks may
project no more than 25% of the minimum distance between buildings
or be set back at least 15 feet from the tract boundary; projections into
open space not covered by these standards shall be subject to approval
by the Board of Supervisors.
C. Raised decks attached to a dwelling may extend into a required side or
rear yard, provided they are set back a minimum of 15 feet from any lot
line (except along a lot line where two dwellings are attached to each
other).
§ 170-1500 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1502
1:657
§ 170-1503. Modification of front yard requirements.
D. An open gazebo or a similar unenclosed uninhabitable decorative
structure with a maximum floor area of 64 square feet shall be
permitted within a front yard setback, provided the front yard has a
minimum width of 50 feet.
E. A movable awning or movable canopy may project into any required
yard not more than 25 feet, but shall not be closer than 15 feet from any
property line.
F. Arbors, garden sheds, private garages, private greenhouses, trellises,
workshops, and similar accessory structures shall be permitted within
side and rear yard areas provided they do not exceed the height, nor
50% of the footprint, of the principal structure. The side and rear yard
setbacks for such structures shall be no less than the height of the
accessory structure, irrespective of the otherwise applicable yard
requirement of the district. Any wheels attached to a mobile structure
must be removed prior to the issuance of any permits. These standards
do not apply to flexible developments. [Amended 6-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-01]
G. Swimming pools, measured from the edge of the water, tennis courts,
and similar outdoor recreation facilities shall be permitted within side
and rear yard areas provided they are set back at least 25 feet from the
lot line.
H. Corner lots. If a corner lot is occupied by a single-family detached
dwelling, and the applicant proves to the Zoning Officer that there is no
suitable permitted location for customary accessory uses/structures
(such as a shed or pool), then the Zoning Officer may permit such
accessory use/structure in one of the two front yards, provided it is
located and landscaped so as to minimize the impacts upon the
neighborhood.
A. To encourage design in accordance with land condition and to develop
the maximum aesthetic potential of the community, the Board of
Supervisors may, at its sole discretion, permit up to 25% of the
residences in a subdivision to be located as much as 10 feet forward of
the required building setback line, if the same number of residences are
located at least an equal distance behind the required setback line.
B. Where an unimproved lot is situated between two improved lots, on
each of which there has existed since the effective date of this chapter a
principal building within 25 feet of the side boundary line of such
unimproved lot and encroaching within the front yard otherwise
required by this chapter, the front yard depth of such unimproved lot
may be the average depth of the front yards of the two adjacent
improved lots, notwithstanding the yard requirements of the district in
which the unimproved lot is located.
§ 170-1502 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1503
1:658
§ 170-1504. Exception to height limitations.
C. Where an unimproved lot adjoins only one improved lot, on which there
has existed since the effective date of this chapter a principal building
within 25 feet of the common side lot line and encroaching within the
front yard otherwise required by this chapter, the front yard depth of
such unimproved lot may be the average depth of the front yard of such
adjacent improved lot and the front yard required for the district in
which such unimproved lot is located, notwithstanding the yard
requirements for such district.
A. Subject to the review and approval by the Board of Supervisors, the
height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires,
belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, chimneys on
residential structures, or flagpoles.
B. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to wireless
communications facilities except as provided for in § 170-1404.
Furthermore, the height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to a
barn or silo. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
C. The height limitations for wind energy systems shall be as set forth in
§ 170-1618 of this chapter. [Added 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-393]
D. A special exception may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board,
permitting signal transmitting, receiving, or relay towers, ham radio or
television masts, aerials, and antennas. Such uses may be erected to a
maximum height of 50 feet or the equivalent of the distance to the
property line, whichever is less. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider the following factors, in addition to the criteria in § 170-2108
of this chapter, in deciding upon a request for special exception:
[Amended 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3]
(1) Compatibility of the proposed facility with existing and zoned uses
in the general neighborhood with respect to safety, visual impact,
aesthetics, noise, and lighting.
(2) Compliance of the proposed facility with all applicable state and
federal licensing and permit requirements, including assurances
that existing uses on surrounding properties will not be disrupted
or otherwise negatively impacted by the operation of the proposed
facility.
(3) The relationship of the proposed site to other similar facilities
within the Township or the immediate region, and the potential
cumulative impacts that could result from a concentration of such
facilities of excessive height.
93.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections C
and D as Subsections D and E, respectively.
§ 170-1503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1504
1:659
§ 170-1505. Fences and walls. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2; 2-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-1]
(4) The ability of the applicant to screen effectively the potentially
negative visual, light, and noise impacts of the proposed facility.
E. A special exception may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board
permitting a primary or secondary school or religious use to exceed
otherwise applicable height limitations up to a maximum of 60 feet. In
consideration of such request for modification, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall review, and may base approval or denial of the request, or
approval subject to specific conditions, on one or more of the following
factors: [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(1) Feasibility of adequate development of the proposed use without
exceeding otherwise applicable height limitations;
(2) Impact on architectural design which compliance with applicable
height limitations would entail, in comparison with improvements
to architectural design which may be feasible with an increase in
permitted height;
(3) Degree of change in visual impacts to nearby public roads and/or
private properties which would result if an increase in height were
to be permitted in comparison to visual impacts from development
conforming to applicable height limitations; and
(4) Potential means to mitigate visual impacts of a tall structure from
point(s) of view from nearby public roads and/or private properties,
whether through landscape screening, retention of existing
vegetation and/or land forms, siting of tall portions of structures at
considerable distance from nearby uses or public roads, or
otherwise.
A. A permit is not required for a fence in the Township District.
B. A permit is required for the installation of all other fences exceeding 40
feet in length and within the front, rear or side setback areas, except
fences enclosing agricultural uses, or those constructed in conjunction
with a permit for the installation of a swimming pool. A plot plan
locating the proposed fence shall be submitted with the permit
application. The plot plan may be an informal sketch plan, not
necessarily to exact scale, showing the property boundaries and
accurately locating the proposed fence. The property owner or
contractor shall notify the PA One Call System before beginning
construction of the fence.
C. In a residential district or a residential or agricultural lot in another
zoning district:
(1) A fence located within the required front building setback area of
any yard shall have a maximum height of five feet and shall have a
§ 170-1504 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1505
1:660
ratio of open to structural areas of at least 1:1 (such as a split-rail
or picket fence).
(2) A wall within the required front building setback area shall not
exceed a height of three feet.
(3) A fence or wall located within a minimum principal building
setback area, other than the minimum front building setback, shall
have a maximum height of six feet (decorative post tops may extend
above six feet).
(4) If one side of a fence is smoother or more finished than the other
side of the fence, the smoother or more finished side shall face onto
any abutting lot or public road.
(5) A fence higher than six feet is permitted to enclose a recreation
facility such as a tennis court if the fence is integral to the
recreational use and complies with the required building setbacks
applicable to the zoning district.
D. On any nonresidential lot, a fence or wall shall not exceed a height of
five feet within the minimum front building setback area and eight feet
in any other minimum principal building setback area.
E. Where landscaping is required as a buffer around a use, all fencing
shall be located on the inside of the landscaping, except for fencing that
is mostly open (such as split-rail or picket fencing) and is constructed of
wood or materials with a similar appearance.
F. This section shall not restrict retaining walls that are necessary to hold
back slopes, nor walls of a building that are permitted by this chapter.
G. No fence or wall shall be constructed on a property within the existing
or future right-of-way of a street, nor in any location that would obstruct
a permanent easement.
H. Fences and their support materials shall be placed entirely within the
boundaries of the property being fenced. If the fence is to be located on
or near the property line and the property owner cannot demonstrate
that the property line location is known and identified in the field, as
well as on the permit plan, the Township may require a survey of the
property.
I. The repair or replacement of any fence that currently exists as of the
date of the adoption of this chapter shall not require a permit.
J. Regulations for fencing associated with wireless communications
facilities are set forth in § 170-1404, and those provisions are the
applicable standards to apply to such fencing. [Added 6-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-6]
§ 170-1505 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1505
1:661
§ 170-1506. Environmental performance standards.
K. Regulations applicable to fencing associated with surface land uses
affiliated with transmission pipelines are set forth in § 170-1612A(3)(b).
[Added 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-2]
A. No use shall be permitted which is noxious or offensive in the
immediately surrounding area by reason of odor, dust, smoke, gas,
vibration, illumination, or noise, or which constitutes a public hazard
whether by fire, explosion, or otherwise. The sole exception to these
requirements shall be with regard to normal and customary
agricultural practices conducted in compliance with the applicable
provisions of § 170-1609 of this chapter. In determining whether a
proposed use is noxious, hazardous, or offensive, the burden of proof is
on the applicant and will be judged by the following criteria. The
proposed operation shall not:
(1) Constitute any nuisance whatsoever beyond the boundary of the
site on which the use is located by reason of dissemination of
noxious, toxic, or corrosive fumes, smoke, odor, or dust. All
equipment shall be operated by electric power, gas, or other
smokeless fuel.
(2) Result in noise or vibration exceeding the average intensity of noise
or vibration occurring from other causes at the boundary line.
(3) Endanger surrounding areas by reason of the potential for fire or
explosion.
(4) Produce objectionable heat, glare, or radiation beyond the property
line.
(5) Result in electrical disturbance in nearby residences, or adversely
affect the operation of equipment other than on the property on
which the disturbance is located.
(6) Engage in the storage of nonhazardous waste material (as defined
by Pennsylvania Act 97 of 1980, as amended, the Solid Waste
Management Act, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.) on the lot for any
period beyond 30 days.
(7) Engage in the production, treatment, or storage of toxic or
hazardous waste (as defined by Pennsylvania Act 97 of 1980, as
amended, the Solid Waste Management Act, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et
seq.). Any use or disposal of toxic or hazardous material or waste
shall conform to the terms of § 170-1517E of this article.
(8) Create any other objectionable condition in an adjoining area
which will endanger public health and safety or be detrimental to
the proper use of the surrounding area.
§ 170-1505 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1506
1:662
§ 170-1507. Landscaping and site design.
§ 170-1508. Screening. [Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord. No. 94-6;
3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
B. Any use proposed under the terms of this chapter shall conform to all
applicable regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and the Chester County Health Department,
and with the Township Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan (35 P.S. § 750.1 et
seq.), regarding the treatment and disposal of industrial or sanitary
wastes.
C. All utilities shall be installed below ground.
D. Where required by the Township, an applicant for a proposed use shall
demonstrate that adequate provisions will be made to reduce and
minimize any objectionable elements to the degree necessary to ensure
that the proposed use will comply satisfactorily with the above
standards. Where so required, the applicant shall submit supplemental
information and plans. The Township may solicit the expert advice of
official agencies or private consultants and such reasonable tests as are
deemed necessary, the costs of which shall be borne by the applicant.
A. Any portion of a lot, site, or tract which is not used for buildings or
structures, loading or parking spaces and aisles, or other impervious
surfaces or designated storage areas shall be planted with an all-season
ground cover. A major objective for such ground cover shall be to
prevent soil erosion and sedimentation off the site.
B. Any use or activity proposed as part of a subdivision or land
development shall further comply with the requirements for shade
trees, street trees, and other landscaping components stipulated in
Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development.
C. There shall be no plantings, ground cover or other objects placed within
the road right-of-way above 18 inches in height.
A. A completely planted visual barrier or landscape screen, of sufficient
density not to be seen through and of sufficient height to constitute an
effective screen and give maximum protection and immediate visual
screening, shall be provided and continually maintained between any
industrial, office, or C-1 Commercial District and any contiguous
residentially-zoned district; any multifamily residential use and any
contiguous single-family detached or two-family residential use; any
use by special exception permitted in the Commercial District and any
other use; and any new or expanded nonresidential principal use that
abuts an existing residential use. Specific buffer requirements, as
contained in the use districts, shall be considered to have fulfilled the
obligations herein.
§ 170-1506 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1508
1:663
§ 170-1509. Storage.
The following standards shall apply to the storage of all man-made
materials:
B. Water towers, storage tanks, processing equipment, fans, skylights,
cooling towers, communication towers, vents and any other structures
or equipment which rise above the roof line shall be architecturally
compatible, or shall be effectively shielded from view from any public or
private street by an architecturally sound method which shall be
approved, in writing, by the Township before construction or erection of
said structures or equipment.
C. In any case in which screening of a parking lot is required, such
screening shall include appropriate planting, such as a compact
evergreen hedge, or a masonry wall or ornamental structure, which
shall be not more than four feet in height. Any such wall or similar
structure shall enclose the parking lot and shall be in harmony with the
general architectural design of the principal building or buildings.
D. For the purposes of this section, the following criteria shall apply:
(1) The term "contiguous" shall include each of the following:
(a) Lots that abut but are not separated by a local or minor street;
(b) Lots that are only separated from each other by a creek or
easement; and/or
(c) Lots that are across a local street from each other.
(2) Complete plant visual screening shall not be required along the
primary front lot line of a lot.
(3) Required landscaping and any berming shall be designed to have a
naturalistic appearance with a mix of plant species. Straight rows
of the same species of shrubs shall generally not be used to meet
Township requirements. Plants with a large mature size should be
planted at offsets to allow room for growth. The species, sizes and
locations of plantings proposed to be used shall be shown on
development plans.
(4) Any required buffer shall also meet the standards in § 149-922 of
the Code.
A. Storage for periods in excess of 30 days shall be screened from view of
any public right-of-way and any contiguous residential use. Screening
shall consist of continuous evergreen plantings and/or include an
architectural screen.
B. No storage shall be permitted within the front yard of a lot.
§ 170-1508 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1509
1:664
§ 170-1510. Access and traffic control.
In order to minimize traffic congestion and hazard, control street access
in the interest of public safety, and encourage the orderly development of
street or highway frontage, the following regulations shall apply. Where
the requirements of §§ 170-1511 and/or 170-1512 are applicable and are
more stringent than the provisions of this section, those requirements shall
govern.
C. No merchandise, goods, articles, or equipment shall be stored,
displayed, or offered for sale outside any building except seasonal
articles which are too large or otherwise infeasible to be stored indoors.
Such articles shall be stored adjacent to the principal building housing
the commercial use, and shall be enclosed by either walls or opaque
fencing designed to be architecturally compatible with the building.
Such enclosure shall be at least six feet high. Any outdoor display area
shall be considered sales floor area for purposes of computing building
coverage and parking requirements.
D. Any organic refuse and garbage shall be stored in tight, verminproof
containers. On multifamily, commercial, or industrial properties, solid
waste storage shall be centralized to expedite collection. Storage
containers shall be enclosed on three sides with masonry walls and
shall be architecturally screened.
E. Flammable and combustible liquids, solids, or gases shall be stored in
accordance with the Township Fire Code.94 There shall be no storage of
hazardous waste anywhere within the Township, including temporary
storage in a parked vehicle. Hazardous waste shall be as defined in Pa.
Act 97-1980, the Solid Waste Management Act (35 P.S. § 6018.101 et
seq.), or any subsequent amendment or revision thereto.
F. Any establishment which furnishes carts or mobile baskets as an
adjunct to shopping shall provide definite locations within the required
parking areas for storage of said carts. Each designated storage
location shall be clearly marked for storage of shopping carts. Signs
indicating the storage locations shall not be considered as regulated by
the provisions of Article XVIII.
A. No parking lot or area for off-street parking or for the storage or
movement of motor vehicles shall abut directly a public street or
highway unless separated from the street or highway by a raised curb, a
barrier planting strip, wall or other effective barrier against traffic,
except for necessary accessways. The minimum setback from the street
line to the parking area shall be equal to that specified in § 170-1701D
of this chapter. Each parking lot shall have not more than two
accessways to any one public street or highway for each 500 feet of
frontage. Where practicable, access to parking areas shall be provided
by a common service driveway or minor street in order to avoid direct
94.Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Fire Prevention.
§ 170-1509 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1510
1:665
§ 170-1511. Establishment of future right-of-way widths for streets.
[Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
access on a major street or highway. Except for flares and curb returns,
no such accessway shall be more than 35 feet clear in width.
[Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
B. In any zoning district, in the case of any multifamily residential
development, commercial use, hospital, hotel, patient hostel,
rehabilitative services center, wellness center, health clinic, medical
office building, medical clinic or industrial use or any other
nonresidential use, excepting municipal, the following regulations shall
apply: [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1]
(1) All parking, loading, or service areas used by motor vehicles shall
be located entirely within the lot lines of the property or center.
(2) All buildings shall front upon a marginal street, service road,
common parking lot or similar area, and not directly upon a public
street or highway.
(3) All accessways to a public street or highway shall be located not
less than 300 feet from the intersection of any street lines.
(4) All streets and accessways shall be designed in a manner conducive
to safe exit and entrance.
(5) Any additional traffic signals and acceleration and deceleration
lanes deemed necessary upon review by the Board of Supervisors
to provide safe and adequate access to the property shall be
provided by the developer.
A. Purpose. To reserve adequate rights-of-way for future circulation
improvements, including road widenings, sidewalks, and bikeways.
B. Widths. The following future rights-of-way shall be reserved for future
dedication along each public street:
Future Right of-Way
(feet)
Minor residential service 50
Local street 50
Collector street 60
Routes 926 and 352 80
U.S. Route 202 and PA Route 3 120
C. Ownership and maintenance. Building setbacks adjacent to streets
shall be measured from the future right-of-way, not the existing street
right-of-way, regardless of whether or not the future street right-of-way
has been dedicated. The adjacent property owner shall be responsible
§ 170-1510 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1511
1:666
§ 170-1512. Access to Route 202.
§ 170-1513. Interior circulation and access.
to maintain the area between the road shoulder and the future rightof-
way line. See provisions in Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land
Development, regarding dedication of the future right-of-way.
D. If the right-of-way is dedicated from an existing lot line along an
existing public street, and as a result the width or lot area does not
conform to the district regulations, then the lot shall not be regulated as
a nonconforming lot.
A. Right-hand turns. A land use with direct access onto and off of U. S.
Route 202 shall not have either left-hand turns from the use onto Route
202 or left-hand turns from Route 202 to the use. This section shall
neither apply to left-hand turns at official traffic signals nor to uses that
were served by left-hand turns onto and/or off of Route 202 prior to the
adoption of this section. However, if any land use that was served by
left-hand turns onto and/or off of Route 202 prior to the adoption of this
section is to be replaced with a land use that will generate more total
weekday traffic, left-hand turns shall be prohibited onto and off of
Route 202 from the use. Traffic generation comparisons shall be based
upon the Traffic Generation Manual of the Institute of Traffic
Engineers. Appropriate measures should then be taken to encourage
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation to erect a median
barrier across any curb cut in Route 202 in that location, if determined
to be reasonable by the Board of Supervisors.
B. Alternative access to Route 202.
(1) Specific intent. The purpose of this section is to discourage direct
vehicular access from uses directly onto and off of U. S. Route 202,
to avoid serious traffic hazards from increased numbers of
vehicular access points along Route 202, and to encourage
alternative access by using existing collector, local, and stub roads.
Access onto Route 202 can thereby be provided through a rational
and reasonable hierarchy of roads and access points.
(2) For all uses, specifically residential uses, proposed within 300 feet
of the future right-of-way of Route 202, if a reasonable alternative
means of access is available by means of an existing street other
than Route 202, uses shall be prohibited from having direct
vehicular access onto and off Route 202. This requirement may be
waived at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors if the
requirement for alternative access would be unreasonable, cause a
serious hardship to the applicant, or be impracticable given the
type of use proposed.
A. General design. Interior drives shall be the minimum widths specified
below and shall be designed so as to prevent blockage of vehicles
§ 170-1511 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1513
1:667
entering or leaving the site. Drives may be one-way or two-way. Areas
provided for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and other
vehicles, and for the servicing of shops by refuse collection, fuel, and
other service vehicles, shall be so arranged that they may be used
without:
(1) Blocking or interfering with the use of accessways, automobile
parking facilities, or pedestrian ways; or
(2) Backing out into a street.
B. Minimum interior drive widths. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-1]
Two-Lane Two-Way
Drives
(feet)
One-Lane One-Way
Drives
(feet)
Use Paved Row Paved Row
Multifamily
residential
24 50 14* 20
Commercial and all
other
28 50 14* 30
NOTES:
* If one-lane, one-way drive is also used for fire access: minimum of
20 feet.
C. Paving. Interior drives shall be paved with an all-weather surface and
provided with curbs and drainage in conformance with the
requirements of § 149-915 of Chapter 149, Subdivision of Land. As
determined by the Board of Supervisors, interior drives designed as
continuous collector road(s) to provide internal through connection(s)
between existing collector and/or arterial roads, which link any
proposed use or development to existing or proposed intersections, or
other points of controlled and/or signalized access to collector and/or
arterial highway(s), shall be paved in accordance with § 149-910 of
Chapter 149, Subdivision of Land. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-1]
D. Fire lane easements.
(1) No multifamily residential, commercial, or industrial building shall
be located more than 150 feet from a duly dedicated, improved, and
accessible fire lane easement, as defined herein, nor more than 600
feet from a duly dedicated, accessible, and improved public street.
If any such building is located further than 600 feet from a public
street, then a subdivision plan must be filed and approved by the
Board before the development plan shall be considered for
approval.
§ 170-1513 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1513
1:668
§ 170-1514. Outdoor lighting. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
(2) Fire lane easements shall have a minimum unobstructed right-ofway
width of 40 feet, and there shall be constructed within this
right-of-way an all-weather and well-drained cartway surface with a
minimum width of 20 feet. The extension of fire lane easements
shall begin from one or more existing and improved public streets.
(3) Fire lane easements which curve, turn, or change direction shall
have a minimum radius of 55 feet at the pavement. Fire lane
easements containing reverse curves shall have a minimum center
line tangent length of 50 feet between curves.
(4) Dead-end fire lane easements shall be terminated with an
unobstructed vehicular turnaround or cul-de-sac with a minimum
right-of-way radius of 45 feet, and shall have a minimum surfaced
radius of 35 feet. Dead-end fire lane easements shall have a
maximum length of 400 feet.
(5) The location of fire lane easements shall conform to plans for the
extensions of streets, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers,
and other drainage facilities and public utilities, as prescribed in
this chapter and other ordinances of the Township, and shall
provide adequate access to buildings by firemen and other
emergency services.
E. New, relocated or intensified driveways. Any vehicle driveway that is
newly developed, relocated, or converted from serving a residential use
to serving a principal nonresidential use shall meet the driveway
requirements of § 149-915, regardless of whether a subdivision or a
land development is involved. [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
A. Purpose. The purpose is to require and set minimum standards for
outdoor lighting to:
(1) Provide lighting in outdoor public places where public health,
safety and welfare are potential concerns during hours of darkness.
(2) Protect drivers and pedestrians from the glare of nonvehicular light
sources that shine directly into their eyes or reflect off surfaces and
thereby impair safe traverse.
(3) Protect neighbors and the night sky from direct glare and stray
light from poorly aimed, placed, applied, maintained or shielded
light sources.
B. Applicability.
(1) Outdoor lighting shall be required for safety and personal security
for uses that operate during hours of darkness where there is
public assembly and traverse, including but not limited to the
§ 170-1513 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1514
1:669
following uses: all residential developments, commercial,
industrial, public-recreational and institutional.
(2) Appropriate officers or agents of the Township may require that
lighting be incorporated for other uses or locations, as they deem
necessary.
(3) The glare, light trespass and light pollution requirements herein
contained apply to lighting in all above-mentioned uses, as well as,
but not limited to, lighting for signage, architectural, site/
landscape, recreational and residential uses and all jurisdictions,
including public, private and municipal.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CANDELA — Unit of luminous intensity of a source in a given direction.
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of illuminance equal to one lumen per square
foot and measurable with an illuminance meter (footcandle or light
meter).
FULL CUTOFF — A luminaire light distribution where zero candela
intensity occurs at or above an angle of 90° above nadir. Additionally,
the candela per 1,000 lamp lumens does not numerically exceed 100
(10%) at or above a vertical angle of 80° above nadir. This applies to all
lateral angles around the luminaire.
GLARE — The sensation produced by luminances within the visual field,
which are sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes
have adapted, and which causes annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual
performance and visibility.
ILLUMINANCE — The quantity of light at a point on a surface
measured in footcandles or lux. Horizontal footcandles are
perpendicular to a horizontal surface. Vertical footcandles are
perpendicular to a vertical surface.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Light emitted by a lighting installation, which
extends beyond the boundaries of the property on which the installation
is sited, and which is considered unwelcome or undesirable.
LUMEN — Unit of luminous flux, amount of light emitted from a source.
LUMINAIRE (LIGHT FIXTURE) — A complete lighting unit consisting of
a lamp, or lamps and ballast (when applicable), together with the parts
designed to distribute light.
LUMINANCE — The luminous intensity of a surface of a given projected
area, in a given direction, and measurable with a luminance meter.
LUX — A unit of light intensity stated in lumens per square meter. There
are approximately 10.7 lux per footcandle.
NON CUTOFF — A luminaire light distribution where there is no
candela limitation in the zone above maximum candela.
§ 170-1514 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1514
1:670
D. Design criteria.
(1) Illuminance.
(a) Lighting, where required by this chapter, shall have intensities
and uniformity ratios in accordance with the current
recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering
Society of North America (IESNA), unless deemed
inappropriate or unnecessary by independent lighting
consultants retained as experts by the Township. Such
recommended practices are contained in the IESNA Lighting
Handbook, RP-33-99 Lighting For Exterior Environments,
RP-8-00 Roadway Lighting, and other IESNA Recommended
Practices for specific activities such as sports lighting.
(b) Future amendments to IESNA practices shall become a part of
this chapter without further action of the Township.
(c) Horizontal illuminances, or lighting levels, are measured at
grade and are considered as maintained during the life of the
lighting system in use.
(d) Lighting uniformity ratios determine areas of insufficient or
excessive illuminances. Uniformity ratios are given as average
to minimum or maximum to minimum.
(e) Examples of illumination levels for typical outdoor
applications, as extracted from the IESNA RP-33-99 and
RP-8-00 Recommended Practices, are presented below.
Uniformity Ratios
Classification
Maintained
Average
Illumination
Levels (Lux/
Footcandles)
(See Note 2)
(Average:
Minimum)
(Note 3)
(Maximum:
Minimum)
Streets and
roadways
Local commercial 9/0.9 average
minimum 12.0/
1.2 average
maximum
6:1
Local residential 4/0.4 average
minimum 7/0.7
average
maximum
6:1
§ 170-1514 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1514
1:671
Uniformity Ratios
Classification
Maintained
Average
Illumination
Levels (Lux/
Footcandles)
(See Note 2)
(Average:
Minimum)
(Note 3)
(Maximum:
Minimum)
Parking
(Commercial/
institutional,
industrial/
municipal use)
High activity
(e.g., major
athletic/civic/
cultural events;
fast food, etc.)
10/1 average
minimum 20/2
average
maximum
5:1 20:1
Medium activity
(e.g., hospitals,
community
shopping centers,
office parks,
commuter lots,
etc.)
5/0.5 average
minimum 10/1
average
maximum
5:1 20:1
Low activity (e.g.,
schools,
churches,
neighborhood
shopping,
multifamily
developments,
etc.)
2/0.2 average
minimum 5/0.5
average
maximum
5:1 20:1
Sidewalks and
bikeways
5/0.5 average
minimum 20/
2.0 average
maximum
4:1
Building entrances
(Commercial/
industrial/
institutional)
25/2.5 average
minimum 50/
5.0 average
maximum
5:1
Service station
dispenser areas
50/5 average
minimum 200/
20 average
maximum
5:1
§ 170-1514 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1514
1:672
Uniformity Ratios
Classification
Maintained
Average
Illumination
Levels (Lux/
Footcandles)
(See Note 2)
(Average:
Minimum)
(Note 3)
(Maximum:
Minimum)
Car dealerships 20/2.0 average
minimum 100/
10 average
maximum
5:1
NOTES (Apply to all classifications):
1 Illumination levels are maintained horizontal at grade.
2 Maximum average illuminance levels are applicable to
commercial areas with high nighttime pedestrian activities
or areas with light (brightly illuminated) surroundings.
3 Uniformity ratios dictate the lowest illuminance allowable
based on the average selected. For example, in high
activity parking areas with two fc average, the minimum
level would be 2/5 or .4 fc.
(2) Luminaire design.
(a) Luminaire shall be of a type and design appropriate to the
lighting application.
(b) For lighting horizontal tasks such as roadways, sidewalks,
entrance drives and parking areas, luminaires shall meet
IESNA full-cutoff criteria (no light output emitted above 90° at
any lateral angle around the fixture).
(c) Noncutoff luminaires may be approved by the Zoning Officer
for historical post top luminaires, provided the source is less
than 2,000 initial lumens.
(d) The use of floodlighting, spotlighting, wall-mounted fixtures,
decorative globes and spheres and other fixtures not meeting
IESNA full-cutoff criteria shall be permitted only with the
approval of the Township, based upon applicability in retaining
the rural character of the Township and achieving acceptable
glare control.
(e) When requested by the Township, luminaires shall be equipped
with or be modified to incorporate light directing and/or
shielding devices such as shields, visors, skirts or hoods to
redirect offending light distribution and/or reduce direct or
reflected glare.
§ 170-1514 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1514
1:673
(f) NEMA-head fixtures, a/k/a "barn lights" or "dusk-to-dawn
lights" shall not be permitted where they are visible from other
uses, unless fitted with optical hardware to render them full
cutoff.
(3) Control of nuisance and disabling glare.
(a) All outdoor lighting, whether or not required by this chapter on
private, residential, commercial, industrial, municipal,
recreational or institutional property, shall be aimed, located,
designed, fitted and maintained so as not to present a hazard
to drivers or pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely
traverse and so as not to create a nuisance by projecting or
reflecting objectionable light onto a neighboring use or
property.
(b) All outdoor luminaires shall be shielded in such a manner that
no light is emitted above a horizontal plane passing through
the lowest point of the light emitting element, so that direct
light emitted above the horizontal plane is eliminated. All
outdoor luminaires that illuminate the area under outdoor
canopies shall comply with the requirement. Outdoor canopies
include, but are not limited to, the following applications:
[1] Fuel island canopies associated with service stations and
convenience stores.
[2] Exterior canopies above storefronts in shopping centers
and malls.
[3] Exterior canopies above driveways and building
entrances.
[4] Pavilions and gazebos.
(c) Floodlights and spotlights shall be so installed or aimed that
they do not project their output into the windows of
neighboring residences, adjacent properties, skyward or onto a
public roadway. The use of searchlights or laser source lights
for advertising or entertainment purposes is prohibited
without a special permit.
(d) Unless otherwise permitted by the appropriate officers or
agents of the Township, e.g., for safety or security or all-night
operations, lighting for commercial, industrial, public
recreational and institutional applications shall be controlled
by automatic switching devices such as time clocks or
combination motion detectors and photcells, to permit
extinguishing outdoor lighting fixtures between 11:00 p.m. and
dawn, to mitigate nuisance glare and sky-lighting
consequences.
§ 170-1514 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1514
1:674
(e) Lighting proposed for use after 11:00 p.m., or after the normal
hours of operation for commercial, industrial, institutional or
municipal applications, shall be reduced by 75% from then
until dawn, unless supporting a specific purpose and approved
by the appropriate officers or agent of the Township.
(f) All illumination for buildings and/or surrounding landscapes
for decorative, advertising or aesthetic purposes is prohibited
between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, except that such lighting
situated on the premises of a commercial establishment may
remain illuminated while the establishment is actually open for
business, and until one hour after closing.
(g) Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the
primary means for controlling glare. Rather, glare control shall
be achieved primarily through the use of such means as cutoff
fixtures, shields and baffles and appropriate application of
fixture mounting height, wattage, aiming angle and fixture
placement.
(h) In no case shall the intensity of illumination exceed 0.1
horizontal, and 0.1 vertical footcandles. Horizontal footcandles
shall be measured at grade. Vertical footcandles shall be
measured line-of-sight, five feet above grade at the property
line.
(i) Externally illuminated signs and billboards shall be lighted by
fixtures mounted at the top of the sign and aimed downward.
Such fixtures shall be automatically extinguished between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and dawn, except as specifically approved
by appropriate officers or agents of the Township.
(j) Mounting height. Lighting fixtures shall be mounted at a
maximum total height of 20 feet above the ground, except such
height shall be reduced to 16 feet within residentially used
properties or within 200 feet of a residentially used lot, except
for authorized institutional use. This height limitation shall not
apply to lights needed for air safety, that solely are intended to
illuminate a steeple or similar architectural feature, or that
illuminate outdoor public recreation facilities.
(k) For land development applications where lighting is required
(i.e., zoning hearings, conditional use hearings), the
credentials of the expert in outdoor lighting shall be described
in writing. If the expert testimony is provided by more than one
person, the credibility of each expert may be weighed by the
Township.
(l) Directional fixtures for such applications as facade, fountain,
feature and landscape illumination shall be aimed so as not to
project their output beyond the objects intended to be
illuminated, shall be extinguished between the hours of 11:00
§ 170-1514 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1514
1:675
p.m. and dawn and shall not be in conflict with the Township's
aim to maintain its rural character.
(m) The use of white strobe lighting for tall structures such as
smokestacks, chimneys and radio/communications/television
towers is prohibited. No exterior luminaire shall have blinking,
flashing or fluttering features.
(n) This subsection shall not restrict routine types of holiday
lighting between November 15 and January 5, provided such
lighting does not produce glare. No beacon light or nighttime
strobe light shall be permitted. This subsection shall not
restrict lights necessary to meet Federal Aviation
Administration requirements.
(o) Outdoor lighting shall be limited to a maximum of 0.25
footcandles in the cases where one of the following situations
exists:
[1] When a retail business is not open to the public;
[2] Public/private use of an area is not anticipated; and
[3] No other use is in operation.
(p) If the type of luminaire on an existing building is being
replaced, or an entire light fixture is being replaced in kind, or
a light fixture is being changed to a more intensive
illumination, such light fixture shall comply with § 170-1514.
(4) Installation.
(a) Setbacks. Exterior light fixtures for principal nonresidential
uses shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from a lot line of a
dwelling, except for lighting necessary to illuminate pedestrian
walkways or vehicle ingress or egress points.
(b) Lighting fixtures shall not be mounted in excess of 20 feet
above grade.
(5) Permanent recreational and sports lighting and nighttime events.
Subject to the conditions listed herein, permanent outdoor
illumination for active recreational and sports facilities accessory
to public, private, and parochial schools, universities and colleges
and for passive non-recreational nighttime events shall be
permitted when approved as a conditional use by the Westtown
Township Board of Supervisors. [Added 7-6-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-4]
(a) Permanent recreational and sports lighting shall be defined as
recreational and sports lighting that is permanently installed in
a fixed location and not portable and associated with nighttime
events.
§ 170-1514 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1514
1:676
(b) Before a conditional use is granted for recreational and sports
lighting and nighttime events, the applicant will conduct traffic
and parking studies and report the results to Westtown
Township to determine if parking, vehicle access and egress,
pedestrian walkways, and site lighting are adequate for
handling the most well-attended anticipated events. The
studies shall be prepared by a qualified traffic consultant and
shall enable the Township to identify traffic and/or parking
problems associated with such events. The studies shall
identify solutions and recommend improvements to mitigate
adverse impacts of the lighted events, if any are found to exist.
(c) An annual permit application shall be required to be submitted
to the Township 45 days before the start of each sports and
recreation year that a permanent recreational and sports
lighting installation is proposed to be utilized. A permit fee
schedule shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors each year to cover all costs to the Township to
include, but not limited to, the following:
[1] Special police detail from the Westtown East Goshen
Police Department to control traffic, parking and on-site
security for any lighted event as determined by the Board
of Supervisors based on type of event.
[2] Trash cleanup by Township Public Works employees on the
roads and properties surrounding the campus as soon as
possible after the lighted event as determined by the
Board of Supervisors based on the type of event.
(d) Granting of such a permit is conditioned upon the discretion of
the Board of Supervisors which shall consider past compliance
with the terms of this Subsection D(5) and (6), §§ 116-1 and
116-2 of Chapter 116, § 170-1506 of this chapter and with any
subsequent ordinances related to noise and peace and good
order.
(e) All outdoor illumination as described in this subsection shall
comply with the following standards and conditions:
[1] Unless specifically modified herein, all other provisions in
§ 170-1514 shall apply.
[2] The maximum mounting height as measured from the
finished grade of the playing field to the top of the highest
fixture of recreational and sports lighting fixtures
permitted by this subsection shall be as follows:
[a] Basketball: 20 feet.*
[b] Field hockey: 70 feet.
§ 170-1514 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1514
1:677
[c] Football: 70 feet.
[d] Lacrosse: 70 feet.
[e] Little League Baseball:
[i] Two-hundred-foot radius: 60 feet.
[ii] Three-hundred-foot radius: 70 feet.
[f] Miniature golf: 20 feet.*
[g] Soccer: 70 feet.
[h] Swimming pool aprons: 20 feet.*
[i] Tennis courts: 20 feet.*
[j] Track: 20 feet.*
*Lighting for this sport is subject to the non-sports/
recreation lighting requirements elsewhere in
§ 170-1514.
[3] Higher mounting heights for football, lacrosse and soccer,
not to exceed 85 feet under any circumstances, may be
considered by conditional use application when it can be
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Township that the
higher mounting height is essential to meet or exceed the
other requirements of this section while still controlling
off-site glare, light trespass and daytime visibility of the
light fixtures as viewed from off site.
[4] The lighting shall be accomplished only through the use of
full cutoff or fully shielded fixtures that employ suitable
shielding. Such lighting shall be designed, installed,
aimed, and maintained so that neither lamps (bulbs) nor
primary reflecting surfaces shall be visible from any
window of residential properties within a radius of 1,800
feet of the boundary of lighted field. The fixtures shall not
present a hazard to drivers or pedestrians by projecting
glare that impairs their ability to safely traverse streets,
driveways, sidewalks, pathways and trails. The fixtures
shall be mounted at an appropriate height, angle, and
location to comply with the above conditions.
[5] For a recreational or athletic sporting event, such as
football, soccer, field hockey, or lacrosse, or marching
band cavalcade, the sports lighting system may only be
energized in conjunction with any of the following events,
and no others:
[a] An event directly related to and under the control of
the educational or sports program of the school,
§ 170-1514 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1514
1:678
university or college where the lights are located; no
private organizations may use the school, university or
college facility for lighted events.
[b] A field practice for such event.
[c] A playoff or championship game.
[6] For a recreational or athletic sporting event, such as
football, soccer, field hockey, lacrosse or marching band
cavalcade, utilization of the sports lighting system is
subject to the following restrictions:
[a] A maximum of 30 lighted events per calendar year will
be permitted on any one campus where permanent
lighting is provided. Up to three additional lighted
events shall be permitted each year for playoffs or
championship games not part of the regular schedule
of events. [Amended 9-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-06]
[b] The lights must be extinguished no later than 10:00
p.m.
[c] A school, university or college having been granted
permission to illuminate a recreational facility may
make formal application to the Board of Supervisors to
extend the curfew hour past 10:00 p.m., not to exceed
four evenings annually. The Board's decision to allow
or not allow an extension of operating hours of the
sports lighting shall be based in part on consideration
of potential adverse consequences to adjacent
residential properties.
[d] All light posts shall be set back at least 50 feet from
the property boundary.
[e] As a part of the process of seeking approval, the
school, university or college proposing to use outdoor
lighting as permitted herein shall submit a lighting
plan and associated information to the Township in
conformity with § 170-1514F(1). In addition, the
applicant shall submit a visual impact plan that
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Township that
ordinance light trespass and direct glare
requirements have been met.
[f] If for any school year the lights are used for more than
the number of events allowed under this subsection,
either per week or per year (or exceed the time limit
allowed for the event), then the maximum number of
allowable events for the next school year shall be
§ 170-1514 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1514
1:679
decreased by the number of events which exceeded
the maximum number allowable in the previous year.
[g] If, for any reason, the number of violations described
in § 170-1514D(5)(e)[6][f] exceeds five, the annual
permit as required by § 170-1514D(5)(b) shall be
revoked and no more lighted events may be held for
the remainder of the year.
[7] Golf driving ranges, racetracks, trap-shooting facilities
and other sports necessitating the horizontal or nearhorizontal
projection of illumination shall not be artificially
illuminated.
[8] Illuminances for recreational and sports lighting shall be
in accordance with and shall not exceed the values
contained in the latest edition of IESNA RP-6,
Recommended Practice for Sports and Recreational Area
Lighting. Illuminances shall be based on Class II play.
[9] The maximum luminance from any light source, including
scoreboards, shall not exceed 2,000 cd/m2 as viewed from
any location off site.
[10] Modifications to installed lighting systems in conformance
with the provisions of this article that would result in
higher aiming angles, greater direct glare and/or greater
off-site light trespass shall require a permit.
[11] The amount of spill light from a sports/recreation facility
as measured on adjacent properties or properties
separated from the property of the school with the lighted
field only by a public road, utility property or easement,
shall not exceed 0.2 footcandle, horizontal or vertical, at
any height or location on that property.
[12] The installation of permanent recreational and sports
lighting shall be limited to one playing field on any one
campus.
[13] The entity on whose premises the sports/recreation facility
is situated shall be responsible for monitoring and
reporting. Records of usage of lighting systems shall be
maintained for Township inspection and shall be submitted
as part of the annual permitting application.
[14] As a condition for installing permanent outdoor
illumination for active recreational and sports facilities
accessory to public, private, and parochial schools,
universities and colleges, the Board of Supervisors shall
require the applying institution to take all reasonable
steps, as recommended by a sound engineer hired by the
§ 170-1514 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1514
1:680
Township, to mitigate noise resulting from nighttime
events and its impact on the neighborhoods nearby the
lighted facility. These mitigative actions must allow the
applying institution to comply with §§ 116-1 and 116-2
of Chapter 116, § 170-1506 of this chapter and with any
subsequent ordinances related to noise and good order.
[15] If a sound amplification system will be used in conjunction
with nighttime events permitted by this Subsection D(5)
and (6), the institution shall provide a fully distributed
sound system consisting of highly directional speakers in
close proximity to and aimed into the seating area
providing uniform coverage throughout the seating.
Speakers must be selected to minimize amplification
outside of the seating areas. Coverage across the playing
field, if necessary, can be provided using a similar
distributed system approach. The system design and
performance will be subject to review and approval by the
Township's engineers/consultants before permanent
operation is authorized.
(6) Temporary/portable recreational and sports lighting and nighttime
events. Subject to the conditions listed herein, temporary outdoor
illumination for recreational and sports events for active
recreational and sports facilities accessory to public, private, and
parochial schools, universities and colleges and for passive
nonrecreational activities shall be permitted when approved as a
conditional use by the Township Board of Supervisors. No
temporary lighting shall be approved for any institution that has
been granted permanent lighting on the same campus under §
170-1514D(5). [Added 7-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-4]
(a) Temporary/portable field lighting shall be defined as lighting
capable of being moved from one location to another, whether
moved on the same site or to another site, and is not
permanently installed and aimed in a fixed position.
(b) Temporary/portable recreational and sports lighting shall be
allowed by permit issued following conditional use approval. In
considering the application, the Board of Supervisors shall
consider the applicant's past compliance with the terms of this
§ 170-1514, §§ 116-1 and 116-2 of Chapter 116, § 170-1506 of
this chapter and with any Township ordinances related to and
regulating noise. The approval shall be subject to those
conditions imposed by the Board of Supervisors in the
conditional use decision and to the following requirements:
[1] All such lighting shall be extinguished no later than 9:30
p.m., regardless of overtimes or extra innings, except that
the Township may grant permission to allow the shut-off
time to be extended to 10:00 p.m. on a per-event basis
§ 170-1514 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1514
1:681
when application is made and a justifiable special need is
presented.
[2] The permit application shall be submitted in writing to the
Township as directed by the conditional use decision.
[3] The permit application shall be signed by the owner of the
field on which the temporary/portable lighting is to be
employed or by the field owner's official designee.
[4] The entity on whose premises the sports/recreation facility
is situated shall be responsible for monitoring and
reporting. Records of usage of lighting systems shall be
maintained for Township inspection and shall be submitted
as part of the annual permitting application.
[5] A maximum of 20 lighted events per school year shall be
permitted on any one campus where temporary/portable
sports lighting has been allowed. Only the activities that
conform to all of the following restrictions and all other
terms of § 170-1514D(6) will not be counted toward the
total permissible lighted events:
[a] The activity involves practice only and does not
include games or contests between teams of different
schools.
[b] The activity takes place only during the months of
August, September, October and November.
[c] Lights for the activity are completely extinguished no
later than 7:45 p.m.
[6] Temporary/portable recreational and sports lighting shall
not be operated simultaneously with permanent
recreational and sports lighting on the same campus.
[7] Individual lighting fixture heads shall be aimed in such a
manner that their interior reflective surfaces and lamp
shall not be directly visible to the extent of creating a
nuisance as viewed from the interior of any residence
within view of the sports recreation facility.
[8] Electric generators powering the portable lighting fixtures
shall be located sufficiently far from adjacent residential
uses so fuel odors, engine noise and/or exhaust fumes do
not create a nuisance to adjacent residential uses.
[9] Permit application shall include an impact statement that
details what specific steps will be taken to mitigate
potential negative off-site impact and what steps will be
taken to respond to potential complaints from neighbors.
§ 170-1514 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1514
1:682
E. Maintenance. Lighting fixtures and ancillary equipment shall be
maintained so as always to meet the requirements.
F. Plan submission.
(1) For subdivision and land development applications where site
lighting is required or proposed, lighting plans shall be submitted
to the Township for review and approval and shall include:
(a) A site plan, complete with all structures, parking spaces,
building entrances, traffic areas (both vehicular and
pedestrian), vegetation that might interfere with lighting, and
adjacent use that might be adversely impacted by the lighting.
The plan shall contain a layout of all proposed fixtures by
location and type.
(b) Isofootcandle plots for individual fixture installations, or 10
feet by 10 feet illuminance-grid plots for multifixture
installations, which demonstrate compliance with the intensity
and uniformity requirements as set forth in this chapter. Also,
vertical footcandles at property line, five feet above finished
grade and horizontal footcandles at grade, at property line.
(c) Description of the proposed equipment, including fixture
catalog cuts, photometrics, glare reduction devices, lamps, on/
off control devices, mounting heights, pole foundation details
and mounting methods.
(2) Appropriate officers or agents of the Township may elect, at their
discretion, to require that lighting plans for other than subdivision
and land development applications also be submitted to the
Township for review and approval.
(3) When requested by appropriate officers or agents of the Township,
the applicant shall also submit a visual-impact plan or sections that
demonstrates appropriate steps taken to mitigate on-site and offsite
glare and to retain the rural character of the Township (i.e.,
topographic information or burms).
(4) Postapproval alterations to lighting plans or intended substitutions
for approved lighting equipment shall be submitted to the
Township for review and approval.
(5) Plan verification shall be submitted to the Township after the final
installation to demonstrate compliance. The plan shall show light
levels below typical poles, between poles and also horizontal and
vertical illuminance at the property line in fifty-feet increments.
Vertical levels shall be taken five feet above finished grade. The
plan shall note the date and time measurements were taken.
(6) Postinstallation inspection. The Township reserves the right to
conduct a postinstallation nighttime inspection to verify
§ 170-1514 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1514
1:683
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and if
appropriate, to require remedial action at no expense to the
Township.
G. Compliance monitoring.
(1) Safety hazards.
(a) If appropriate officers or agents of the Township determine
that a lighting installation created a safety or personal-security
hazard, the person(s) responsible for the lighting shall be
notified in writing and required to take remedial action.
(b) If appropriate corrective action has not been effected within 30
days of written notification, the Township may commence legal
action as provided in §§ 170-1514I and J below.
(2) Nuisance glare and inadequate illumination levels.
(a) When appropriate officers or agents of the Township determine
that an installation produces unacceptable levels of nuisance
glare, skyward light, excessive or insufficient illumination
levels or otherwise varies from this chapter, the Township may
give written notification to the person(s) responsible for the
lighting and require appropriate remedial action.
(b) If appropriate corrective action has not been effected within 30
days of written notification, the Township may commence legal
action.
H. Nonconforming lighting. Any lighting fixture or lighting installation
existing on the effective date of this chapter that does not conform with
the requirements of this chapter shall be considered as a lawful
nonconformance subject to the following:
(1) Unless minor corrective action is deemed by the Township to be an
acceptable alternative, a nonconforming lighting fixture or lighting
installation shall be made to conform with the applicable
requirements of this chapter when:
(a) It is deemed by the Township to create a safety hazard;
(b) It is replaced, or relocated; or
(c) There is a change in use.
(2) Nonconforming lighting fixtures and lighting installations shall be
made to conform with the requirements of this chapter or removed
within two years after the effective date of this chapter.
I. Modifications.
(1) For any use or activity subject to subdivision or land development
review, modification(s) to the provisions of this § 170-1514 may be
§ 170-1514 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1514
1:684
§ 170-1515. Noise standards.
requested, which modification(s) may be granted at the discretion
of the Board of Supervisors pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
149 of the Township Code.
(2) For any use or activity not subject to subdivision or land
development review, where subject to application for approval of a
conditional use, special exception, or zoning variance,
modification(s) to the provisions of this section may be requested
as part of such application.
(3) For any use or activity not otherwise subject to permit or approval
as provided in Subsections I(1) or (2) above, modification(s) to the
provisions of this section may be requested in the form of an
application for grant of a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
(4) In approving any application pursuant to Subsections I(2) or (3)
above, the Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Supervisors, as
applicable, as a condition of approval of such application, may
permit specific modification(s) to the provisions of this section
subject to the following:
(a) The Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Supervisors, as
applicable, shall determine that the specific nature of the
lawful use or activity, existing site conditions, and/or safety
considerations warrant such modification(s); and
(b) Permitted modifications shall be consistent with the purposes
of this section.
A. Except as noted in Subsection B below, the following shall apply to
specified uses and properties within the Township, between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., plus all day Sunday and legal holidays.
(1) There shall be no nonresidential off-street loading operation.
(2) There shall be no operation of a vehicle in excess of 8,600 pounds
on the property, nor idling of any motor of such vehicle.
(3) There shall be no outside operation for nonresidential purposes of
any powered equipment, mobile refrigeration unit, powered
handtool, forklift, tractor, or other similar vehicle except for lawn
maintenance, snow removal, or emergency services or repairs.
(4) Other than police, fire, public service, or ambulance operators, no
person shall sound any horn, bell, gong, siren, or whistle or make
other unnecessarily loud noises except when reasonably required
to prevent accidents.
(5) There shall be no outdoor loudspeakers or similar amplification
which may be heard beyond the property line.
§ 170-1514 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1515
1:685
§ 170-1516. Keeping of animals. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
B. The restrictions established in Subsection A above, shall not be applied
to agricultural operations on properties within the Township.
Agriculture shall be as defined and regulated by this chapter.
C. For any proposed or existing use of land in which potential or actual
noise impacts need amelioration, the means to ameliorate such impacts
shall be proposed by the applicant and reviewed by the Township on a
case-by-case basis. The use of berms, existing and installed vegetation,
fencing or similar enclosure, etc., shall be considered by the Township
and, where deemed suitable, may permit modification or waiver of
restrictions in Subsection A above.
D. Noise impacts upon dwellings. [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(1) Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., there shall be no
exterior construction of buildings, driveways or parking lots or use
of related construction vehicles or any commercial or industrial
operations or any truck loading or unloading activities that create a
noise level exceeding 55 A-weighted decibels at the exterior walls
of any dwelling.
(2) Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., no commercial or
industrial operation or truck loading or unloading activities shall
create a noise level exceeding 63 A-weighted decibels at the
exterior walls of any dwelling.
(3) This § 170-1515D shall not regulate emergency repairs.
A. In conjunction with agriculture.
(1) Except as stipulated in Subsection A(2), below, livestock and other
animals utilized as part of an agricultural operation may be kept, so
long as the property on which they are kept is not less than three
acres in size and all applicable requirements of Subsection C below
are complied with.
(2) The operation of any feed lot or pig farm, or the keeping of pigs or
swine, shall be permitted so long as the property is not less than 10
acres. In addition, no such activities shall be conducted closer than
200 feet from any property line, and the area devoted to such uses
shall be completely enclosed by fencing.
(3) If a use involves an average of more than three animal equivalent
units of livestock or poultry per acre of contiguous lot area, then a
minimum lot area of 20 acres and special exception approval shall
be required. Animal equivalent units shall be calculated using
average animal weights as provided in State Nutrient Management
Regulations. The raising of minks shall be prohibited. This
§ 170-1515 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1516
1:686
§ 170-1517. Groundwater supply and protection.
§ 170-1516A(3) shall not apply to the keeping of horses or ponies
under § 170-1516B.
B. Within any residential district, a horse barn, as defined by this chapter,
shall be permitted on any property where the lot area is three acres or
greater. A minimum of three acres is required to keep one horse or
pony. For each acre of lot area greater than three acres, one additional
horse, pony or similar animal may be kept. Such animals may be owned
by the occupant of the dwelling or boarded for other persons, and may
be rented out for horseback riding.
C. General standards applicable to all properties on which animals are
kept.
(1) No animals of any kind shall be kept in any structure or elsewhere
on the premises in a manner likely to cause excessive noise,
unhealthy or unsanitary conditions, pollution of groundwater or
surface water, or pollution of stormwater runoff leaving the
property.
(2) Permanent shelter for animals shall be provided in agricultural
areas, as appropriate. Permanent shelter shall be provided for all
animals in residential areas. Such shelter shall be of sufficient size
for good sanitation practices and shall be equipped with adequate
facilities for food, water, and manure removal and handling for the
number and type(s) of animals kept. The location of shelter for
small domestic animals shall conform to setback standards
otherwise applicable to accessory structures. Shelter for all other
animals shall be located not less than 100 feet from any lot line.
(3) A fenced or otherwise enclosed outside area shall be provided
which is capable of containing the animals kept and which is of
sufficient size and properly located for good sanitation practices.
Materials used for fencing shall be of sufficient sturdiness and
properly designed, installed, and maintained so as to prevent
straying.
(4) Any keeping of eight or more dogs age three months or older shall
require a minimum lot area of 10 acres, and any pens used for such
dogs shall be set back a minimum of 250 feet from any lot line,
except in connection with permitted veterinary services or a pet
store. [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
A. For any use permitted under the terms of this chapter that will
necessitate approval as a subdivision or land development, the
standards governing water supply as currently applicable under PA
DEP regulations, DRBC regulations, EPA regulations, and Chapter 149,
Subdivision and Land Development, and Chapter 80, Erosion, Sediment
Control and Grading, shall be applicable.
§ 170-1516 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1517
1:687
B. For any nonresidential use that does not involve approval as a
subdivision or land development, including in particular any individual
commercial structure or water-related outdoor recreation use that
utilizes on-site water, the following shall apply:
(1) The standards contained in Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land
Development, shall be complied with, as deemed appropriate by
the Board of Supervisors upon recommendation of the Township
Engineer. All currently applicable PA DEP and EPA regulations shall
apply.
(2) The Zoning Officer may, as a prerequisite to the issuance of a
building permit, use permit, and/or occupancy permit, advise the
Board to require of the applicant additional information on the
adequacy of the proposed water source, and the potential impacts
of the proposed groundwater removal on any wells relied upon by
neighboring properties.
C. For any use authorized under the terms of this chapter, stormwater
shall be managed in compliance with Chapter 149, Subdivision and
Land Development. Emphasis shall be on retention and infiltration of
stormwater on site, unless this is deemed by the Township to be clearly
impractical or inappropriate in relation to site conditions; any
alternative shall be approved by the Township Engineer.
D. Where any aspect of the water supply system requires a permit from
the Delaware River Basin Commission (including regulations governing
well withdrawal of 10,000 or more gallons per day, as they may be
amended), the Chester County Health Department, or any other agency,
such permit shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a building permit,
use permit, or occupancy permit.
E. Any of the following facilities may be installed, and any of the activities
undertaken, in conjunction with any nonresidential use authorized
under the terms of this chapter, only upon demonstration by the
applicant that all reasonable measures will be taken to minimize the
adverse impacts of the proposed action on the Township's groundwater
resources. To minimize shall not mean to eliminate, but to make the
most substantial effort possible under the circumstances to reduce the
adverse effect of the action required to be minimized.
(1) The below-ground storage of heating oil, gasoline, chemical
solutions or other substances which, if released, would constitute
pollutants to groundwater. The applicant shall demonstrate
compliance with applicable Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and United States Environmental
Protection Agency regulations, as well as applicable regulations of
the Pennsylvania State Police, Fire Marshal Division.
(2) The use of fill containing any material which would represent a
potential contamination hazard to groundwater. Materials shall
§ 170-1517 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1517
1:688
§ 170-1518. (Reserved)
§ 170-1519. Standards for minimum tract and lot area; maximum
density of tract usage. [Amended 5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2;
3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
include, but need not be limited to, wastes identified as hazardous
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) Storage, handling, processing, or disposal of toxic materials or any
other substance with the potential to contaminate groundwater.
The applicant shall also demonstrate compliance with Chapter 75
of the Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, the requirements of Act 108, the
Hazardous Sites Cleanup Act (35 P.S. § 6020.101 et seq), and with
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (P.L. 94-580,
as amended).95
(4) Land grading or construction of buildings or other site
improvements which would directly or indirectly diminish the flow
of natural springs. If warranted, as determined by the Township,
water table data from observation wells shall be provided by the
applicant.
F. Any existing or proposed underground storage tank shall comply with
the requirements of the 1984 Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments
to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, unless specifically
exempted thereunder. Any applicant shall present documentation of his
compliance with the notification and design/construction requirements
of the Act and any regulations promulgated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, and documentation of approval by
that agency.
A. For purposes of calculating the maximum density or intensity of use on
any tract of land proposed for subdivision or land development
subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, the following standards
shall be applied to determine the minimum tract area:
(1) Tract area shall be determined by excluding from the gross area of
the tract any or all of the following, as applicable:
(a) Any area used for gas, oil, natural gas, electric, or
communications transmission facilities, railroad fee-simple
interest, right-of-way or easement whether below or above
ground, that do not serve the tract.
(b) Any area within an existing street right-of-way.
95.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C.A. § 6901 et seq.
§ 170-1517 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1519
1:689
(c) An area measured in acres equal to 75% of the total area
comprising any of the following: [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-4]
[1] Any area subject to floodplain regulations; [Amended
9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
[2] Any area where the slope gradient is 25% or greater;
[3] Any area designated as a wetland.
(d) An area measured in acres equal to 25% of the total area
comprising any area containing seasonally high water table
soils. [Added 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
(2) In the event two or more of the above-named features overlap, the
overlapped area with the most severe reduction shall be counted,
and the overlapped areas shall be counted only once. [Amended
5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
B. The maximum density of use on any tract within a particular zoning
district shall be as follows:
(1) The tract area shall be established according to the procedures of
§ 170-1519A(1) above.
(2) For a proposed residential use, the maximum number of dwelling
units on the tract shall be calculated by multiplying the tract areas
by the appropriate multiplier set forth below. Calculations resulting
in fractions shall be rounded to the next lower whole number.
(a) A/C District.
[1] Standard single-family detached dwelling subdivision:
tract area x 0.5.
[2] Flexible development: tract area x 1.1, except where
bonus density up to a maximum multiplier of 1.5 is
permitted as provided in § 170-904A(2).
[3] Adult community development: tract area multiplied by
1.5, except as provided below. As part of a conditional use
application, as a density bonus, the Board of Supervisors
shall approve an increase in the maximum density above
1.5 dwelling units per acre where the Board is satisfied
that all applicable conditions set forth herein are met. In
no case shall the maximum density be increased to result
in a maximum total greater than 2.25 dwelling units per
acre. Such bonus shall be approved if the applicant proves
to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that the
applicant will complete or fund substantial public
improvements to mitigate one or more significant off-site
impacts of the development or achieve other significant
§ 170-1519 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1519
1:690
community planning objectives, consistent with the
provisions of Subsection B(2)(a)[3][a] below. [Amended
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1]
[a] Substantial public improvements or design
approaches potentially eligible for bonus density
consideration include, but are not necessarily limited
to significant transportation, water supply or sanitary
sewer improvements; provision of substantial open
space in addition to the minimum otherwise required;
protection and/or renovation/reuse of identified
historic resources as part of the development;
provision of land suitable for active recreation, public
or community facilities; or other substantial public
improvement identified by the Township at the time of
the conditional use approval process and which
significantly reduces the need for public expenditures
to achieve clear public need(s).
[b] At the time of conditional use application, the
applicant shall identify the specific proposed
substantial public improvement(s) for which bonus
density is requested, shall indicate the anticipated
cost(s) of completing such improvement(s) and shall
submit plans and/or other documentation sufficient to
demonstrate the applicant's ability to achieve the
proposed improvements. The amount of density bonus
granted for any substantial public improvement(s)
shall be established by the Board of Supervisors as a
condition of approval based on a preponderance of
evidence as follows: bonus density, measured in an
incremental increase in dwelling units, shall be
determined by roughly equating the incremental cost
to the developer of providing substantial public
improvement(s), with a reasonable value to the
developer for the increase in unit count.
[c] Subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors as
provided herein, incremental bonus density shall be
provided in, but shall not be limited to, the following
situations:
[d] Bonus dwelling units for preservation of historic sites
and landscapes. One additional dwelling unit may be
provided for each two acres comprising a lot (or open
space parcel) which contains any Township-, state- or
federally designated historic site or historic building
or any historic site or building included or eligible for
inclusion in the Chester County Historic Sites Survey
and where such acreage otherwise meets all
applicable criteria for open space. The use of this
§ 170-1519 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1519
1:691
bonus shall be limited to no more than four bonus
dwelling units for each distinct historic landscape
preserved and shall be subject to the criteria set forth
in § 170-904A(2)(c)[1][a], [b] and [c].
[e] Bonus dwelling units for historic restoration/
rehabilitation. Where preservation of historic sites, as
provided in § 170-1519B(2)(a)[3][c][i] above, includes
restoration or rehabilitation of historic structures
approved by the Township, one additional dwelling
unit may be provided for each 2,000 square feet, or
portion thereof exceeding 1,000 square feet, of
habitable floor area on all floor levels in the historic
sections of such structures, subject to the criteria set
forth in § 170-904A(2)(c)[2][a], [b], [c], [d] and [e].
[f] Bonus density for provision for additional open space.
Two additional dwelling units may be provided for
each acre, exclusive of floodplain areas, wetland areas
and areas of greater than twenty-five-percent slope, of
common open space that is provided in excess of
applicable minimum open space requirements and
where such open space is permanently restricted from
future development for other than approved open
space purposes, subject to establishment of
conservation easement(s) or other restrictive
covenant(s) acceptable to the Township.
[g] Bonus density for provision for recreational facilities.
Two additional dwelling units may be provided for
each acre of common open space, regardless of any
other open space requirement or bonus, where such
open space is developed and made available to the
public for active recreational use, upon the
recommendation of the Township Park Advisory
Group.
[h] Bonus density for provision for infrastructure
improvements. Additional dwelling units may be
provided where the applicant constructs or funds the
construction of significant public infrastructure
improvements clearly in excess of that which is
required to serve the proposed development,
including but not limited to public sewer and/or water
facilities, public road or highway improvements,
public trails, and structures devoted to public
recreational use. The number of bonus dwelling units
shall be commensurate with the cost of the substantial
public improvements as provided above.
§ 170-1519 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1519
1:692
[i] Where the applicant demonstrates partial
achievement of the substantial public improvements
identified by the Township, the Board of Supervisors,
at its sole discretion, may approve density bonus in
increments reasonably related to the public
improvement or design mitigation to be achieved. No
density bonus shall be granted for any improvements
that an applicant for a development would be required
to complete or fund under a Township, Township
Authority, state or federal requirement. For example,
in the case of public street improvements, no density
bonus shall be granted for improvements to a segment
of an existing street immediately adjacent to the
applicant's property and improvements that would
otherwise be required by the Township and/or the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
[j] Commitment on the part of the applicant to complete
or fund substantial public improvements shall be in a
legally binding form acceptable to the Township
Solicitor.
[4] Continuing care retirement community (CCRC). [Added
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1]
[a] The density limitations established herein shall apply
collectively to all independent living residences and
assisted living residences included in a CCRC. Skilled
nursing beds in a nursing facility that is developed as
a required component of a CCRC shall not be counted
toward any density limitation but shall be subject to
the provisions of § 170-1303.
[b] Maximum base density in a CCRC shall be established
as tract area x 3.
[c] Maximum total density shall be increased above the
base density calculated per Subsection B(2)[4][b]
above, where units are allocated to two-family
dwellings, townhouses (single-family attached
dwellings) or apartments, as follows:
[d] For each unit in the base density allocation, each twofamily
or townhouse dwelling shall be entitled to one
additional two-family or townhouse dwelling unit over
and above the base density calculation.
[e] For each unit in the base density allocation, each
apartment dwelling shall be entitled to two additional
apartment dwellings over and above the base density
§ 170-1519 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1519
1:693
calculation, except where allocated to assisted living
residences.
[f] For each unit in the base density allocation, each
assisted living residence shall be entitled to three
additional assisted living residences over and above
the base density calculation.
[g] Notwithstanding density increases as provided in
Subsection B(2)[4][c] above, the total maximum
density (collective number of all dwellings) shall be
limited to tract area x 8.
(b) R-1 District.
[1] Standard single-family detached dwelling subdivision:
tract area x 1.0.
[2] Flexible development: tract area x 1.1, except where
bonus density up to a maximum multiplier of 1.5 is
permitted as provided in § 170-904A(2).
(c) R-2 District:
[1] Standard single-family detached dwelling subdivision,
served by:
[a] On-site sewage and on-site water: tract area x 1.0.
[b] On-site sewage and off-site water, or public off-site
sewage and on-site water: tract area x 1.45.
[c] Public off-site sewage and off-site water: tract area x
1.98.
[2] Single-family semidetached or two-family detached
dwellings: tract area x 2.9.
(d) R-3 District.
[1] Apartment dwellings.
[a] For areas occupied by dwelling units having one or
less bedrooms: 10 dwelling units per acre of tract
area.
[b] For areas occupied by dwelling units having two
bedrooms: eight dwelling units per acre of tract area.
[c] For areas occupied by dwelling units having three or
more bedrooms: four dwelling units per acre of tract
area.
[d] If there is a mix of dwelling units having different
numbers of bedrooms, then the density shall be
§ 170-1519 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1519
1:694
§ 170-1520. Vibration, odor, dust and burning. [Amended 3-3-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-2]
calculated in proportion with the acreage attributable
to each type of dwelling unit.
[2] Townhouse dwellings: 6.0 dwelling units per acre of tract
area.
(e) M-U District.
[1] Residential uses authorized in the R-1, R-2, or R-3
Districts: as specified in Subsections B(2)(d)[1][b], [c], and
[d] above.
[2] Mobile home park: tract area x four.
(3) For a proposed nonresidential use, the maximum density of use on
the tract shall be as follows:
(a) R-3 District.
[1] Professional or business office: tract area x 0.40 (square
feet of floor area)
(b) M-U District.
[1] Nonresidential uses authorized in the R-3 or C-1 Districts
as specified in Subsection B(3)(a) above, or B(3)(c) below,
respectively.
(c) C-1 District.
[1] Total number of permitted, special exception, or
conditional uses: tract area x 0.5.
[2] Total amount of square feet of floor area per use: lot area
(as determined by § 170-1519C, below) x 0.40.
(4) The maximum density for any other use permitted by right, special
exception, or conditional use shall be as stipulated by the relevant
terms of this chapter.
A. Vibration. No use shall generate vibration that is perceptible by a
person on another lot without the use of measuring instruments. This
subsection shall not apply to occasional blasting that is necessary as
part of construction of streets, buildings and utilities.
B. Dust and odors. No use shall generate odors or dust that are offensive
to persons of average sensitivities when such persons are located on
another lot.
C. Burning. No commercial or industrial use shall conduct outdoor
burning nor any burning that violates state air pollution regulations.
§ 170-1519 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1520
1:695

ARTICLE XVI
Supplemental Regulations
§ 170-1600. Statement of intent.
The regulations in this article are meant to give guidance to those seeking
approval for certain supplemental uses and activities and for uses not
specifically designated within one or more zoning districts. It is the intent
of the Township that, where these uses or activities are authorized, they
comply strictly with standards that have been created to address their
particular impacts and characteristics.
§ 170-1601. Public utility corporations.
This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed building or
extension thereof, or to any land, used or to be used by a public utility
corporation if, upon petition of the corporation, the Public Utility
Commission shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or
proposed situation or use of the building or land in question is reasonably
necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public.
§ 170-1602. Automobile service stations.
The following specific development standards shall be met for any
automobile service station, where such use is authorized by this chapter,
so as to control the mode of development and method of operation and to
ensure that the location does not adversely affect the health, safety and
welfare of the community, especially in terms of traffic impacts.
A. Minimum lot area. A service station lot shall contain a minimum area of
two acres or shall contain a minimum of 3,000 square feet for each
pump, whichever is greater. A pump may have more than one hose.
Minimum lot frontage shall be 150 feet.
B. Setbacks. Pump islands and any similar equipment or facilities shall be
set back at least 30 feet from any property line or street right-of-way.
The overhang of canopies may extend to within 20 feet of a property
line, but the supporting structure for such canopies to protect
automobiles positioned for service at pump islands shall be set back at
least 30 feet from a property line or street right-of-way. Such setback
distances shall be in addition to those required by buffer requirements
contained in § 170-1105.
C. Service bays. Service bays shall be limited to one per 7,000 square feet
of site area. All service bays are to be contained entirely within the
principal building. Where any side or rear yard is adjacent to a
residential district, no more than three service bays shall be permitted.
Service bay doors shall not face residentially zoned property.
§ 170-1600 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1602
1:697
D. Noise. Plantings or other noise-abatement procedures may be required,
as stipulated in § 170-1515C of this chapter. [Amended 12-5-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-6]
E. Supplemental services requiring approval as a special exception. The
following activities may be operated in conjunction with the principal
use of a service station where authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with § 170-2108 of this chapter:
[Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1]
(1) Leasing or rental of vehicles, trailers or similar equipment.
(2) Car washing.
F. Trash disposal. All used tires and parts, trash and similar objects shall
be stored within a solid brick or concrete enclosure in the rear half or,
in the case of corner sites, the rear quarter of the site, and shall be
secured against dispersal by wind or water from such site.
G. Gasoline deliveries. No delivery tanker shall park on public right-of-way
during gasoline delivery, nor shall any hose be permitted on the public
right-of-way.
H. Landscaping and buffering. Landscaping and buffering shall be
provided in accordance with §§ 170-1507 and 170-1508 of this chapter.
Landscaping provided along any street frontage must preserve sight
lines for entering and exiting traffic. This does not preclude careful
placement of street trees with high foliage or low growing shrubbery
(below 30 inches).
I. Curb cuts and corner radius. On corner sites, a twenty-foot curb radius
shall be provided, and no point of access shall be located within 100
feet of the street intersection, as measured from center line to center
line. At intersections where a primary flow of right-turn traffic is
anticipated, a longer curb radius may be required, again with a onehundred-
foot minimum separation between any point of access and the
street intersection.
J. Signs. Signs associated with any service station shall be in compliance
with the standards of Article XVIII of this chapter, including in
particular § 170-1806.
K. Self-service islands. No automobile service station shall contain selfservice
islands or pumps at which customers dispense gasoline or other
flammable liquids unless:
(1) An attendant, trained in the dispensing of such liquids, is on duty
and in position to observe the self-service areas and to assist as
necessary; and
(2) There is installed at each self-service island an automatic firesuppression
system, the design and installation of which is
approved by the Fire Marshal.
§ 170-1602 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1603
1:698
§ 170-1603. Accessory uses and structures. [Amended 3-3-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-2]
Uses considered customarily accessory and incidental to any permitted use
under this chapter shall include those generally provided for within the
various zoning districts. In addition, the uses listed herein shall specifically
be deemed accessory in accordance with the following terms:
A. Accessory dwellings. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1;
5-21-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-5]
(1) Specific intent. In allowing opportunities for the creation of
accessory dwelling units, it is the specific intent of this subsection
to address directly the housing needs of small households to make
more efficient use of the Township’s existing building stock and
infrastructure.
(2) Standards for accessory dwellings. Where authorized as a special
exception under the terms of this chapter, accessory dwellings may
be created in accordance with the following standards:
(a) There shall not be more than one accessory dwelling unit
created on any single-family residential lot.
(b) The accessory dwelling unit may be located in the principal
dwelling or in a structure which is accessory to the principal
dwelling and is located on the same single-family residential
lot.
(c) One of the two dwelling units shall be occupied by the owner of
the lot on which both dwelling units are located.
(d) The accessory dwelling unit shall be occupied only by members
of the family of the occupants of the principal dwelling or those
providing care or services to the occupants of the principal
dwelling unit.
(e) The minimum size of an accessory dwelling shall be 500 square
feet of gross habitable area. The accessory dwelling shall
comprise not more than 35% of the gross habitable area of the
principal dwelling prior to creation of the accessory dwelling.
However, in no case shall the accessory dwelling exceed 1,200
square feet, not including any vehicle garage space.
(f) No other alterations to the exterior of the structure shall be
permitted unless necessary for health or safety reasons. No
exterior changes shall be made which, in the judgment of the
Zoning Hearing Board, are not in conformance with the
existing single-family character of the neighborhood.
(g) Except where an off-site sewage system is available, the
applicant shall submit to the Township a permit for an on-site
sewage disposal system issued by the Chester County Health
§ 170-1603 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1603
1:699
Department, certifying that the sewage disposal facilities are
adequate for the projected number of residents. Where the
existing on-site system is found to be inadequate, by the
Department, to serve the projected demand, no approval shall
be given for the accessory dwelling unit until the system is
improved to meet Health Department requirements and a
permit is issued by the Department.
(h) One off-street parking space shall be required for the
accessory dwelling unit in addition to those required for the
principal dwelling. The additional parking space shall not be
located within any required yard area.
(i) To ensure compliance with this chapter, an architectural plan
shall be submitted, accurately drawn to scale, indicating the
location and size of the existing and proposed dwelling units,
parking areas and any proposed exterior alterations.
(j) All accessory dwelling units in the Township shall be subject to
the requirements of §§ 170-2004, 170-2005 and 170-2006
relating to use and occupancy permits.
B. Uses accessory to agriculture.
(1) Greenhouse.
(2) Display and sale of farm products, in accordance with the
following:
(a) At least 50% of such products shall have been grown on the
property on which they are offered for sale or by the family of
the operator.
(b) Parking space for at least three cars shall be provided on the
lot. Where building area exceeds 600 square feet, one
additional parking space shall be provided for each additional
200 square feet of building area.
(c) Sale of farm products shall be conducted either from a
temporary stand, dismantled at the end of the growing season,
or from a permanent building, the location of which complies
with all Township setback standards for that zoning district.
Any temporary structure shall be set back at least 25 feet from
the right-of-way line of the road.
(d) The use shall be on a lot or contiguous lot(s) of at least five
acres in the R-1 District, provided that the lot requirements for
creation of any new lot shall be met. If the lot is not five acres
or more, the use may also occur on a lot that generates more
than $2,000 of annual agricultural revenue.
(e) The use may also include the sale of custom crafts as
supplemental to the farm products.
§ 170-1603 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1603
1:700
(f) The applicant shall prove that any driveway location has
suitable sight distances at entrances/exits to a public street.
(3) Keeping, breeding, and management of livestock and poultry, in
accordance with § 170-1516 of this chapter.
(4) The following accessory uses are permitted for a malt production
use as accessory and subordinate to agriculture on the same
parcel(s) of land which is permitted for and being utilized for
agriculture in the A/C Agricultural/Cluster Residential District,
subject to the following standards in this Subsection B(4) herein,
which shall control over other provisions set forth in
§ 170-1603B(2) and § 170-1609I(2): [Added 9-6-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-5]
(a) Storage, processing and sale of malt and malt products
whether or not the grain was grown on site subject to a
maximum annual production/processing of 2,000 tons of malt.
A report is required to be submitted to the Township on an
annual basis confirming production output.
(b) Malt tasting room on premises for the showcase, promotion,
and sale of malt and malt products as well as any other farm
products grown or produced on premises subject to the
following:
[1] Tastings of malt beverages are permitted on the premises
only in accordance with the Pennsylvania Liquor Control
Board's (PLCB) regulations for beer tastings and subject to
full compliance with all PLCB regulations including
possessing a valid license.
[2] Seating must be available for at least 10 patrons in
accordance with the regulations of the PLCB, not to
exceed 50 indoor seats.
[3] Food must be available for patrons if there will be onpremises
consumption of malt beverages in accordance
with the regulations of the PLCB. To the extent food trucks
are used, they shall be located at a predetermined location
approved by the Township at the time of building permit.
[4] On-premises consumption may occur only between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, subject to
compliance with the Township Noise Ordinance after
10:00 p.m.
[5] Outside seating is permitted for no more than 25 seats.
[6] A permanent designated parking area devoted to servicing
customers and/or visitors shall be provided proximate to
the building used for the malt tasting room. Any additional
§ 170-1603 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1603
1:701
new parking areas shall be reviewed by the Township
at the time of building permit or land development, if
applicable, for appropriate berming and/or screening if
determined to impact surrounding residential properties
in close proximity to same. The designated parking area
shall be provided at a calculation of one space per five
seats and shall be improved in accordance with
§ 170-1703B(l).
(c) Retail area to sell packaged malt, malt products, and malt
accessories including, but not limited to, shirts, hats, and
glassware provided that the maximum floor area of a building
or portion thereof devoted to retail sales shall be 1,000 square
feet. Floor area devoted to retail sales shall include any area
for customer's access and circulation, for the display of
products including floor area devoted to counters, tables,
display cases and similar purposes. Floor area not included in
the area devoted to retail sales would include the malt tasting
room, and the inside floor area for storage and processing of
malt where customer access is restricted except for
instructional tours related to the malt production process. No
display of retail products outside the building or structure shall
be permitted.
(d) Applicant shall prove that any new driveway location utilized
by patrons has suitable sight distance at the entrances/exits to
a public street and shall be subject to PennDOT approval, if
applicable.
(e) If applicable, any and all third-party permits are required to be
submitted at the time of building permit.
C. Uses accessory to residential use, provided that any detached building
that is accessory to a dwelling shall be securely anchored to the ground
or attached to a foundation in such a manner that will resist high winds.
[Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
(1) Private parking space. [Amended 6-3-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-01]
(2) Barn, private stable or other shelter for animals (but not including,
a kennel), in accordance with the terms of § 170-1516 of this
chapter. [Amended 6-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
(3) Private garage, workshop, greenhouse, garden shed, or similar
structure. [Amended 6-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
(4) Home occupation, in accordance with § 170-1605 of this chapter.
(5) Ham radio or television aerials, masts, or antennas; windmills and
similar wind energy conversion systems. Such facilities shall
comply with the height regulations of the applicable zoning district,
§ 170-1603 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1603
1:702
§ 170-1604. Microwave antennae for satellite communication.
Microwave antennae for satellite communication (hereinafter "microwave
antennae") shall be subject to the following regulations:
except as provided through special exception under the terms of
§ 170-1504 of this chapter.
(6) Microwave antenna for satellite communication, in accordance
with the terms of § 170-1604 of this chapter.
(7) Bed-and-breakfast facility, in accordance with the terms of
§ 170-1607 of this chapter.
(8) Vehicle repairs, provided that a residential lot in any residential
district shall not be used for any of the following activities:
(a) To repair more than one motor vehicle per week that is not
registered to a current resident of such lot or a person who is
related to a resident of such lot;
(b) Spray painting or structural body- or framework of a motor
vehicle outside of an enclosed building; or
(c) Other motor vehicle repairs that are perceptible from another
dwelling between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(9) Vehicle sales. No more than one motor vehicle or boat may be
offered for sale on any lot at any one time unless the use is
approved as a motor vehicle or boat sales use.
A. All residential zones. Microwave antennae shall be considered as a
permissible accessory use in the A/C, R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts, subject
to the following:
(1) The diameter of the microwave antenna shall not exceed 12 feet.
(2) When separately supported, the total height of the microwave
antenna shall not exceed 14 feet.
(3) The microwave antenna may be located only in a side or rear yard
and not closer than 20 feet to any property line.
(4) When roof-mounted, the microwave antenna shall be located on a
portion of the roof sloping away from the front of the lot, and no
part thereof shall project above the ridgeline; provided, however,
that in no event shall a roof-mounted microwave antenna exceed
three feet in diameter.
(5) Not more than one microwave antenna shall be permitted on any
lot. Individual antennae on individual lots shall not be permitted in
residential developments utilizing the cluster or flexible
development options.
§ 170-1603 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1604
1:703
(6) When not roof-mounted, the microwave antenna shall be screened
from adjoining lots by the installation and maintenance of a
completely planted visual barrier of evergreen material, the height
of which (after planting) is at least equal to the height of the
microwave antenna.
(7) Before erection of any such microwave antenna, a permit
application shall be made to the Township and a permit issued in
accordance with § 170-2001 of this chapter.
B. Commercial (C-1) and Multi-Use (M-U) Districts. Microwave antennae
shall be considered a permissible accessory use, subject to the
following regulations:
(1) The diameter of the microwave antenna shall not exceed 12 feet.
(2) When separately supported, the total height of the microwave
antenna shall not exceed 14 feet.
(3) The microwave antenna may be located only in the rear yard and
not less than 25 feet from any property line; provided, however,
that no microwave antenna shall be permitted within that portion
of a rear yard designated or required to be a buffer area by any
provision of this chapter.
(4) Screening shall be provided in accordance with § 170-1508 of this
chapter.
(5) Roof-mounted microwave antennae shall not be permitted to
exceed nine feet in diameter.
(6) Before erection of any such microwave antenna, a permit
application shall be made to the Township and a permit issued in
accordance with the terms of § 170-2001 of this chapter.
(7) Within the M-U District, individual antennae on individual lots shall
not be permitted in integrated townhouse developments.
C. General regulations. In all zoning districts, microwave antennae shall
be subject to the following additional general regulations:
(1) No microwave antenna may be erected in any district or any
location within a district which is prohibited by regulation of the
Federal Communications Commission or other regulatory agency
having jurisdiction.
(2) Microwave antennae shall be properly anchored and installed to
resist a minimum wind load of 30 pounds per square foot of
projected horizontal area. Supports, anchors, and foundations shall
take into account overturning moments and forces created by wind
loading. The safety factor against overturning or sliding for wind
forces on microwave antennae shall be 2.0.
§ 170-1604 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1604
1:704
§ 170-1605. Home occupations. [Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord. No.
97-3]
There shall be two categories of home occupations: "minor" and "major."
Such uses shall be permitted when in accordance with the following
standards:
(3) In no event shall the provisions of this section be construed to
authorize as a permissible residential accessory use a microwave
antenna for satellite communication that is used or intended to be
used for the propagation or transmission of radio or
electromagnetic waves. It is the intent hereof that such microwave
antennae shall be permitted only within the Commercial (C-1) and
Multi-Use (M-U) Districts.
A. General standards applicable to all home occupation classifications.
The following standards shall apply to all home occupations, whether
minor or major:
(1) Operation. A home occupation shall be conducted within a dwelling
which is the residence of the principal practitioner.
(2) Permit. All applicants shall be required to obtain a permit in
accordance with the requirements of § 170-1605C.
(3) Structural appearance. The appearance of the residential structure
or accessory structure shall not be altered or the occupation be
conducted in such a manner which would cause the premises to
differ from its residential character by the use of materials,
construction, lighting, show windows, signs, or advertising visible
outside the premises to attract customers or clients, other than
those signs permitted by this chapter. No interior display of goods
shall be visible from the outside.
(4) Vehicles. The storage of commercial vehicles shall comply with
§ 170-1605A(10) and (11) below.
(5) Storage. There shall be no exterior storage of materials or refuse
resulting from the operation of the home occupation.
(6) Hazardous materials. There shall be no storage or use upon the
premises of toxic, explosive, polluting, dangerous, or other
substances defined as hazardous by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection.
(7) Nuisance. No equipment or process shall be used in a home
occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors,
dust, or electrical interference detectable to normal senses beyond
the property line in excess of levels customarily generated by a
residential use. Only general types and sizes of machinery that are
typically found in dwellings for hobby or domestic purposes shall
§ 170-1604 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1605
1:705
be permitted. No use shall generate any of the conditions listed
above in excess of what is typical in a residential neighborhood.
(8) Burden of proof. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to
prove that the standards of this section will be met. Based upon the
potential nuisances of a proposed major home occupation, the
Zoning Hearing Board may determine that a particular type or
intensity of use is unsuitable to be a home occupation or that the
proposed lot area or setbacks are not sufficient to contain such
nuisances.
(9) Truck traffic. The use shall not require the parking or servicing by a
vehicle with more than 26,000 pounds gross registered vehicle
weight.
(10) Hours. Home occupations shall be conducted in a way that is in
conformance with the provisions of § 170-1515, Noise standards, of
this chapter. This time limit shall also apply to any loading or
unloading of vehicles on the property or on a street that causes
noise to adjoining residents.
(11) Advertising. The address of the home occupation shall not be
advertised in such a way that would encourage customers or
salespersons to come to the property.
B. Determination of classification. The Zoning Officer shall determine
whether a proposed home occupation is minor, major, or prohibited. The
applicant shall be responsible for supplying such information as
deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer to make this determination.
C. Issuance of permits. The following procedure for approval and
permitting shall apply:
(1) Upon determination that the proposed use is a minor home
occupation and is in conformance with the requirements of this
chapter, the Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning permit.
(2) Where the Zoning Officer determines that the proposed use is a
major home occupation and does not meet any or all of the criteria
specified for a permitted home occupation listed in § 170-1605G,
the use shall require review and approval by the Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with the provisions of § 170-2108 and the
criteria of this section. The Zoning Hearing Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards, as it deems necessary, to
implement the purposes of this chapter. Following approval, the
Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning permit.
D. Permit limitations. A home occupation permit shall not be transferable
to another property or to another type of home occupation. The permit
issued shall only be valid for the use and on the property for which it
was originally issued. The permit shall expire five years from the date of
its issuance. Both minor and major permits may be renewed by the
§ 170-1605 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1605
1:706
Zoning Officer if upon review of the renewal application the Zoning
Officer determines that there has been no substantial change in the
scope of the original permit.
E. Prohibited home occupations. The following uses shall not be permitted
as home occupations under any conditions and shall be classified as
commercial uses:
(1) Animal hospital or animal shelter.
(2) Kennel, commercial kennel, or commercial stable.
(3) Boardinghome.
(4) Funeral parlor or undertaking establishment.
(5) Restaurant.
(6) Medical or dental clinic (three or more nonresident employees).
(7) Professional offices (three or more nonresident employees) except
for a major home occupation which is allowed in accordance with
§ 170-1605G(4)(f)[1]. [Amended 11-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-6]
(8) Gift or antique shop.
(9) Rental business.
(10) Furniture stripping.
(11) Auto or small engine repair.
(12) Painting of vehicles, trailers, or boats.
(13) Private school with organized classes.
(14)Welding shop.
(15) Private club.
(16) Sale of firearms or weapons.
(17) Those home occupations that cannot meet any of the criteria of
§ 170-1605F for a minor home occupation or § 170-1605G for a
major home occupation.
(18) Any occupation that the Zoning Hearing Board deems similarly
objectionable in terms of scale and impact.
(19) Other uses of similar character to those listed above.
F. Minor home occupation. Minor home occupations shall meet the
definition of "no-impact home-based business," as that term is defined
by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10107, as
amended, and all of the criteria contained therein, which currently
§ 170-1605 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1605
1:707
provides: [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2; 1-5-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-1]
(1) A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an
accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential
dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic,
whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally
associated with residential use. The business or commercial
activity must satisfy the following requirements:
(a) The business activity shall be compatible with the residential
use of the property and surrounding residential uses.
(b) The business shall employ no employees other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
(c) There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no
stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature.
(d) There shall be no outside appearance of a business use,
including, but not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
(e) The business activity may not use any equipment or process
which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical
or electronic interference, including interference with radio or
television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
(f) The business activity may not generate any solid waste or
sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally
associated with residential use in the neighborhood.
(g) The business activity shall be conducted only within the
dwelling and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable
floor area.
(h) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
G. Major home occupations. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(1) A home occupation that cannot meet one or more of the criteria
listed in § 170-1605F supra shall be defined as a major home
occupation. Where permitted, major home occupations shall
comply with all applicable criteria of this chapter.
(2) Major home occupations which cannot meet all of the following
criteria, are not prohibited in § 170-1605E, supra, and substantially
comply with the following criteria shall be permitted under the
provisions of § 170-2108, Granting of special exceptions. All other
home occupations shall be defined, for the purposes of this section,
as commercial if they do not meet the criteria of the section or
those of § 170-1605F, infra:
§ 170-1605 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1605
1:708
(a) The major home occupation shall be conducted only within a
single-family dwelling or structures accessory to residential
use.
(b) No products or materials used in the major home occupation
shall be stored outside.
(c) An area corresponding to not more than 25% or 600 square
feet of the gross square footage of the dwelling, including all
floors and habitable basement areas, but excluding attic space,
shall be devoted or used for the major home occupation. A
maximum of one home occupation shall be permitted per
dwelling unit.
(d) The Township may require screening of any parking area.
(e) No more than two nonresidents may be employed on-site.
(f) The major home occupation structure shall not be subdivided
from the parent parcel.
(g) The major home occupation shall include an absolute minimum
of two additional off-street parking spaces above the
requirements of Article XVII of this chapter. The applicant shall
prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that the
use will include adequate off-street parking and loading
spaces. If additional parking is needed beyond what can be
accommodated using a residential-style driveway, then the
Township may require that such parking be provided in the
rear of the home, if practical, and may deny the use if such rear
parking cannot be accommodated.
(h) The major home occupation shall not contribute more than
33% additional vehicle trips per day, as defined by the
standards outlined in the Institute of Transportation Engineers
"Trip Generation-An Informational Report," from the dwelling.
The applicant may be required to demonstrate compliance with
this standard by conducting a traffic study.
(i) The Township may require periodic reinspection to ensure
continued compliance with all applicable conditions.
(j) All major home occupations shall comply with the
environmental performance standards in § 170-1506 of this
chapter.
(k) No articles shall be sold or offered for sale on-site except those
produced on the premises.
(l) Commercial delivery and pickup of goods and supplies is
limited to no more than three times per week, exclusive of
normal postal and parcel service typically serving a residential
area.
§ 170-1605 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1605
1:709
(m) There shall be no use of show windows, business displays, or
advertising visible from outside the premises. One sign, no
larger than two square feet in area and consistent in all other
respects with Article XVIII of this chapter, shall be permitted
for major home occupation. The Zoning Hearing Board may
approve an increase in the sign area to four square feet if the
applicant proves such sign would be compatible with the area
and would be necessary to be readable by motorists.
(n) Parking of commercial vehicles is in accordance with
§ 170-1700D of this chapter.
(3) The following are permitted major home occupations, provided
they meet standards of this chapter:
(a) Photography studio.
(b) Offices of professional sole practitioners, when the proposed
floor area comprises more than 25% of the total floor area of
the existing dwelling unit or more than 400 square feet,
whichever is less.
(c) Family day-care homes. In addition to complying with the
standards in Subsection G(1), supra, family day-care homes
must also comply with the following standards. Family day-care
is a home occupation in which a private residence is used for
the care and supervision of between three and five children not
related to the caregiver. When in compliance with the
provisions outlined below and all other applicable
requirements, home day care shall be permitted as a major
home occupation. Day care provided for more than five
children is considered a commercial day-care center for the
purposes of this chapter and is not permitted in residential
districts. Care provided to two or fewer children is considered
babysitting and is not formally regulated.
[1] The owner must be licensed or approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare (DPW) and
must demonstrate compliance with all DPW regulations for
such homes;
[2] A impenetrable safety fence or natural barrier, with a
minimum height of four feet, or other barrier suitable to
prevent children from crossing, shall surround any
requisite outdoor play area used by children or small
animals;
[3] Outside play shall be limited to the hours between 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m.;
§ 170-1605 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1605
1:710
[4] A proper circulation pattern must be established so that
cars picking up and dropping off individuals shall not
impede the flow of traffic off the site;
[5] For home day care intended for children, a minimum
outdoor play area of 100 square feet of contiguous play
area shall be provided for each child. The outdoor play
area shall be located to the side or rear of the property;
and
[6] The minimum lot area for this use shall be one acre.
(d) Catering, provided all food is served off-premises;
(e) Tutoring and instructional services may be permitted as a
major home occupation provided that no more than two
students may be instructed at any one time; or
(f) Dressmaking, sewing, and tailoring.
(4) Major home occupations at the intersection of two arterial streets.
If an existing principal building is within a maximum of 300 feet of
the intersection of the centerlines of two arterial streets, and has
direct access from one or both of the intersecting arterial streets,
then the major home occupation requirements shall be modified as
follows: [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4; 11-7-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-6]
(a) The home occupation practitioner is not required to reside on
the lot. However, the lot shall still contain a dwelling unit.
(b) The following additional uses may be approved as a major
home occupation:
[1] Veterinary office.
[2] Gift or antique shop.
(c) Section 170-1605G(2)(h) shall not apply. As a condition of
special exception approval, the applicant shall prove to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that the traffic
generation, driveway location and site design of the use will
not create a significant traffic safety hazard nor generate
increased traffic congestion.
(d) Any off-street parking spaces developed after the adoption of
this subsection shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from the
existing legal right-of-way of an arterial street.
(e) Signs. Article XVIII shall apply, including but not limited to
§ 170-804A(2)(a).
§ 170-1605 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1605
1:711
§ 170-1606. Institutions.
Institutions, as defined and provided for in this chapter, shall comply with
the following standards:
(f) If the major home occupation is conducted within a structure
listed on the Historic Resources Map, the following additional
provision shall apply:
[1] A professional office with no more than six nonresident
employees may be permitted as a major home occupation
and no more than two-thirds of the gross square footage of
the structure shall be used for such home occupation.
A. A minimum lot area of three acres shall be required for an institution
housing up to four resident/clients and any associated supervisory
personnel.
B. An additional one acre of lot area shall be required above the three-acre
minimum for every two additional resident/clients and associated
supervisory personnel, or any portion of such increment.
C. Minimum requirements for off-street parking shall be those applicable
to a single-family dwelling. The Zoning Hearing Board may require
additional parking for an institution housing more than four resident/
clients and associated supervisory personnel, and may employ as a
guideline the standard of an additional two off-street parking spaces for
each additional four resident/clients and associated supervisory
personnel.
D. The applicant shall demonstrate that all necessary approvals and
permits from the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry have
been obtained or waived, particularly with respect to fire protection,
safety measures, construction standards, and design standards to
accommodate the handicapped. The Zoning Hearing Board may, in the
alternative, authorize approval of the conditional use contingent upon
the requisite approvals from the Department of Labor and Industry
being obtained.
E. The Zoning Hearing Board, in reaching its decision on any request for
approval of an institution, shall consider the proximity of the proposed
use to any other similar institution within the Township and/or to
similar facilities in adjacent municipalities, and shall not approve any
such request where resulting proximity might unduly alter the intended
character of the neighborhood through the relative concentration and
scale of such uses.
F. In addition to the requirements of § 170-1508 of this chapter, there shall
be a fifty-foot buffer strip maintained on the property containing an
institutional use when such use abuts any A/C, R-1, R-2, or R-3 District.
Such buffer strip shall be in addition to any and all applicable area and
§ 170-1605 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1606
1:712
§ 170-1607. Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
The following standards shall apply to the operation of any bed-andbreakfast
facility permitted by this chapter:
bulk regulations, including setback regulations. The buffer strip shall
be planted and shall not include any paved area.
A. A bed-and-breakfast facility shall be permitted only in single-family
detached, owner-occupied dwellings, existing as of the effective date of
this chapter, with a minimum lot area of two acres. A bed-and-breakfast
facility shall be considered an accessory use to such residence.
B. The principal use of the property shall remain that of a single-family
residential dwelling.
C. No more than three guest rooms may be offered on any individual
residential property. No such room shall contain any cooking facilities.
D. There shall be provided one full bathroom (one toilet, wash basin, bath
and/or shower) for each two guest rooms.
E. Length of stay shall be not more than seven consecutive days for any
transient guest.
F. There shall be not more than one employee on the premises at any one
time who is not a member of the household.
G. Meals shall consist of breakfast only, and only for guests of the
establishment. Owners shall comply with all federal, state, and local
requirements for the preparation, handling, and serving of food.
H. Any amenities (swimming pool, tennis court, etc.) shall be solely for the
use of the resident owner and occupants of the bed-and-breakfast
facility.
I. The owner shall maintain a guest register which shall list the names,
addresses, and lengths of stay of all guests.
J. Other than the minimum lot area specified in Subsection A above, area
and bulk standards shall be those that apply to single-family detached
dwellings within the applicable zoning district.
K. In addition to meeting the minimum parking requirements of this
chapter for single-family detached dwellings, there shall be at least one
off-street parking space for each room designated for bed-and-breakfast
use and one space for any employee not a member of the household.
When parking spaces required for the bed-and-breakfast facility total
three or more, such spaces shall be set back at least 15 feet from any
property line and shall be screened from the direct view of any adjacent
residential use by means of vegetative material, fence, wall, or a
combination thereof.
§ 170-1606 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1607
1:713
§ 170-1608. Conversion of dwellings.
L. One sign shall be permitted in association with a bed-and-breakfast
operation. Any such sign shall comply with the standards for home
occupation signs contained in Article XVIII of this chapter.
M. Each bed-and-breakfast facility shall be equipped with smoke detectors
and fire extinguishers in accordance with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry and with the
stipulations of the Township Fire Code.96 Guests shall be provided
information regarding the floor plan of the dwelling and the location of
emergency exits.
N. Except where an off-site sewage system is available, no permit for a
bed-and-breakfast facility will be issued by the Zoning Officer unless
the applicant furnishes written approval from the Chester County
Health Department concerning the adequacy of the on-site sewage
system to serve the increased demand resulting from the bed-andbreakfast
facility.
A. Statement of intent. The intent of this section is to provide alternative
uses for structurally sound, large, and primarily older single-family
detached dwellings that are costly to maintain as a single-family use
and contain an excessive amount of living space for today's decreasing
family size. This section is also intended to increase the supply of
smaller dwelling units and provide for a more efficient use of the
existing housing stock, while protecting the character of sound, stable
residential neighborhoods and preserving the basic character of
dwellings that might otherwise become obsolete.
B. Standards for conversion to other residential use. A single-family
detached dwelling, existing on the effective date of this chapter, may be
converted into and used as a two-family or multifamily dwelling, when
approved as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the terms of Article XXI of this chapter and with the
following stipulations: [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
(1) The owner of the converted structure must reside on the premises.
(2) Site and architectural plans for the conversion of said dwelling
shall be submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board. Where two or
more families are to be housed above the ground floor, such plans
shall bear the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor
and Industry as required by law.
(3) Such plans shall provide adequate and suitable parking spaces for
a minimum of two automobiles per proposed dwelling unit. These
spaces shall not be located between the front lot line and dwelling.
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Fire Prevention.
§ 170-1607 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1608
1:714
§ 170-1609. Agriculture. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(4) Such dwelling(s) shall be subject to the height, width, yard, and
other applicable regulations effective in the zoning district where
the existing single-family dwelling is located.
(5) In no instance shall the lot area for a converted structure be less
than three acres.
(6) There shall be no external alteration of the building except as may
be necessary for reasons of safety. Fire escapes and outside
stairways shall, where practicable, be located to the rear of the
building.
(7) A new dwelling unit resulting from conversion shall have a
minimum habitable floor area of 500 square feet.
(8) Regardless of the size of the existing structure, the total number of
dwelling units following conversion shall not exceed five.
(9) Except where an off-site sewage system is available, the applicant
shall submit a permit for an on-site sewage disposal system issued
by the Chester County Health Department, certifying that the
proposed sewage disposal facilities are adequate for the projected
number of residents.
(10) The Zoning Hearing Board may specify the maximum number of
dwelling units to be created within any such structure, and may
prescribe such further conditions and restrictions with respect to
the conversion and use of such dwelling, and to the use of the lot,
as the Board may consider appropriate.
A. No minimum lot area shall apply to the growing and harvesting of
crops, plants or trees or raising of insects (such as honeybees), or
aquaculture. A use involving the keeping of animals shall meet the lot
area requirements of § 170-1516. The raising of mushrooms shall
require a one-hundred-acre minimum lot area. Unless otherwise stated,
any other agricultural use shall require a minimum of 10 acres. Manure
shall not be kept on-site unless it was generated on-site and is actively
awaiting proper disposal or is being actively used on-site.
B. Maximum impervious cover on any agricultural property shall be 10%.
Both temporary and permanent structures shall be considered
impervious surfaces when computing this percentage.
C. Agricultural buildings (excluding dwellings) shall comply with the
following standards:
(1) Minimum lot width at street line: 300 feet.
(2) Minimum setback from all lot lines: 100 feet.
§ 170-1608 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1609
1:715
(3) Minimum separation from any residential structures on the same
lot: 100 feet.
D. Silos and bulk bins shall be exempted from area and bulk regulations
when attached to a building.
E. No barn or enclosed (fenced) barn yard, mushroom house, or manure
storage shall be established any closer than 100 feet from any property
line. Further, no manure, compost, or material of similar character may
be bulk stored within 300 feet of the boundary of any property used
and/or zoned for residential purposes.
F. Agricultural runoff.
(1) Runoff from agricultural buildings and other impervious surfaces
shall be directed around areas where manure is stored or otherwise
concentrated.
(2) The property shall be graded or otherwise managed so that runoff
as described in Subsection F(1) above shall be confined to the lot.
(3) The storage and disposal of manure shall be prohibited in areas
where continuous or intermittent contact occurs between the
material and the groundwater table.
(4) Storage areas for manure shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any
water supply source and, whenever feasible, shall be located
downhill from it; such storage areas also shall be located a
minimum of 100 feet from any lake or stream.
(5) There shall be an eight-foot grass strip between any road cartway
and any area that is plowed or tilled; the Board of Supervisors may
modify or require additional measures where topography or other
conditions so dictate.
G. The number of dwellings on an agricultural property shall not be
limited, provided the gross density does not exceed one dwelling per 10
acres. Dwellings shall be separated by a minimum of 100 feet.
H. Any agricultural use shall also comply with the keeping of animal
regulations in § 170-1516.
I. As accessory uses to agriculture, the following shall be permitted by
right:
(1) The sale or mixing of seeds, feed and fertilizers;
(2) Storage and processing of crops grown on-site, and
(3) The sale of trees or plants grown on-site, including but not limited
to Christmas trees.
(4) Use of malt, malt production and malt tasting room as provided for
in § 170-1603B(4). [Added 9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-5]
§ 170-1609 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1610
1:716
§ 170-1610. Temporary structures.
A. Temporary dwelling units.
(1) No temporary structure, whether fixed or mobile in nature, shall be
established for any dwelling purpose for any length of time unless
approved as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board. Such
approval shall be granted only where the applicant demonstrates
that a permanent use, in compliance with the applicable terms of
this chapter, is being pursued with due diligence and that the
temporary dwelling will be utilized for the minimum practical time
period and removed immediately upon the expiration of that
period. The maximum allowable time period for keeping a
temporary dwelling unit on the property shall be six months, unless
the Zoning Hearing Board shall, upon further request of the
applicant, grant one extension of that period for a maximum of an
additional six months.
(2) A use permit and an occupancy permit shall be required prior to the
utilization of any such temporary dwelling unit, and shall be issued
only in accordance with the above stipulations. The temporary
dwelling unit shall further comply with all applicable area and bulk
standards for the zoning district in which it is to be situated.
B. Sales and construction trailers.
(1) Temporary structures, located on a tract undergoing development,
that are utilized for construction management purposes may, while
serving that function, remain on the tract only during active
development of the property. Removal shall occur immediately
upon completion of the development process, as determined by the
Township Engineer.
(2) Sales trailers may be located on such a tract only during active
development of the property, but shall be removed no later than
one month following the sale of the last unit.
(3) A use permit and an occupancy permit shall be required prior to the
utilization of any such temporary structure, and shall be issued only
in accordance with the above stipulations. The temporary structure
shall further comply with all applicable area and bulk standards for
the zoning district in which it is to be situated.
C. Tents. This provision shall only regulate tents covering more than 200
square feet of ground area. A tent may be used for a maximum of seven
days in a calendar year for wedding or similar customarily accessory
noncommercial uses and provided a ten-foot setback is maintained. A
tent may also be used for routine and customary accessory uses for an
existing principal commercial use, provided that sight distance and
parking requirements are met, and provided such tent shall be used a
maximum of 30 days in a calendar year. A permit shall be required.
[Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
§ 170-1610 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1610
1:717
D. Temporary uses by conditional use. For temporary structures or uses
that are not specifically permitted by right by this chapter, conditional
use approval by the Board of Supervisors shall be required subject to
the following additional provisions. [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
(1) Existing uses. This § 170-1610D shall not require approval of
temporary uses that were lawfully occurring on a periodic basis
prior to the adoption of this section.
(2) Duration. The Board of Supervisors shall establish a reasonable
limit on the duration, frequency and hours of operation of the use
that is consistent with a truly temporary use that is not more
intensive than the customary practice for such temporary use. In
the case of a special event, the Board of Supervisors should not
approve the use operating for more than six days in any sixty-day
period. The Board of Supervisors may grant a single approval once
for numerous occurrences of an event. Except for reoccurring
special events, a temporary use should not be approved to continue
for more than one year.
(3) Statement from owner. The applicant shall present a statement
from the owner of record of the land accepting responsibility to
ensure that the use or structure is removed once the permit
expires.
(4) Removal. Such structure or use shall be removed completely upon
expiration of the permit without cost to the Township. If the
structure or use is not removed in a timely fashion after proper
notification, the Township may remove the use or structure at the
cost of the person who owns the land upon which the structure or
use is located.
(5) Conditions. The temporary use or structure shall be compatible
with adjacent uses and clearly be of a temporary nature.
(6) Fee. The Board of Supervisors may waive and/or return the
required application fee if the applicant is an Internal-Revenue-
Service-recognized and well-established nonprofit organization,
and the applicant clearly shows that the proposed use is temporary
and will be used to clearly primarily serve a charitable or public
service purpose.
(7) Nonprofit. Only a well-established and Internal-Revenue-Servicerecognized
nonprofit organization proposing a temporary use to
clearly primarily serve a charitable or public service purpose shall
be eligible to receive approval for a temporary commercial use in a
district where that use is not permitted.
(8) Special events. For a special event that will attract significant
numbers of the public, the Board of Supervisors may deny the use if
it determines that the following will not be generally appropriate:
§ 170-1610 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1610
1:718
§ 170-1611. Swimming pools. [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-4]
A permanent or temporary swimming pool shall be located only in the rear
yard or side yard of the dwelling to which it is an accessory, shall be located
at least 25 feet from any lot line, measured from the edge of the water,
and shall be enclosed with a continuous barrier at least four feet in height.
Equipment accessory to the operation and maintenance of a swimming pool
and any structure housing such equipment shall be located at least 15 feet
from any lot line and, where located less than 25 feet from any lot line,
shall comply with § 170-1502F. Where such equipment is not housed in a
structure, it shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way or
neighboring property.
§ 170-1612. Utility uses.97 [Added 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-2]
sanitary and water service, traffic control, off-street parking and
protection of the public health and safety.
A. Surface land uses affiliated with transmission pipelines.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section shall be to:
(a) Accommodate the need for surface land uses affiliated with
transmission pipelines consistent with the intent and necessity
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
Township.
(b) Minimize aesthetic, nuisance and visual impacts of surface
land uses affiliated with transmission pipelines through proper
design, siting and vegetative screening.
(c) Ensure the location of surface land uses affiliated with
transmission pipelines in compliance with applicable
government and industry standards, including standards
administered by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
(FERC), the Pennsylvania Oil and Gas Act (as amended), and
Pennsylvania case law.
(d) Preserve the rural or suburban character of neighborhoods
adjacent to surface land uses affiliated with transmission
pipelines.
(2) Use provisions.
(a) Surface land uses affiliated with transmission pipelines shall
be permitted as a principal use by right in Article X, M-U Multi-
Use District, where underground pipelines are proposed. Such
uses shall meet the dimensional requirements, of Article X, M-
97.Editor's Note: Former § 170-1612, Standards for residential cluster development, as
amended, was repealed 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2.
§ 170-1610 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1612
1:719
U Multi-Use District, excluding setbacks as outlined under
§ 170-1612A(3)(a). Applicants are required to demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Township that the requirements of
Subsection A(3), Standards for surface land uses affiliated with
transmission pipelines, can be met.
(b) Except as otherwise designated in Subsection A(3) below,
surface land uses affiliated with transmission pipelines shall be
permitted as a principal use in all other zoning districts where
underground pipelines exist as of the date of adoption of this
section on properties owned by Westtown Township when
authorized as a conditional use pursuant to Subsection A(3),
Standards for surface land uses affiliated with transmission
pipelines, and Article XX, § 170-2009, Conditional uses. In
addition, such uses shall meet the dimensional requirements,
including but not limited to area and bulk standards, of the
underlying district, excluding setbacks as outlined under
§ 170-1612A(3)(a).
(c) Surface land uses affiliated with transmission pipelines shall
be prohibited on a lot containing an historic resource.
(d) All other uses ancillary to surface land uses affiliated with
transmission pipelines are prohibited unless otherwise
permitted in the zoning district in which the use is located.
(3) Standards for surface land uses affiliated with transmission
pipelines. The following standards will be considered by the
Township prior to permitting surface land uses affiliated with
transmission pipelines:
(a) Setbacks.
[1] Unless otherwise approved by the Board of Supervisors
upon recommendation of the Township Planning
Commission, surface land uses affiliated with transmission
pipelines and all supporting equipment and structures
shall be set back a minimum of 750 feet from residential
buildings and all commercial, industrial and institutional
uses or a minimum of 500 feet from the nearest lot line,
whichever is greater.
[2] Setbacks may be increased by the Board of Supervisors
pursuant to the type of material being managed at the
surface land use affiliated with transmission pipelines and
whether the use is adjacent to areas of high on-site
population. The Township shall, on a case-by-case basis,
determine whether increased setbacks are warranted
consistent with the potential impact radius (PIR), defined
by the relationship between the diameter of the adjacent
pipeline (and appurtenances) and its maximum operating
pressure (see Exhibit 1), 98whether high on-site
§ 170-1612 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1612
1:720
populations are located in close proximity, and whether
more than one transmission pipeline (such as coupled
lines) will be managed at the surface land use affiliated
thereto.
[a] The PIR approach is applicable only to surface land
uses affiliated with "gas" or "petroleum gas"
transmission pipelines as defined by 49 CFR 192.3.
Surface land uses affiliated with transmission
pipelines carrying "hazardous liquids," as defined by
49 CFR 195.2, shall adhere to the setback standards
contained in this subsection.
(b) Landscaping. The applicant shall provide a plan prepared by a
landscape architect licensed in Pennsylvania showing
landscaping proposed to be installed to screen and buffer
surface land uses affiliated with transmission pipelines. The
landscape plan shall incorporate the use of an eight-foot
decorative fence surrounded by a mix of native vegetation,
including evergreens, shrubbery and trees, which shall not be
less than the height of the fence and shall be of sufficient
density to screen the facility. Existing vegetation in proximity
to surface land uses affiliated with transmission pipelines shall
be preserved to the greatest extent possible. All proposed
landscaping shall comply with the requirements of § 149-925 of
Chapter 149, Subdivision of Land. Applicants shall submit a
visual survey from mutually agreed upon vantage points in
order to support the proposed landscaping plan's mitigation of
visual impacts.
(c) Noise. All noise impacts are subject to the standards set forth
under § 170-1515 and sound produced by the surface land use
affiliated with transmission pipelines shall not result in noise or
vibration clearly exceeding the average intensity of noise or
vibration occurring from other causes at the property line; in
no case shall the sound pressure level exceed 60 dB(A)
[according to the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) "a" weighted scale] at the property line closest to the
land use.
(d) Odors. Odor, vapors or particulate matter produced by the
surface land use affiliated with transmission pipelines shall not
exceed the average emission of such substances occurring
from other causes at the property line. Specific contaminants
shall be regulated by Pa. Code Title 25, Environmental
Protection, Part 1, Subpart C, Article III, Air Resources.
(e) Signage. All signs, other than utility identification signs,
appropriate warning signs, or owner identification signs, shall
98.Editor's Note; Said exhibit is on file in the Township offices.
§ 170-1612 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1612
1:721
be prohibited. There shall be no antennas, advertising, or other
items or material affixed to or otherwise placed on surface land
uses affiliated with transmission pipelines, except as permitted
by the Township.
(f) Parking. If the surface land use affiliated with transmission
pipelines is fully automated, adequate parking shall be
required for maintenance workers. If the site is not automated,
the number of parking spaces shall be equal to the number of
people on the largest shift. Parking spaces shall be located
within the decorative fence and landscape buffer area so they
are substantially concealed when viewed from surrounding
properties.
(g) Lighting. No surface land use affiliated with pipeline utilities
shall be artificially lighted except as required for emergency
night time access. Any such lights shall be shielded so as to
prevent intrusion upon nearby properties.
(h) Engineered drawing submission. Applications for a land use
affiliated with pipeline utilities shall be accompanied by
engineering drawings prepared by an engineer licensed in
Pennsylvania. The applicant shall show that all applicable
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and United States standards
for the construction, operation, and maintenance of the
proposed facility have been met.
(i) Design. The applicant proposing a surface land use affiliated
with transmission pipelines must demonstrate that the
structure has been designed to blend in with or mimic existing
structures in the landscape such as residential outbuildings,
farm structures, or other uses permitted in the underlying
districts.
(j) Visual impact. Any surface land use affiliated with transmission
pipelines shall be designed and constructed so as to mitigate
the visual impact from public roads and nearby uses. In
addition, the color and other visual features of the land use
affiliated with pipeline utilities shall be designed and installed
in such a manner so as to create the least visual impact
practicable. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with
this section, by among other things, providing photographic
perspectives of the proposed site from all sides of the property,
adjacent road ways and neighboring properties (with
permission of the owners).
(k) Emergency response. The applicant for a surface land use
affiliated with transmission pipelines is required to provide the
Township with an emergency liaison that may be reached 24
hours a day, seven days a week, in the event of an emergency.
In addition, the applicant shall also prepare and file with the
§ 170-1612 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1612
1:722
§ 170-1613. Standards for residential care facilities for senior
citizens. [Amended 10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 97-4]
Recognizing the growing need for life-care facilities for the aged, which
includes the need for quality housing, fellowship, health and assisted care
centers, open space, and recreation areas, regulations are promulgated
to permit the development of residential care facilities for senior citizens,
subject to the following:
Township an emergency response plan which shall be followed
in the event of an emergency at the facility.
(l) Need. The applicant for a surface land use affiliated with
transmission pipelines is required to demonstrate, using
scientific and technological evidence, that the facility must be
located where it is proposed in order to satisfy its function in
the company's pipeline system and demonstrate that there is a
need for this facility at the location where it will be located.
(m) State and federal regulation. All applicants, whether
commercial pipeline companies or otherwise, must
demonstrate the submission of sufficient filings and/or receive
sufficient approvals, as required, through the FERC, the
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
(PHMSA), and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania [the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(PADEP) and/or the Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission
(PA PUC)]. Such documentation is not required as part of the
initial application to the Township, but must be included with
the final as-built plans submitted upon approval by the
Township.
(n) Removal of surface land uses affiliated with transmission
pipelines. Any surface land uses affiliated with transmission
pipelines that are no longer licensed and active shall be
removed and the site restored to its original condition at the
owner's expense within 60 days of the last date that the facility
was licensed by the PADEP and FERC. A bond or escrow
account shall be posted with the Township in an amount
sufficient to ensure such removal and site restoration prior to
the construction of the facility. The applicant shall have
prepared and submit to the Township, to accompany the bond
or escrow account, an estimate of the cost necessary to remove
the surface land use facility associated with the pipeline and
restore the site to its preconstruction condition.
A. A building or group of buildings may be used or occupied for any of the
following purposes, and no other:
(1) Residential care facilities for senior citizens providing permanent
residential accommodations including independent living units,
§ 170-1612 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1613
1:723
defined as those having full living accommodations including full
kitchens, whether or not any meals are provided on a communal
basis.
(a) A residential care facility for senior citizens is a facility
operated by a legal entity holding a certificate of compliance
document issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Welfare
("license"), permitting the operation of a personal care home
(PCH) at the location of the facility, according to appropriate
Pennsylvania Department of Welfare program licensure or
approval regulations. The facility shall be used to provide
dwelling units, food and personal assistance or supervision to
adults of advanced age or otherwise who do not require
services in or the services of a Pennsylvania Department of
Health licensed long-term care facility, but who because of
their advanced age or other condition require assistance or
supervision in matters such as dressing, bathing, diet, financial
management, evacuation of a residence in the event of an
emergency, or taking medication prescribed for selfadministration.
(b) Residential care facilities for senior citizens may include
service facilities for senior citizens, including community
facilities, congregate dining facilities, personal care services,
and health care services, including temporary infirmary beds
and care for not more than 10% of the maximum bed
population of the resident-clients of the residential care facility,
or 10 beds, whichever is lesser. These services shall be for the
exclusive use of the residents of the associated facility and
reasonably integrated into the residential care facility.
B. Prerequisites for residential care facilities for senior citizens
development.
(1) The following conditions must be satisfied before an application for
a residential care facility for senior citizens can be considered.
(a) Any tract of land to be so developed shall be in one ownership
or in the case of multiple ownership of the tract, evidence shall
be presented of a written agreement between the parties
involved, and said agreement shall provide in terms
satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors, that the development
will be in accordance with a single plan with common authority
and common responsibility.
(b) The tract must have available sewer and water facilities
satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors. In this regard,
centralized public sewer and public water will be deemed to be
satisfactory to the Board.
(2) Density: No more than 25 beds per acre of lot area shall be
provided.
§ 170-1613 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1613
1:724
(3) Independent living unit density: Limited to two beds per
independent living unit.
(4) Minimum tract area: two acres, as defined by § 170-1519A of this
chapter.
(5) Minimum setback: As stipulated in § 170-802D(2)(b) above.
(6) Maximum floor area ratio: .40.
(7) Maximum impervious coverage: 60%.
(8) Standards for lot width, distance between buildings, building
length, and building height: As stipulated in § 170-802B.
(9) Building construction and placement: The following building
placement restrictions shall apply:
(a) When a portion of the perimeter of the tract abuts a
nonresidential use or district, all structures shall be a
minimum of 50 feet from that portion of the perimeter.
(b) When a portion of the perimeter of the tract abuts any
residential use or district, all structures shall be a minimum of
75 feet from that boundary.
(c) The buildings, streets, driveways, and related structures shall
be laid out and constructed with the intent of encouraging an
attractive facility on a large site with the buildings sited as
compactly as is reasonably feasible and in a manner intended
to duplicate the appearance and feel of a small, integrated
community or village. The physical design of the personal care
facility and the appurtenant improvements shall provide for
adequate control of vehicular traffic, make adequate provisions
for public water, public sewer, erosion and sedimentation
control, stormwater management, fire protection and other
public services and further the amenities of light, air, and
visual enjoyment.
(d) The buildings comprising the personal care facility shall be
architecturally designed and constructed so as to integrate to
the extent that is reasonably practical with the existing
development and existing land use adjacent to the site. If
practical, the buildings shall be oriented with a gable end
facing a street frontage and shall appear to be residential in
nature. No building shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in
height.
(e) There shall be at least two separate means of access to the
personal care facility, each of which is of a sufficient size to
provide uninhibited ingress and egress to emergency vehicles
and which complies with § 149-909A of Chapter 149,
Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 170-1613 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1613
1:725
(f) There shall be provided areas for loading and unloading of
delivery trucks and other vehicles and for servicing permitted
establishments with refuse collection, fuel and other service
vehicles, which areas shall be located at the side or rear of the
buildings, shall be adequate in size, shall be so arranged that
they may be used without blockage or interference with the
use of the accessways or parking facilities, shall be located as
far as possible from the residential areas of the personal care
facility, and shall be constructed so as to be as unobtrusive as
possible and screened from abutting properties through
landscaping berming, fencing, or other appropriate measures.
(10) All parking and service areas shall be located a minimum of 30 feet
from a street right-of-way or other property line, and subject to the
standards prescribed in Article XVII of this chapter.
Notwithstanding those requirements, no service area may abut a
residential use or district unless completely enclosed by solid
fencing, walls, buildings, or a combination thereof, the purpose of
which is to buffer noise.
(11) Minimum requirements for off-street parking shall be specified in
§ 170-1705A(6) of this chapter. In addition, one additional parking
space shall be required for each employee, who works on the shift
with the highest number of employees. [Amended 2-8-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-3]
(12)Off-street parking for residents, employees, and visitors shall be
placed in the rear or on the side of the facility, and shall be made as
unobtrusive as possible through the use of berming and
landscaping that complies with §§ 170-1508 and § 170-1507 of this
chapter. Parking in the front yard shall be limited to spaces to be
used for visitors, resident pickup and dropoff, and shall not exceed
25 spaces.
(13) The greatest dimension in length or depth of a building shall not
exceed 250 feet, and no building connectors shall exceed 80 feet in
length.
(14) In no case shall the width of a building or the aggregate widths of
buildings fronting on a street exceed 50% of the property on that
street. The computation of the width of such buildings shall include
all buildings and parts thereof, which are intersected by a line
projecting from the street line at a ninety-degree angle.
(15) The residential care facility for senior citizens shall be designed to
include individual unit and central control of security, fire and life
safety systems.
(16) The applicant shall demonstrate that all necessary approvals and
permits from the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
have been obtained or waived, particularly with respect to fire
§ 170-1613 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1613
1:726
§ 170-1614. Bus shelters. [Amended 7-6-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1]
To provide refuge for public transit riders from adverse weather conditions,
a bus shelter shall be permitted, provided that all of the following
requirements are satisfied:
protection, safety measures, construction standards, and design
standards to accommodate the handicapped. The Board of
Supervisors may authorize approval of the conditional use
contingent upon the requisite approvals being obtained.
(17) The Board of Supervisors shall consider the proximity of the
proposed use to any other similar institution within the Township
and/or to similar facilities in adjacent municipalities and shall not
approve any such request where resulting proximity might unduly
alter the intended character of the neighborhood through the
relative concentration and scale of such uses.
C. Design standards.
(1) Screening: As required by § 170-1508 of this chapter.
(2) Storage: As required by § 170-1509.
(3) Landscaping: As required by § 170-1507.
(4) Access and traffic control: As required by § 170-1510.
(5) Interior circulation: As required by § 170-1513.
(6) Lighting: As required by § 170-1514.
(7) Signs: As required by Article XVIII.
(8) All utility services are to be installed underground.
A. Such bus shelters shall only be permitted if the entity installing the bus
shelter has a written agreement with the Board of Supervisors. Such
written agreement shall specify at a minimum that:
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall have the right to preapprove the
location(s) of the bus shelter(s); and
(2) An acceptable process is established in advance to address liability
issues, lighting, removal and maintenance responsibilities.
B. A bus shelter regulated by this section shall only be permitted abutting
the Township POC, C-1, C-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts. [Amended
6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-4]
C. A bus shelter shall not be located directly abutting the lot line of an
existing single-family detached dwelling. The bus shelter shall be
located to avoid interference with sight distances as specified in
Township ordinances or any applicable standards of the Pennsylvania
§ 170-1613 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1614
1:727
§ 170-1615. Adult community development (or "adult community").
[Added 5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2]
Department of Transportation, whichever is more restrictive. Bus
shelters shall be permitted in the street right-of-way.
D. Such shelters shall be durably constructed. For security and safety
purposes, the majority of the bus shelter shall be constructed of clear
lexan, plexiglass, or clear tempered safety glass. In addition, the roof
may be constructed of translucent plexiglass or another suitable
material. The view into a bus shelter may only be obstructed from one
of the bus shelter panels, or sides. Bus shelters shall not exceed 45
square feet and nine feet in height.
E. All lighting of the shelter and the signs shall be installed in such a way
that the source of the light is shielded from direct view of abutting
properties and from traffic along the street(s), and so that noxious glare
is not created. Illumination shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles, a minimum
CRI (Color Rendering Index) of 65, and shall be shielded so as to
minimize the off-site impact of the illumination.
F. The only signs that shall be permitted shall be those that conform to
those in this section and permitted by any written agreement, in
addition to maps and schedules providing information regarding the
public transit service. Off-premises outdoor advertising signage in a bus
shelter, except for route map and schedule information, shall be limited
to one double-faced panel, or side, of the bus shelter. Such advertising
and signage shall conform to § 170-1806D and E of this chapter.
[Amended 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-4]
A. Purposes. This section is intended to serve the following objectives, in
addition to the overall objectives of this chapter:
(1) To recognize that developments housing older persons typically
generate lower average rates of vehicle traffic, water usage and
wastewater usage than other types of residential development, and
less impacts upon the public school system, and a lower average
number of residents per dwelling unit, and therefore, that a higher
density is justified for this type of development than other types of
residential development;
(2) To provide for residential developments that meet the growing
needs of older persons, including the need for quality housing,
fellowship, oversight, open space and recreation facilities;
(3) To encourage innovations in residential development so that
growing demand for housing may be met by greater variety in type,
design and layout of dwellings, and by conservation of open space
within such a development in a manner that serves important
public purposes;
§ 170-1614 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1615
1:728
(4) To encourage flexibility in site planning which will respect and
conserve natural resources, such as streams, ponds, floodplains,
groundwater, wooded areas, steeply sloped areas, and areas of
significant beauty or importance to the natural ecosystem; to seek
to incorporate key scenic views into site designs;
(5) To encourage more efficient use of land and public services;
(6) To provide for patterns of development around the perimeter of a
tract that are compatible with neighboring development and the
Township's planned trails and greenway system, while allowing
greater flexibility within the interior of the tract;
(7) To recognize that the impacts of higher density developments can
be offset by substantial public improvements by a developer, the
preservation of important open spaces, and careful site design; and
(8) To maintain the scenic and natural character of Westtown Township
as viewed from major roads, scenic roads and trails.
B. Applicability. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(1) An adult community development shall only be permitted as
follows:
(a) It shall be a conditional use;
(b) It shall only be permitted in the A/C District; and
(c) It shall only be permitted on a tract of land encompassing a
minimum of 75 contiguous acres in single ownership, or single
equitable ownership, at the time of the application. For the
purposes of this subsection, "contiguous" may include land that
is directly abutting or separated by a waterway, street right-ofway
or railroad easement or right-of-way.
(d) It shall only be permitted where located not less than 2,000
feet at any point from any other adult community development
or any continuing care retirement community. [Added
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1]
(2) An adult community development shall meet all requirements of
the A/C District and all requirements of this Zoning Chapter, except
for those provisions that are specifically modified by this
§ 170-1615. Requirements that apply to the adult community
development shall include, but not be limited to, the following
articles of this Zoning Chapter: Articles I, II, III, IV, V (except
§ 170-502), XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII, XIX, XX, XXI, XXII, XXIII, and XXV.
(3) Residents of an adult community development shall be limited by
deed, and by lease where applicable, to households including at
least one permanent resident age 55 years or older, and shall
§ 170-1615 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1615
1:729
prohibit occupancy by any person age 18 or younger, except as
follows:
(a) Individual units may occasionally house persons younger than
age 18, such as grandchildren, provided that they reside within
the unit for less than 120 days in any calendar year.
(b) This § 170-615B shall not require members of a household to
move out of a dwelling unit if they qualified for residency at the
time of their initial occupancy and no longer meet the
requirements for residency because a resident age 55 or older
died, divorced, was placed in a nursing home or experienced a
similar circumstance.
(4) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that an appropriate entity, such as a homeowners'
association, will have appropriate authority through deed
restrictions or similar mechanisms to ensure compliance with the
age limitations.
(5) The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that the proposed development plans are consistent
with the purpose statements set forth in § 170-1615A and
adequately respect and incorporate the important resources of the
site as set forth in § 170-1615F, Site analysis.
C. Density and dimensional requirements.
(1) Overall density. The density of an adult community development
shall be calculated as follows:
(a) The applicant shall provide a survey stating the total amount of
land included within the development tract. At the time of the
conditional use application, land within the development tract
shall be contiguous, and shall only be separated from other
portions of a tract by a waterway, railroad, former railroad
right-of-way or easement, or street right-of-way. The site
survey shall state the total gross tract area and the net tract
area as provided in § 170-1519A.
(b) The density calculation provisions of § 170-1519A and B(2), as
amended, shall apply to an adult community development.
(2) Housing types and dimensional requirements.
(a) An adult community shall only include the following uses:
[1] Single-family detached dwellings;
[2] Side-by-side twin dwellings;
[3] Multifamily dwellings, except that no building containing
more than five dwelling units shall be located less than 200
§ 170-1615 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1615
1:730
feet from any existing public road or highway bordering
the adult community development and not less than 100
feet from the boundary of any adjacent lot or tract
whereupon any single-family detached dwelling exists.
[Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
[4] Community center facility, swimming club and/or
customarily accessory noncommercial recreation areas
and facilities primarily serving residents of the
development and their occasional invited guests;
[5] Structures and uses owned and/or operated by Westtown
Township or an authority created by Westtown Township;
[6] Minor home occupations in accordance with § 170-1605;
and
[7] Only the following customary accessory uses: hot tubs,
decks, satellite dish antennae less than three feet in
diameter, and patios. Household storage sheds and
household swimming pools shall be prohibited.
(b) A maximum of five townhouse dwelling units shall be
connected in any manner in any row.
(c) Each single-family detached dwelling lot shall include a
minimum lot area of 6,000 square feet and have a minimum lot
width of 55 feet. Each single-family detached dwelling shall
have a minimum side yard width of five feet on one side,
provided that the total width of the two side yards shall be an
aggregate total width of 15 feet. Side-entry garages are
specifically encouraged. Each single-family detached dwelling
shall have a minimum rear yard of 20 feet. See accessory
setback provisions in Subsection C(2)(i) below. The creation of
individual fee simple lots are not required for single-family
detached dwellings if the applicant proves there will be an
appropriate system for condominium ownership. In such case,
the physical layout shall be shown as if the dimensional
requirements applied to separate lots for each dwelling unit.
However, the actual establishment of the individual lot lines
shall not be required.
[1] The creation of individual fee simple lots are not required
for single-family detached dwellings if the applicant
proves there will be an appropriate system for
condominium ownership. In such case, the physical layout
shall be shown as if the dimensional requirements applied
to separate lots for each dwelling unit. However, the actual
establishment of the individual lot lines shall not be
required.
§ 170-1615 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1615
1:731
(d) Each twin dwelling unit, four-family dwelling unit, and
townhouse dwelling unit shall have a minimum enclosed
building width of 20 feet, except such minimum width shall be
increased to 28 feet if one or more vehicle garages face onto
the front of the dwelling unit or if a driveway for one or more
vehicles is placed within 20 feet of the front of the dwelling
unit. [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
[1] Each twin dwelling unit, four-family dwelling unit, and
townhouse dwelling unit shall have a minimum usable
outdoor green space, patio and/or deck, contiguous to the
dwelling, totaling 500 square feet available for the
exclusive use of its residents. Such square footage shall
have a slope and drainage that is suitable for outdoor
activities.
[2] Each building containing twin dwelling units, four-family
dwelling units, or townhouse dwelling units shall be
separated from any other principal building by a minimum
of 20 feet along the side and 40 feet along the rear.
(e) Each building shall have a minimum front yard of 25 feet,
unless a larger depth is required by another provision of this
chapter. A maximum of 10 feet of such setback may be intruded
upon by an unenclosed porch. In no other case shall any
building be located within 25 feet of any street right-of-way, or
from the cartway of a private street that does not have a rightof-
way. If the minimum setback for a structure from an exterior
lot line of an adult community development is not regulated by
another section of this chapter, then such minimum setback
shall be 30 feet.
(f) The following minimum setbacks shall apply from the future
street right-of-way line of a public street and from any
perimeter lot line (other than a railroad or former railroad
easement/right-of-way):
[1] Residential buildings and off-street vehicle parking areas:
20 feet plus the specified buffer.
[2] Community center, maintenance building and/or
nonmunicipal recreation building: 250 feet, unless
otherwise waived by the Board of Supervisors when the
applicant proposes use of existing structures or the
renovation and reuse of identified historic resources of
Westtown Township.
[3] Entry guard station: 50 feet.
(g) The total area occupied by a driveway and vehicle parking area
shall not exceed a maximum total of 60% of the front yard of
each dwelling.
§ 170-1615 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1615
1:732
(h) Maximum building height. [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-4]
[1] Except for residential buildings containing apartment
dwellings, no building shall exceed two stories or 38 feet,
whichever is more restrictive. The floor area of any second
story shall not exceed 70% of the total area of the first
floor footprint, including the garage;
[2] Residential buildings containing apartment dwellings shall
not exceed four stories or 50 feet, whichever is more
restrictive. A level used for vehicle parking that is in a
basement level shall not be counted towards the maximum
number of stories. Extensions of roof lines above 50 feet
shall be permitted to accommodate architectural roof
pitches. However, the horizontal area that extends above
50 feet shall not be greater than 15% of the horizontal area
covered by the building on the ground level.
(i) Accessory structures and uses shall meet minimum side and
rear yard setbacks, except as provided in the following
instances, provided Subsection C(2)(f) above is met:
[1] Attached decks, hot tubs, fencing and similar structures
may extend into a rear setback, provided that a ten-foot
minimum rear yard is not occupied by any structure.
[2] Uncovered landings (including but not limited to patios)
may be placed a minimum of 10 feet from a rear lot line.
However, no setback shall apply for porches, patios or
similar structures, whether covered or uncovered, from a
lot line along which dwelling units are attached.
(j) Parking.
[1] See § 170-1705A.
[2] Off-street parking spaces are not required to be on the
same lot as the dwelling unit that they serve, provided that
they are located within 250 feet of such dwelling unit and
provided that there is a legally binding system to ensure
the continued availability of and adequate maintenance of
such parking. For example, parking spaces may be located
in a landscaped parking court or within a common
architecturally compatible carport.
[3] Any common carport or parking court shall be separated
from any dwelling by a minimum landscaped area at least
20 feet in width.
§ 170-1615 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1615
1:733
[4] Off-street parking spaces serving dwellings may be
accessed by alleys, provided that the following
requirements are met:
[a] An alley shall have a minimum paved width of 12 feet
for one-way traffic and 16 feet for two-way traffic;
[b] Each lot shall also abut a paved street;
[c] There shall be a legally binding system to ensure the
continued use of and nonpublic maintenance of the
alley; and
[d] Each alley shall have two points of access to a street.
[5] The minimum parking requirements for a recreation/
community building shall be four off-street parking spaces
for every 1,000 square feet of interior floor area.
(k) Building coverage. The maximum building coverage for each
single-family detached dwelling lot shall be 50%.
(l) Maximum floor area. To discourage the use of dwelling units
for nonsenior households over the long-term, the maximum
floor area of each dwelling unit shall be 3,200 square feet. This
maximum floor area shall not apply to a basement, garages,
and a single-family detached dwelling on an individual lot
which has an area greater than 12,000 square feet.
(m) Apartment dwellings and buildings containing apartment
dwellings shall comply with the provisions of § 170-802B to the
extent not inconsistent with any provisions set forth in this
section. Apartment dwellings shall be included within the
maximum number of dwelling units permitted within an adult
community development as provided herein. [Added
5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
(3) Utilities. Each dwelling unit and any community center within an
adult community development shall be served by public sanitary
sewage service and public water service.
(4) Recreational vehicles.
(a) Any area used for the outdoor storage of two or more
recreational vehicles or boats shall be separated by substantial
primarily evergreen landscaping from view of public streets
and existing dwellings outside of the adult community
development. Any such storage area shall be setback a
minimum of 100 feet from all property lines, other than a
railroad right-of-way/easement.
(b) No recreational vehicle or boat longer than 19 feet in length
shall be stored for more than five consecutive days outdoors on
§ 170-1615 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1615
1:734
any individual residential lot nor adjacent to any individual
dwelling.
(5) Perimeter landscaping and buffer. Substantial landscaping shall be
provided around the outer perimeter of an adult community
development. Such landscaping shall include a buffer area with a
minimum depth of 80 feet. Such buffer area shall be in addition to
the required minimum yards for individual buildings. No walls shall
be permitted within the buffer, except as permitted as a backing to
a permitted sign. Where the buffer area is required along a public
street, it shall be measured from the future street right-of-way.
(a) The buffer area plantings shall be shown on an overall
landscaping plan. Such plan shall be prepared and sealed by a
registered landscape architect and shall meet the
requirements of § 149-922 et seq. of Chapter 149, Subdivision
and Land Development. A complete visual screen is not
required, but instead the landscaping is intended to filter and
soften views of new development from adjacent roads and
homes. Such landscaping and any berming shall be designed to
have a naturalistic appearance with a mix of plant species
along existing perimeter public streets.
(b) The Board of Supervisors shall have the authority as part of the
conditional use approval process to reduce the eighty-foot
minimum width buffer to a minimum of 30 feet in specific
locations where the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Board of Supervisors that the reduced buffer would still meet
the purposes of § 170-1615A. The authority to reduce the
buffer width is intended primarily to address specific portions
of the site where unique topographic conditions minimize the
visual impact of the development from the perimeter of the
site.
(c) Fencing that is mostly open (such as split-rail fencing) and is
constructed of wood or materials with a similar appearance
may be used to supplement the landscaping.
(d) The perimeter landscaping provisions of § 149-925 of Chapter
149, Subdivision and Land Development, shall apply. For an
adult community development, those perimeter landscaping
provisions shall be modified as follows:
[1] In all cases along all perimeter property lines and
perimeter street frontages, the number of canopy trees
shall be increased to a minimum of three canopy trees per
100 linear feet, and the number of shrubs shall be
increased to a minimum of four shrubs per 100 linear feet.
[2] The minimum caliper size for deciduous trees shall be
reduced to three inches, and the minimum height for any
evergreen trees shall be reduced to six feet.
§ 170-1615 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1615
1:735
(6) Any proposed dwelling unit within 200 feet of a lot line of an
existing single-family detached dwelling on another lot shall be a
single-family detached dwelling. However, this requirement shall
not apply if the proposed dwelling would be separated from the
existing dwelling by a public street.
D. Impact studies.
(1) A traffic study meeting the requirements of § 149-804 of Chapter
149, Subdivision and Land Development, shall be required to be
submitted at the time of the conditional use application. In
addition, such traffic study shall consider accident-prone segments
and other off-site traffic safety hazards that may be worsened by
the proposed development.
(2) A community impact study shall be submitted by the applicant at
the time of the conditional use application. This study shall
consider the impact of the development upon water supply
systems, sewage treatment and collection systems, the school
district, Township finances and services, and fire and emergency
medical services. Improvements to such systems shall be identified
that will be necessary to accommodate the impacts from the
development. Particular attention shall be paid to proving that
adequate access will be possible to all dwellings and principal
buildings by emergency vehicles.
E. Open space and public uses. A minimum of 50% of the gross area of the
tract shall be permanently preserved as common open space.
(1) If so stated by the Board of Supervisors as part of the conditional
use approval, a maximum of 10% of the required common open
space may be required to be dedicated to the Township for use as a
nonrecreation public use.
(2) Except as provided in the above Subsection E(1), all of the required
common open space shall meet the requirements for open space:
(a) The 50% open space required by this section shall be in place
of the amount of open space that would otherwise be required
under § 149-921, or its successor section, of Chapter 149,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(b) The minimum open space shall meet the requirements of the
following sections of Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land
Development: § 149-921C(2) through (4), 149-921C(6)(d)
through (g), 149-921D and E.
(c) To count towards the required open space, land must be
landscaped in trees, shrubs and other vegetation; preserved in
woods or natural vegetation; be developed as active or passive
recreational facilities; or approved under Subsection E(3)
below.
§ 170-1615 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1615
1:736
(d) Open space shall be interconnected with common open space
areas on abutting parcels where possible, including provisions
for pedestrian pathways for general public use to create linked
pathway systems within the Township.
(e) Open space areas are not required to be served by their own
off-street parking, unless they are developed for active
recreation facilities.
(3) A stormwater detention or retention basin shall not be permitted to
be counted towards the minimum open space requirement unless
the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors
that such basin shall comply with the provisions of § 170-904A(3)(c)
and would be designed and constructed to serve a recreational use
during the vast majority of weather conditions, or would function as
a scenic open space asset. [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-4]
(4) The following areas shall not be permitted to be counted towards
the minimum open space requirement:
(a) Areas within the lot lines of a fee-simple lot;
(b) Areas within 20 feet of the front, rear or side of a principal
building;
(c) Open space with a width of less than 50 feet, except such width
may be reduced to 20 feet if the open space is part of a
interlinked pathway system; and
(d) Areas involving less than 0.25 acres of contiguous open space.
(5) The applicant shall provide a suitable recreation trail easement
that allows pedestrian access by the public where necessary to
complete a link included within Township Comprehensive Plan or
Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan, or where otherwise
required under Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development.
(6) If land is proposed for dedication to the Township for recreation
purposes, the applicant may be required by the Board of
Supervisors to provide a professional assessment of such land to
determine whether evidence exists of environmental
contamination. If such contamination is found, the applicant shall
ameliorate the contamination in a manner as to make the land
suitable for its intended use.
F. Site analysis. The provisions of § 170-1617, Conservation design, shall
be applicable to an adult community development. The applicant shall
demonstrate compliance with the conservation design process at the
conditional use hearing. [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
§ 170-1615 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1616
1:737
§ 170-1616. Farm-related business. [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
Farm-related business meeting the requirements of this § 170-1616 shall be
an accessory use allowed by special exception on a lot or contiguous lot(s)
of at least 10 acres. The lot must include an existing principal agricultural
use. The following regulations shall apply to such nonagricultural activities:
A. A farm-related business shall be defined as a low-intensity commercial
or industrial activity that functions as a customary accessory use to an
on-site principal agricultural activity. Farm-related businesses are
intended to provide supplemental income to farmers to encourage the
continuation of farming, and to provide needed services to other
farmers.
B. A farm-related business shall be conducted by a resident or owner of
the property, his/her immediate relatives, and a maximum total of three
other on-site employees, in addition to employees of the agricultural
operations. In addition, a barn that was constructed for agricultural
purposes prior to the adoption of this chapter may be leased to a
nonresident for a use meeting these standards.
C. To the maximum extent feasible, a farm-related business should use an
existing building. Buildings that existed prior to the effective date of
this section may be used for a farm-related business. Any new building
constructed for a farm-related business and any new parking area for
trucks shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any lot line of an
existing dwelling, unless a larger setback is required by another section
of this chapter. A farm-related business shall not occupy more than
4,000 square feet of building floor area that is constructed after the
adoption of this § 170-1616.
D. The farm-related business shall not routinely require the overnight
parking of more than one tractor-trailer truck.
E. The business shall not generate noxious odors, noise or glare beyond
amounts that are typically generated by agricultural operations.
Nonagricultural operations shall not routinely occur in a manner that
generates traffic or noise heard by neighbors between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
F. Any retail sales shall only be occasional in nature, and shall occur by
appointment or during a maximum of 20 hours per week. This provision
shall not restrict permitted display and sale of farm products as allowed
by § 170-1603B.
G. Only one sign shall advertise a farm-related business, which shall have
a maximum sign area of 12 square feet on each of two sides, and which
shall not be internally illuminated, and which shall have a maximum
height of eight feet.
§ 170-1616 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1616
1:738
H. The following activities may be granted special exception approval as a
farm-related businesses:
(1) Farm equipment or farm vehicle repair;
(2) Occasional repair of one motor vehicle at a time, beyond those
vehicles owned or leased by a resident of the property or his/her
relative, but not including a junkyard, auto body shop or spray
painting;
(3) Construction tradesperson's headquarters;
(4) Small engine repair;
(5) Woodworking or wood refinishing;
(6) Custom blacksmithing or sharpening services;
(7) Veterinarian offices;
(8) Rental storage of household items and vehicles;
(9) Seasonal special events, such as hay rides and similar Halloween
activities, that do not involve the erection of new permanent
buildings nor mechanized amusement park rides;
(10) A bed-and-breakfast facility meeting § 170-1607, except a
maximum of six guest units shall be permitted under this
§ 170-1616;
(11) Creation of custom crafts;
(12) Seasonal environmental education day camp;
(13) Christmas tree sales, other than those grown on-site; or
(14) Uses that the applicant proves to the Zoning Hearing Board are
closely similar in impacts to the above uses.
I. This subsection shall not regulate agricultural uses that are permitted
under other provisions of this chapter.
J. If an activity would be permitted as either a farm-related business or a
home occupation, then the applicant may choose which set of
provisions shall apply.
K. One off-street parking space shall be provided per nonresident
employee, plus parking for any dwelling. In addition, the applicant shall
prove to the Zoning Officer that sufficient parking will be available for
customers.
L. All existing and new buildings shall maintain a residential or
agricultural appearance, as viewed from a public street.
§ 170-1616 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1616
1:739
§ 170-1617. Conservation Design. [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
M. The use shall not involve the storage or use of highly hazardous, toxic,
radioactive, flammable or explosive substances, other than types
typically used in agriculture or a household.
N. Landscaping shall be placed between any outdoor storage of
nonagricultural materials or products and any dwelling from which
storage would be visible.
O. The applicant shall prove that adequate space will be provided for truck
movements.
A. As part of an application for a flexible development or for any
application for a development of three or more acres of nonresidential
development or for five or more residential lots, the applicant shall
submit the sketches described in this § 170-1617 and shall demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that the following
process was followed in designing the proposed development.
B. This process is intended to show how the special features of the
property relate to resource areas on adjacent lands, and how the
development will properly relate to the features of the land that are
most worthy of conservation. The maps required by this § 170-1617 may
be completed at a sketch plan level of detail, which shall be drawn to
scale, provided that more detailed mapping required by other sections
of Township chapters is also submitted as required. This process is
intended to provide guidance in cases where this chapter allows
flexibility in the placement of buildings and lot lines.
C. Process.
(1) Existing resources and site analysis map. This map shall be
prepared and submitted to accurately show the locations of
wetlands, the one-hundred-year floodplains, slopes of 15% to 25%,
and slopes over 25% (in accordance with § 170-402 of this chapter).
These areas are known as "primary conservation areas." This map
shall accurately show the following:
(a) The wetlands shall be based upon a professional analysis, with
identification of the individual who completed such analysis in
accordance with § 170-401B of this chapter.
(b) The delineation of one-hundred-year floodplains based upon
official floodplain mapping or a more accurate professional
analysis in accordance with § 170-401C of this chapter.
(c) Other important existing resources on the site shall be added
to the map, including woodlands, tree lines, large specimen
trees over 18 inches in trunk diameter, scenic views from
inside the site, ridgelines, and scenic views from existing
§ 170-1616 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1617
1:740
streets and trails. These resources are known as "secondary
conservation areas." The Planning Commission may require
the identification of scenic views beyond those identified by the
applicant. This map, or an accompanying map, shall also show:
[1] Uses of properties that are contiguous or across a street.
[2] Approximate locations of natural features and principal
buildings on those properties that are within 150 feet of
the perimeter lot lines.
[3] Approximate location of areas with a seasonally high water
table, based upon the Soil Survey for Chester and
Delaware Counties or a more accurate professional
analysis.
[4] Locations and descriptions of existing buildings, with a
description of any historic architectural significance of
each, if any.
[5] Adjacent private or public open spaces, parklands and
pedestrian or bicycle trails.
(d) The applicant shall then highlight on a plan the areas that are
proposed to be conserved in some form of open space. Where
common open space is required, it shall be shown as such.
Where common open space is not required, the open space
may be proposed as privately owned areas that are intended to
remain unbuilt. The open space areas should be
interconnected.
(2) Potential development areas concept map. Based upon
consideration of the existing features map and the primary and
secondary conservation areas (as described above), the potential
development areas shall be mapped. These potential development
areas are areas that are best suited for the majority of the
development on the tract. Potential development areas shall not
include any primary conservation areas, except that minor
intrusion into primary conservation areas for land development
purposes may be permitted where otherwise permitted in
accordance with Article IV of this chapter or to provide for
regulated activities permitted by the Commonwealth, i.e.,
permitted stream or wetland crossing or other encroachment.
Potential development areas also shall be delineated so as to
minimize intrusion into secondary conservation areas. Land
development activities and associated land disturbance shall not be
permitted within more than 50% of secondary conservation areas,
except where this standard is modified at the discretion of the
Board of Supervisors as a condition of preliminary or final
subdivision/land development plan approval or conditional use
approval as applicable. In consideration of modification of this
standard, the Board shall consider the nature of the intended land
§ 170-1617 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1617
1:741
use and the anticipated scope of land disturbance normally
associated with such use, as well as any planning or design
measures proposed by the applicant to mitigate any environmental,
aesthetic, or other community impacts resulting from land
disturbance within secondary conservation areas.
(3) Location of building sites. In respect of the primary and secondary
conservation areas described above, the approximate proposed
locations of new homes/principal buildings and, in the case of
nonresidential development, associated parking areas and
accessory structures and uses shall then be selected within defined
potential development areas. It is recognized that on-lot septic
system suitability needs to influence these choices when septic
systems are used. It is also recognized that some intrusions into the
secondary conservation areas may be necessary to allow
reasonable uses of the land, provided that such development is
carefully located and designed to minimize impacts upon the most
important resources and features. Building sites and associated
facilities also should be selected so as to maximize views, including
views into the conservation areas.
(a) While the mapping of existing features required by this
§ 170-1617 is required to be accurate and to scale, the
locations of proposed building sites, associated facilities, lot
lines, roads and trails may be at a sketch plan level of detail for
the purposes of complying with this § 170-1617. A more
detailed site plan shall be required to be submitted as part of a
formal conditional use application or subdivision/land
development plan submission, as applicable.
(b) The applicant shall provide a written and graphic analysis of
how the proposed development will respect and incorporate
the important resources of the site and be coordinated with
resources, open space/trail corridors and views on surrounding
properties. This may involve an overlay map that shows
important natural features and proposed development.
(4) Layout of streets and trails. An efficient street layout shall then be
designed to serve the appropriate building sites. Trails should also
be considered to link together common open spaces, clusters of
homes and other destinations (such as nearby stores, parks and
schools). Building sites should be clustered together to minimize
expensive wetland and creek crossings by roads.
(5) Drawing the lot lines. Lot lines should then be drawn on the site to
encompass the proposed building sites, to result in a development
concept plan. Once this sketch is prepared, then more detailed
engineering may be completed.
§ 170-1617 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1618
1:742
§ 170-1618. Renewable energy systems. [Added 2-17-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-3]
It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the safe, effective and
efficient use of renewable energy systems to reduce the consumption of
utility-supplied energy, heat, hot water, or any combination of the above,
while protecting the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Township, and while protecting adjacent land uses through appropriate
zoning and land-use controls. Non-utility-supplied energy systems not
specified herein may be permitted subject to conditional use approval.
Where, in the course of reviewing a permit application for any renewable
energy system, it is deemed advisable for the Township to retain the
services of the Township engineer or any other consultant, all reasonable
costs therefore shall be borne by the applicant.
A. Geothermal energy systems. Geothermal energy systems shall be
permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following regulations:
(1) Accessory use. A closed-loop geothermal energy system shall be
permitted in all zoning districts as an accessory use, where the
energy supplied is solely for the use of principal and accessory uses
permitted on the subject property. Open-loop geothermal energy
systems shall not be permitted.
(2) Permitting. A zoning permit and building permit, consistent with or
independent of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, shall
be required prior to installation of any geothermal energy system.
Applicable manufacturer specifications and Chester County Health
Department permit shall be submitted to Westtown Township as
part of the application for any permit.
(3) Design. The design, installation and operation of geothermal
energy systems shall be permitted in conformance with all
applicable regulations under Section 501 of the Chester County
Health Department Rules and Regulations and shall conform to
applicable industry standards, including those of the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI), the International Ground
Source Heat Pump Association (IGSHPA), the American Society for
Testing and Materials (ASTM), the Air Conditioning and
Refrigeration Institute (ARI), or other similar certifying
organizations, and shall comply with the Township Building Code99
and with all other applicable Township requirements.
(4) Appurtenances. All or any mechanical equipment (appurtenances)
associated with and necessary for the operation of the geothermal
energy system shall comply with all accessory setbacks for the
zoning district in which the system is installed.
(5) Heat-transfer fluids. Closed-loop geothermal systems shall utilize
heat-transfer fluids conforming to all standards set by the PA
99.Editor's Note: See Ch. 57, Building Construction.
§ 170-1618 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1618
1:743
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). A permanent sign
must be attached to the heat pump specifying that only approved
heat-transfer fluids must be used.
(6) Disrepair. If the geothermal energy system enters into a state of
disrepair, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to
properly maintain the geothermal energy system or to
decommission the system within six months from the date the
system enters such a state or immediately in any case determined
to be a safety hazard.
(7) Abandonment and decommissioning.
(a) Where the use of any geothermal energy system is abandoned,
it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to cap and
seal the in-ground portion(s) of the system. The property owner
may further be required to evacuate (pump out) the fluid(s) in
the system and to fill the borehole(s) with bentonite or an
acceptable alternative.
(b) Any earth disturbance as a result of decommissioning or
removal of any geothermal energy system shall be graded and
reseeded.
B. Outdoor wood-fired boilers. Outdoor wood-fired boilers or outdoor
hydronic heaters, known generally as "OWBs," shall be permitted in the
M-U and A/C Districts on properties of 10 acres or greater, and in the T
District regardless of lot size, subject to the following regulations:
(1) Accessory use. OWBs shall be permitted as accessory uses,
including accessory structures, where the energy supplied is solely
for the use of principal and accessory uses permitted on the subject
property. OWBs shall not be permitted as a principal use in any
district.
(2) Permitting. A zoning permit and building permit, consistent with or
independent of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, shall
be required prior to installation of any OWB. Applicable
manufacturer specifications shall be submitted to Westtown
Township as part of the application for any permit.
(3) Design. The design and installation of OWBs shall conform to
applicable industry standards, including those of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), American National
Standards Institute (ANSI), Underwriters Laboratories (UL), the
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), or other
similar certifying organizations, and shall comply with the
Township Building Code100 and with all other applicable fire and life
safety requirements.
100. Editor's Note: See Ch. 57, Building Construction.
§ 170-1618 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1618
1:744
(4) Compliance with other regulations. At the time of permit
application, the owner of the OWB shall provide evidence
indicating that the maintenance and operation of the OWB will be
in compliance with applicable operations and performance
standards set forth by DEP as well as in compliance with all air
emissions quality standards promulgated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), PA DEP, or other relevant
state or federal agency including emissions of dust and
particulates.
(5) Setback requirements. All OWBs shall be located a minimum
distance of 150 feet from any property line or street right-of-way.
(6) Historic structures. If an OWB is proposed to be located within 100
feet of any historic structure as may be designated by the Township
or determined to be eligible for listing on the National Register of
Historic Places by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum
Commission or the National Park Service, such OWB shall be
subject to conditional use approval at the sole discretion of the
Township upon a finding that the proposed system will not
adversely impact the historical significance or landscape context of
the subject historic structure or historic resource.
(7) Stack. All OWBs shall have a permanent attached stack. The
minimum height of all stacks shall be 20 feet above the ground, and
stacks shall otherwise installed according to the manufacturer's
specifications.
(8) Abandonment or disrepair. If the OWB is ever abandoned or enters
into a state of disrepair, it shall be the responsibility of the property
owner to remove or properly maintain the OWB within six months
from the date the system enters such a state or immediately in any
case determined to be a safety hazard.
(9) Decommissioning. Any earth disturbance as a result of the removal
of the OWB shall be graded and reseeded.
C. Solar energy systems. Solar energy systems shall be permitted, subject
to the following regulations and with the understanding that when a
provision herein does not specifically refer to either accessory or
principal uses, it shall apply to both:
(1) Principal use. A solar energy system shall be permitted as a
principal use subject to conditional use approval in the T-Township
and A/C Agricultural/Cluster Residential Districts only, subject to
the following and as otherwise provided herein; any solar energy
system not meeting the criteria for an accessory solar energy
system shall be considered a principal use.
(a) The maximum area occupied by a principal solar energy
system on any lot shall be 10 acres;
§ 170-1618 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1618
1:745
(b) Notwithstanding lot coverage limitations set forth in the base
zoning district(s), the maximum impervious coverage for a
principal solar energy system and any accessory or
appurtenant structures shall be 20% of the lot area;
(c) A principal solar energy system shall be set back a minimum of
100 feet from any public right-of-way, any lot line, and any
historic structure as may be designated by the Township or
determined to be eligible for listing on the National Register of
Historic Places by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum
Commission or the National Park Service;
(d) The entire facility comprising a principal solar energy system
and its appurtenant and accessory structure(s) and equipment
shall be enclosed by a fence, barrier or other appropriate
means to prevent or restrict unauthorized persons or vehicles
from entering the facility. Clearly visible warning signs shall be
placed on the fence, barrier or at the perimeter of the facility to
inform individuals of potential voltage hazards. All mechanical
equipment associated with the facility shall be completely
enclosed by a minimum eight-foot-high fence with a selflocking
gate.
(e) Proper aisleways between panel cluster sections, at least eight
feet in width, shall be provided for safe access to clusters. DC/
AC inverters shall be installed at each cluster, in addition to an
automatic disconnect device.
(f) A principal solar energy system shall not include the colocation
of batteries or other equipment used to store the
energy output from the system except where approved by the
Board of Supervisors as a condition of conditional use approval
upon satisfaction that adequate safety precautions are
included in the design of the system.
(g) A principal solar energy system shall be serviced by an
adequate water supply for firefighting purposes.
(2) Accessory use. A solar energy system shall be permitted in all
zoning districts as a permitted accessory use, subject to the
provisions set forth herein. A system shall be considered an
accessory solar energy system only if it supplies electrical or
thermal power primarily for the use of principal and other
accessory uses permitted on the subject property, or properties in
the case of community or virtual net metering as provided below.
(a) Individual net metering. When a property upon which an
accessory solar energy system is installed also receives
electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess
electrical power generated and not presently needed for onsite
use may be used by the utility company, as long as the
electrical power generated is used primarily for on-site use.
§ 170-1618 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1618
1:746
The owner of the accessory solar energy system shall provide
written confirmation that the public utility company has been
informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected
customer-owned generator and also approves of such
connection. Systems not connected to the public utility grid
shall be exempt from this requirement.
(b) Community net metering. Community net metering is similar
to individual net metering, but permits the net metering
credits from an accessory solar energy system to be distributed
among two or more electric meters, for example, where several
homeowners cooperatively install a solar energy system. Such
systems shall be permitted subject to conditional use approval,
where all standards set forth herein are met.
(c) Virtual net metering. Virtual net metering may be permitted
subject to conditional use approval where an accessory solar
energy system is installed in a different location from the meter
or meters being credited with the solar energy that is
produced, subject to conformance with all standards set forth
herein. Instead of a direct connection to the accessory solar
energy system, the consumer of electricity is credited with the
amount of electricity that the system offsets through
connection into the grid at its location. Virtual net metering
may apply to individual or community solar energy system(s).
(3) Permitting. In addition to conditional use approval where required,
a zoning permit and building permit, consistent with or
independent of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, shall
be required prior to installation of any solar energy system.
Applicable manufacturer specifications shall be submitted to
Westtown Township as part of the application for any permit.
(4) Design. The design and installation of the solar energy system shall
conform to applicable industry standards, such as those of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI), Underwriters
Laboratories, the American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM), or other similar certifying organizations, and shall comply
with the Township Building Code101 and with all other applicable
fire and life safety requirements.
(5) Grid interconnection. A solar energy system connected to the utility
grid shall provide written authorization from the local utility
company acknowledging and approving such connection.
(6) Transmission lines. All power transmission lines from the solar
energy system to any building or other structure shall be located
underground, unless it can be demonstrated, to the satisfaction of
101. Editor's Note: See Ch. 57, Building Construction.
§ 170-1618 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1618
1:747
the Zoning Officer, in consultation with the Township Engineer, that
this is infeasible.
(7) Appurtenances. All or any mechanical equipment (appurtenances)
associated with and necessary for the operation of the solar energy
system shall comply with all accessory setbacks for the zoning
district in which the system is installed.
(8) Hazardous materials. No solar energy system shall contain
hazardous substances as defined in the Pennsylvania Hazardous
Sites Cleanup Act, 35 P.S. § 6020.101 et seq.
(9) Lighting. Solar energy systems shall not be artificially lighted
except to the extent required for safety or by any applicable
federal, state or local authority.
(10)No advertising. Solar energy systems and appurtenant or
accessory structures shall not display any advertising, except for
reasonable identification of the panel or other equipment
manufacturer, and the facility owner.
(11) Vehicular access. All solar energy systems shall be located where
there is a means of vehicular access from a public or private street.
(12) Glare.
(a) Solar collectors shall be installed so as to prevent glare or
concentrated solar radiation as may otherwise be directed onto
other properties or onto roadways such that a nuisance
situation is created. Antireflective surface materials or
coatings shall be used to preclude glare to the extent feasible.
(b) The applicant or the installer or manufacturer of the solar
energy system shall submit with the application for permit or
conditional use approval, as applicable, a signed statement
including the following:
[1] Certification that the proposed system shall not produce
glare or reflect concentrated solar radiation visible beyond
the property lines of the property upon which the solar
energy system shall be located such that a nuisance
situation is created;
[2] Acknowledgement that, should any glare or concentrated
solar radiation produced prove to be visible beyond the
property lines of the property upon which the solar energy
system shall be located, at any time subsequent to the
installation of the system, such that, in the opinion of the
Zoning Officer, a nuisance situation or safety hazard arises
for another property owner or the travelling public, the
Township may at its discretion require mitigative action or
§ 170-1618 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1618
1:748
may require the removal of the system or portion thereof
generating the glare or reflected solar radiation;
[3] Acknowledgement that, should any mitigation or system
removal deemed necessary by the Township fail to be dealt
with in accordance with the Township's determination
within six months of notification of the landowner and/or
system owner, or immediately in any case determined to
be a safety hazard, the Township may implement such
mitigation or remove such systems as it deems necessary,
costs therefor to be reimbursed within 90 days, and, if not,
a commensurate lien shall be placed upon the property;
[4] Acknowledgement that the obligations set forth herein
shall continue so long as the subject solar energy system
remains in operation and that any subsequent property
owner shall be so notified.
(13) Historic structures. If an accessory solar energy system is
proposed to be mounted on or located within 100 feet of any
historic structure as may be designated by the Township or
determined to be eligible for listing on the National Register of
Historic Places by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum
Commission or the National Park Service, such system shall be
subject to conditional use approval at the sole discretion of the
Township as provided herein and upon a finding that the proposed
system will not adversely impact the historical significance or
landscape context of the subject historic structure.
(14) Solar access easements. A solar energy system shall be located to
ensure solar access without reliance on adjacent properties. Where
any applicant desires to ensure that solar access to a solar energy
system shall not be obstructed over time by permissible uses or
activities on any adjacent property (i.e., by planting or growth of
vegetation, new construction, etc.), it shall be the responsibility of
the owner of the solar energy system to obtain appropriate solar
access easement(s) from neighboring property owner(s) and to
notify the Township upon the recording of any such easement(s).
All solar access easements shall be recorded in the office of the
Chester County Recorder of Deeds.
(15) Roof-mounted systems.
(a) Under no circumstance shall the solar energy system extend
beyond the edge of the roof.
(b) Notwithstanding otherwise applicable height limitations, a
roof-mounted solar energy system may exceed the height of the
ridgeline of any sloping roof upon which it is mounted by no
more than one foot, where the pitch of the roof exceeds a ratio
of 1/3.
§ 170-1618 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1618
1:749
(c) Notwithstanding otherwise applicable height limitations, a
roof-mounted solar energy system on a flat roof, or where the
pitch of the roof is less than a ratio of 1/3, may exceed the
height of the roof at its highest point by no more than four feet,
except where a greater height is approved subject to
conditional use approval.
(d) Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall not be counted as
adding to any impervious coverage calculation.
(e) All roof-mounted systems must have/accommodate safe access
for fire service and maintenance, as deemed appropriate by the
Zoning Officer, Building Code Officer and/or Fire Marshal.
(f) Structural integrity. For any roof-mounted solar energy system,
the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Building Code Officer, by credible evidence, that the structural
integrity of the structure is such that it can adequately support
the roof-mounted system being considered.
(16) Ground-mounted (freestanding) systems.
(a) Principal ground-mounted solar energy systems shall meet the
setback requirements, size, and impervious coverage
limitations set forth in § 170-1618C(1) above.
(b) Accessory ground-mounted solar energy systems shall meet all
setback requirements for an accessory structure for the zoning
district in which installed, and shall be subject to the maximum
impervious coverage limitations of the underlying zoning
district.
(c) Accessory ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not be
installed within the required front yard setback, shall not be
located in the area between the front yard setback and the
principal structure on the lot, nor shall be located along any
street frontage (e.g., in a side yard abutting a street) except
where permitted subject to conditional use approval.
(d) Impervious coverage. For the purposes of this section, all "at
grade" or "above grade" features and facilities relating to
ground-mounted solar energy systems, including
appurtenances, shall be considered impervious surface. The
extent of impervious coverage of sloping panels shall be
measured as equal to their horizontal footprint.
(17) Conditional use approval. In consideration of conditional use
approval where required pursuant to this section, in addition to
review of the standards for conditional use approval set forth in
§ 170-2009D of this chapter, the Board of Supervisors shall be
satisfied that the solar installation will not unduly impact other
property owners or the traveling public or that potential impacts
§ 170-1618 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1618
1:750
are mitigated by design of the system or structure(s) upon which
it is mounted, by distance from points of visibility, by the presence
of intervening topography, vegetation or structures, or will be
mitigated through introduction of landscaping.
(a) Any application for conditional use approval for a principal
solar energy system shall include submission of a visual
analysis demonstrating that the system is designed and located
to meet the objectives stated above.
(b) As a condition of approval, the Board of Supervisors may
require a buffer yard around the perimeter of any facility
comprising a principal solar energy system and its appurtenant
or accessory structure(s) and equipment providing a
continuous visual screen between such facility and any
adjacent property, public right-of-way or historic structure as
viewed by a person standing at ground level.
(18) Abandonment or disrepair. If the solar energy system is ever
abandoned or enters into a state of disrepair, it shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to remove or properly maintain
the solar energy system within six months from the date the system
enters such a state or immediately in any case determined to be a
safety hazard.
(19) Decommissioning. If a ground-mounted solar energy system is ever
removed, any earth disturbance as a result of the removal of the
ground-mounted solar energy system shall be graded and reseeded
to the satisfaction of the Township.
D. Wind energy systems. Wind energy systems shall be permitted in all
zoning districts, subject to the following regulations and with the
understanding that when a provision herein does not specifically refer
to either accessory or principal uses, it shall apply to both:
(1) Principal use. A wind energy system shall be permitted as a
principal use subject to conditional use approval in the T Township
and A/C Agricultural/Cluster Residential Districts only, subject to
the following and as otherwise provided herein; any wind energy
system not meeting the criteria for an accessory wind energy
system shall be considered a principal use.
(a) The maximum area occupied by a principal wind energy system
on any lot shall be 20 acres;
(b) Notwithstanding lot coverage limitations set forth in the base
zoning district(s), the maximum impervious coverage for a
principal wind energy system and any accessory or
appurtenant structures shall be 5% of the lot area;
(c) No principal wind energy system shall be installed at any
location that would substantially detract from or block the view
§ 170-1618 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1618
1:751
of a major portion of a recognized scenic vista, as viewed from
a public road right-of-way or publically accessible parkland or
open space.
(d) The owner of a principal wind energy system shall provide the
Township written confirmation that the public utility to which
the principal wind energy system will be connected has been
informed of the intent to install a grid connected system and
approved of such connection.
(e) The entirety of a principal wind energy system, regardless of
number of components, shall be set back a minimum distance
of 125% of the wind energy system height of the highest
individual structure or system from any public right-of-way, any
lot line, any aboveground electrical transmission lines, or any
occupied structure.
(f) Any individual wind energy structure shall be set back a
minimum distance of 125% of the wind energy system height
from any other wind energy structure except its immediate
appurtenant and accessory structure(s) and equipment.
(g) Height limitations for principal wind energy systems.
[1] The maximum wind energy system height of any individual
wind energy structure shall be 425 feet;
[2] The minimum height of the lowest position of any wind
turbine blade shall be 100 feet above the ground.
(h) All principal wind energy systems shall be built to withstand
sustained winds of 100 miles per hour with a uniform loading
of 50 pounds, or short-duration gusts of up to 150 miles per
hour. An independent structural engineer registered in
Pennsylvania shall attest to the proposed system's ability to
meet this requirement and certify proper construction of the
foundation and erection of the tower.
(i) The entire facility comprising a principal wind energy system
and its appurtenant and accessory structure(s) and equipment
shall be enclosed by a fence, barrier or other appropriate
means to prevent or restrict unauthorized persons or vehicles
from entering the facility. Clearly visible warning signs shall be
placed on the fence, barrier or at the perimeter of the facility to
inform individuals of potential voltage hazards. All mechanical
equipment associated with the facility shall be completely
enclosed by a minimum eight-foot-high fence with a selflocking
gate. Towers supporting principal wind energy
equipment shall be designed and constructed to prevent
unauthorized climbing of any tower. Landscaping will be
provided around all fences as necessary to screen them from
public views and adjoining properties.
§ 170-1618 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1618
1:752
(j) A principal wind energy system shall not include the colocation
of batteries or other equipment used to store the
energy output from the system except where approved by the
Board of Supervisors as a condition of conditional use approval
upon satisfaction that adequate safety precautions are
included in the design of the system.
(k) A principal wind energy system shall be serviced by an
adequate water supply for firefighting purposes.
(l) The potential ice throw or ice shedding for a principal wind
energy system shall not cross the property line on which the
principal wind energy system is located nor impinge on any
right-of-way or overhead utility line.
(m) The facility owner and/or operator shall ensure that the design
and operation of any principal wind energy system avoids any
disruption or loss of radio, telephone, television, cell, Internet,
or similar signals, and shall mitigate any harm caused by the
Wind Energy Facility.
(n) Use of public roads.
[1] The applicant shall identify all state and local public roads
to be used to transport equipment and parts for
construction, operation or maintenance of the principal
wind energy system.
[2] The Township engineer or a qualified third-party engineer
hired by the Township and paid for by the applicant shall
document road conditions prior to construction.
[3] The Township engineer shall document road conditions
again 30 days after construction is complete or as weather
permits.
[4] Any road damage caused by the applicant or its
contractors shall be promptly repaired at the applicant's
expense.
[5] The applicant shall demonstrate that it has appropriate
financial assurance to ensure the prompt repair of
damaged roads.
(o) Local emergency services.
[1] The applicant shall provide a copy of the project summary
and site plan to local emergency services, including paid
or volunteer fire department(s).
[2] The facility owner and/or operator shall abide by all
applicable local, state and federal fire code and emergency
guidelines.
§ 170-1618 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1618
1:753
[3] Upon request, the applicant shall cooperate with
emergency services to develop and coordinate
implementation of an emergency response plan for the
principal wind energy system.
(p) The owner of any principal wind energy system shall maintain
a current general liability policy covering bodily injury and
property damage with limits of at least $1,000,000 per
occurrence and $1,000,000 in the aggregate. Certificates shall
be made available to the Township upon request.
(q) The owner/operator of any principal wind energy system shall
be required to routinely submit to the Township proof of an
annual inspection and maintenance program. Any structural
faults thus noted will be immediately corrected by the owner.
Failure to provide proof of certified inspection will result in
notification to the owner to cease operation and dismantle the
facility as required below.
(r) The owner/operator of any principal wind energy system shall
be required to notify the Township immediately upon cessation
of operation or abandonment of the facility or any portion
thereof. Except for temporary cessation of operation for up to
90 days, such as for maintenance or repair, the owner shall
dismantle and remove from the property all structures no
longer operating. At the time of issuance of the permit for the
construction of the principal wind energy system or any
components thereof, the owner shall provide financial security
in form and amount acceptable to the Township to secure the
expenses of dismantling and removing said structures if not
accomplished by the owner within one year of cessation of
operation.
(2) Accessory use. Accessory wind energy systems shall be permitted
in all zoning districts as a permitted accessory use, subject to the
provisions set forth herein. A system is considered an accessory
wind energy system only if it supplies electrical power primarily for
on-site use of principal or accessory uses permitted on the subject
property and subject to the following:
(a) When a property upon which an accessory wind energy system
is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility
company, excess electrical power generated and not presently
needed for on-site use may be used by the utility company, as
long as the electrical power generated is used primarily for onsite
use. The owner of the accessory wind energy system shall
provide written confirmation that the public utility company
has been informed of the customer's intent to install an
interconnected customer-owned generator and also approves
of such connection. Systems not connected to the public utility
grid shall be exempt from this requirement.
§ 170-1618 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1618
1:754
(b) If an accessory wind energy system is proposed to be mounted
on or located within 100 feet of any historic structure as may
be designated by the Township or determined to be eligible for
listing on the National Register of Historic Places by the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission or the
National Park Service, such system shall be subject to
conditional use approval at the sole discretion of the Township
upon a finding that the proposed system will not adversely
impact the historical significance or landscape context of the
subject historic structure or historic resource.
(c) Height limitations.
[1] The maximum height for an accessory wind energy system
shall not exceed 35 feet except where approved up to a
maximum of 70 feet as a conditional use.
[2] The minimum height of the lowest position of any wind
turbine blade of an accessory wind energy system shall be
15 feet above the ground. If the wind turbine proposed is a
vertical-axis wind turbine (also referred to as a "helix-type"
turbine), the height between the lowest point of the
turbine and the ground may be reduced to 10 feet.
(d) All accessory wind energy systems must, at a minimum, meet
the setback requirements for accessory structures for the
underlying zoning district. In addition, accessory wind energy
systems shall be set back a horizontal distance equal to their
height from any property line or residential dwelling, excluding
any dwelling on the lot on which the wind energy system is
located. No accessory wind energy systems shall be installed
within the required front yard setback and shall not be located
along any street frontage (e.g., in a side yard abutting a street).
Additionally, all accessory wind energy systems must be set
back sufficiently from any aboveground utility lines, radio,
television, or telecommunication towers so as to present no
danger to those lines or structures, as certified by the
applicant's engineer. No portion of any accessory wind energy
system shall extend over parking areas, access drives,
driveways or sidewalks.
(e) The footprint of an accessory wind energy system shall be
calculated as part of the overall lot coverage.
(f) For any roof-mounted wind energy systems, such as microturbine
systems or horizontal- or vertical-axis turbines, the
applicant must demonstrate to the Building Code Inspector, by
credible evidence, that the integrity of the structure is such
that it can adequately support the system being considered.
(g) When an accessory building is necessary for storage cells or
related mechanical equipment, the accessory building shall not
§ 170-1618 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1618
1:755
have a floor area exceeding 200 square feet, and shall comply
with the accessory structure requirements specified within the
underlying zoning district.
(h) No more than one accessory wind energy system (wind
turbine) shall be permitted per lot, except where approved as a
conditional use. A wind energy system made up of a number of
adjacent micro-turbine panels is considered one system for the
purposes of this subsection.
(i) If the accessory wind energy system is ever abandoned or
enters into a state of disrepair, it shall be the responsibility of
the property owner to remove or properly maintain the wind
energy system within six months from the date the system
enters such a state or immediately in any case determined to
be a safety hazard.
(3) Permitting. A zoning permit and building permit, consistent with or
independent of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, shall
be required prior to installation of any wind energy system.
Applicable manufacturer specifications shall be submitted to
Westtown Township as part of the application for any permit or
conditional use application, as applicable.
(4) Design. The design and installation of the wind energy system shall
conform to applicable industry standards, such as those of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI), Underwriters
Laboratories, Det Norske Veritas, Germanischer Lloyd Wind
Energies, the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM),
or other similar certifying organizations, and shall comply with the
Township Building Code102 and with all other applicable fire and life
safety requirements. DC/AC inverters shall be installed at the base
of each wind energy system, in addition to an automatic disconnect
device.
(5) Transmission lines. All power transmission lines from the wind
energy system to any building or other structure shall be located
underground.
(6) Appurtenances. All or any mechanical equipment associated with
and necessary for the operation of the wind energy system shall
comply with all accessory setbacks for the zoning district in which
the system is installed and shall be screened from view of any
neighboring property or public road.
(7) Noise limitations. Wind energy systems shall not generate noise
which exceeds 55 decibels, or 10 decibels above ambient noise, in
any hour, whichever is higher. Noise is measured from the property
line of the closest neighboring inhabited or occupied structure or
nearest habitable or occupied structure setback line on any
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 57, Building Construction.
§ 170-1618 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1618
1:756
abutting property. The ambient sound measurement, known as "Aweighted
sound level," is taken where the noise from the wind
turbine cannot be heard, or with the wind turbine shut down. The
ambient sound level shall be considered the level that is exceeded
90% of the time when the noise measurements are taken. Any
noise exceeding this level may be subject to the nuisance provisions
of Article II of Chapter 168 of the Westtown Township Code.
Notwithstanding the above, the 55 decibel or 10 decibel over
ambient level may be exceeded during short-term events such as
utility outages and/or severe wind storms.
(8) Vibration. A wind turbine shall not cause vibrations through the
ground which are perceptible beyond the property line of the
parcel on which it is located.
(9) Braking. All wind energy systems shall be equipped with an
adequate and redundant braking system to prevent excessive
speed. Such system shall include aerodynamic overspeed controls
(including variable pitch, tip, and other similar systems) and
mechanical brakes. Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a failsafe
mode.
(10) Lighting. Wind energy systems shall not be artificially lighted,
except to the extent required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA).
(11) Colors. Wind energy systems shall be a nonobtrusive color
acceptable to the Township, such as white, off-white or gray.
(12) Shadow flicker. All wind energy systems shall, to the extent
feasible, be sited to prevent shadow flicker on any occupied
structure on adjacent properties.
(13) Climbing. Wind energy systems shall be equipped with an
appropriate anti-climbing device, or otherwise made unclimbable,
to prevent unauthorized access to the system.
(14) Advertising and signage. Wind energy systems shall not be used to
display advertising, signage, banners or similar materials, with the
exception of any manufacturer's labels or warning placards. Any
such sign shall have an area not to exceed four square feet.
(15) Conditional use approval. In consideration of conditional use
approval where required pursuant to this section, in addition to
review of the standards for conditional use approval set forth in
§ 170-2009D of this chapter, the Board of Supervisors shall be
satisfied that the wind energy system will not unduly impact nearby
property owners or the traveling public or that potential impacts
are mitigated by design of the system or structure(s) upon which it
is mounted, by distance from points of visibility, or by the presence
of intervening topography, vegetation or structures.
§ 170-1618 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1618
1:757
(16) Decommissioning. If a wind energy system is ever removed, any
earth disturbance as a result of the removal of the system shall be
graded and reseeded to the satisfaction of the Township.
E. Manure digesters. Manure digesters (also known as anaerobic
digesters) shall be permitted in the M-U and A/C Districts on properties
of 10 acres or greater, and in the T District regardless of lot size,
subject to the following regulations:
(1) Accessory use. A manure digester shall be permitted as an
accessory use only if it supplies electrical or thermal power
primarily for on-site use of principal or accessory uses permitted on
the subject property. A manure digester shall not be permitted as a
principal use.
(2) Permitting. A zoning permit and building permit, consistent with or
independent of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, shall
be required prior to installation of any manure digester. The
applicant shall submit the following to Westtown Township as part
of the application for any permit:
(a) Applicable manufacturer specifications.
(b) Documentation that performance standards for siting to
minimize impacts on neighboring properties have adequately
been addressed, including considerations of odor, prevailing
wind patterns, proximity to nonagricultural properties,
operational noise, and specific hours of operation.
(c) Evidence of all necessary federal and state regulatory
agencies' approvals shall be included with the application.
(d) A letter from the Chester County Conservation District (CCCD)
that 1) states that the applicant's manure digester design has
been reviewed and approved by the CCCD and that all
regulations and requirements of the state manure
management program have been satisfied, or 2) states that
CCCD will not review the design or that no review is required
under applicable laws and regulations. Where a CCCD review
letter has been requested but the CCCD has failed to respond
within 60 days, the applicant shall provide evidence to verify
such.
(3) Design and installation.
(a) The design and installation of any manure digester shall
conform to applicable industry standards and shall comply
with the Township Building Code103 and with all other
applicable fire and life safety requirements.
103. Editor's Note: See Ch. 57, Building Construction.
§ 170-1618 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1618
1:758
(b) Manure digesters shall be designed and constructed in
compliance with the applicable guidelines outlined in the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection's
Bureau of Water Quality Management publication(s), and any
revisions, supplements and replacements thereto by the PA
DEP.
(c) Manure digesters shall also be designed and constructed in
compliance with any other applicable federal, state, county and
Township laws and regulations.
(d) A certified professional, qualified to do such, shall furnish and
demonstrate to the Township compliance with all details of
construction, operation, maintenance and necessary controls
related to the manure digester.
(4) Grid interconnection. When a property upon which the facility is
installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility
company, excess electrical power generated and not presently
needed for on-site use may be used by the utility company, as long
as the electrical power generated is used primarily for on-site use.
The owner of the manure digester shall provide written
confirmation that the public utility company has been informed of
the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned
generator and also approves of such connection. Systems not
connected to the public utility grid shall be exempt from this
requirement.
(5) Operation and performance standards. The proposed use shall be
subject to any applicable operation and performance standards set
forth by DEP.
(6) Setback requirements. Manure digesters shall not be located
within 50 feet of any side property line, within 75 feet of any rear
property line, within 150 feet from any residential structure other
than that of the property owner, or within 100 feet of any public
road right-of-way.
(7) Historic structures. If a manure digester is proposed to be located
within 100 feet of any historic structure as may be designated by
the Township or determined to be eligible for listing on the
National Register of Historic Places by the Pennsylvania Historical
and Museum Commission or the National Park Service, installation
of the manure digester shall be subject to conditional use approval
at the sole discretion of the Township upon a finding that the
proposed system will not adversely impact the historical
significance or landscape context of the subject historic structure
or historic resource.
(8) Lot coverage. The footprint of a manure digester shall be
calculated as part of the overall lot coverage.
§ 170-1618 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1618
1:759
§ 170-1619. Conversion of accessory dwelling unit (ADU) into
rental. [Added 5-6-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
(9) Abandonment or disrepair. If the manure digester is ever
abandoned or enters into a state of disrepair, it shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to remove or properly maintain
the manure digester within six months from the date the system
enters such a state or immediately in any case determined to be a
safety hazard.
(10) Decommissioning. If a manure digester is ever removed, any earth
disturbance as a result of the removal of the manure digester shall
be graded and reseeded to the satisfaction of the Township.
A. Statement of intent. The intent of this section is to provide an
alternative use for a structurally sound, approved, and permitted ADU
whose occupancy was permitted only to related or relative persons as
defined under § 170-201. This section is also intended to increase the
supply of smaller dwelling units and provide for a more efficient use of
the existing housing stock, while protecting the character of sound,
stable residential neighborhoods and preserving the basic character of
dwellings that might otherwise become obsolete.
B. Standards for conversion to residential rental use. An approved,
permitted ADU, either existing on the effective date of this chapter or
approved and permitted thereafter, may be converted into and used as
a dwelling unit for rent, when approved as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the terms of Article XXI of
this chapter and with the following stipulations:
(1) The ADU may be located in the principal dwelling or in a structure
which is accessory to the principal dwelling and is located on the
same single-family residential lot.
(2) A detached ADU shall meet setbacks for an accessory structure for
the zoning district in which it is located.
(3) The minimum size of the ADU shall be 500 square feet, the
maximum size shall be no greater than 50% of the footprint of the
principal dwelling.
(4) The height of the ADU shall not exceed the height of the principal
dwelling.
(5) There shall not be more than one accessory dwelling unit created
on any single-family residential lot.
(6) One of the two dwelling units (either the principal or the accessory)
shall be occupied by the owner of the property, or a family member
of the owner of the lot on which both dwelling units are located.
§ 170-1618 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1619
1:760
(7) At least one paved off-street parking space shall be required for the
accessory dwelling unit in addition to those required for the
principal dwelling. The additional parking space(s) shall not be
located within any required setback area.
(8) Utility billing for the property shall remain under the name of the
property owner.
(9) No other alterations to the exterior of the structure shall be
permitted unless necessary for health or safety reasons.
(10) Except where public sewer is available, the applicant shall submit
to the Township a permit for an on-site sewage disposal system
issued by the Chester County Health Department, certifying that
the sewage disposal facilities are adequate for the projected
number of residents. Where the existing on-site system is found to
be inadequate, by the Department, to serve the projected demand,
no approval shall be given for the accessory dwelling unit until the
system is improved to meet Health Department requirements and a
permit is issued by the Department.
(11) To ensure compliance with this chapter, a site plan shall be
submitted, accurately drawn to scale, indicating the location and
size of the existing and proposed dwelling units, parking areas and
any proposed exterior alterations.
(12) All accessory dwelling units in the Township shall be subject to the
requirements of §§ 170-2004, 170-2005 and 170-2006 relating to
use and occupancy permits.
(13) The rental dwelling unit shall not be occupied by more than one
family per dwelling unit, which shall consist entirely of individuals
who are related to one another as defined under "members of the
same family."
§ 170-1619 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1619
1:761

ARTICLE XVII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 170-1700. General requirements.
A. Applicability
(1) Off-street parking facilities shall be provided whenever:
(a) A building is constructed or a new use is established.
(b) The use of an existing building is changed to a use requiring
more parking facilities, as determined by this article.
(c) An existing building is altered so as to increase the amount of
parking space required, as determined by this article.
(2) Structures and uses in existence as of the date of adoption of this
chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of this article, so
long as the use is not changed nor its extent or density increased.
No parking facility now serving structures or uses shall, in the
future, be reduced below the requirements of this chapter.
(3) All required parking facilities shall be provided and maintained for
as long as the use which they are designed to serve remains in
existence.
B. Decreased parking demand. When a building or structure undergoes a
decrease in the number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating
capacity, number of employees, or other unit of measure specified
hereinafter as a means for determining required off-street parking or
loading facilities, or when the application of the standards herein would
result in a requirement for fewer total off-street parking or loading
spaces than are provided on the subject site, the available off-street
parking and loading facilities may, upon approval by the Township, be
so reduced accordingly; provided, however, that existing off-street
parking or loading facilities may be so decreased only when the parking
or loading facilities remaining would equal or exceed the off-street
parking or loading requirements resulting from application of the
provisions of these standards to the entire building, activity, or
structure, as modified.
C. Increased parking demand. When any building or structure undergoes
a change of use or any increase in the number of dwelling units,
employees, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other unit of
measurement specified hereinafter as a means for determining
required off-street parking or loading facilities, and when such a
change or increase would, through application of the provisions of
these standards, result in a requirement for greater total off-street
parking or loading spaces, such off-street parking or loading facilities
shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking or loading
requirements resulting from application of the provisions of these
§ 170-1700 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1700
1:763
§ 170-1701. Location.
§ 170-1702. Size.
standards to the entire building or structure, as modified in use or
capacity.
D. Front yard parking restriction. No motor home, travel trailer, boat, or
boat trailer shall be parked within any front yard. [Amended 5-2-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-4]
E. Repair, service, or sales use of parking facilities. It shall be unlawful to
utilize any required off-street parking or loading facilities for motor
vehicle repair work, service, display, or sales of any kind, except as
expressly permitted elsewhere in this article.
A. Except as provided under the terms of § 170-1706 of this article, all
parking spaces shall be on the same lot as the principal building which
they serve.
B. No parking or paved area, except for permitted driveways or
accessways, shall directly abut a public street. The minimum setback
from the street line to the parking area shall be equal to that specified
in § 170-1701D of this chapter. Each such area shall be separated from
the street by a curb, planting strip, wall or other suitable barrier
against vehicles. [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
C. A garage may be located wholly or partly inside the walls of the
principal building, or may be attached to the outer walls. If separated
from the principal building, the garage shall conform to all accessory
building requirements.
D. The minimum distance for parking areas, as measured from the street
line, shall be equal to the greater of 1/2 of the front yard building
setback line or the setback prescribed for parking areas in the
particular district in which the parking area is located. [Amended
3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2; 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
A. The following schedule of parking space and layout standards shall
apply to all but commercial/retail parking facilities, in accordance with
this article:
Angle of Parking Row to Driveway Aisle
30° 45° 60° 90°
Depth of parking row 17' 20' 21' 18'
Width of parking space 9.5' 9.5' 9.5' 9.5'
Width of aisle 11'
(1 way)
13'
(1 way)
18'
(1 way)
24'
(1 or 2 way)
§ 170-1700 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1702
1:764
§ 170-1703. Design and maintenance standards.
(1) Parking spaces for commercial/retail uses shall be a minimum of 20
feet in depth and 10 feet in width.
(2) Parallel parking spaces shall be at least 24 feet in length and eight
feet in width.
(3) In the case of churches, schools and office parks, where parking is
at a ninety-degree angle and a twenty-four-foot aisle is provided,
10% of the spaces shall be 9.5 feet by 18 feet. The remainder may
be nine feet by 18 feet. [Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord. No. 94-6]
B. Wheel stops: The Board may approve the use of continuous curbs as
wheel stops and thus measure the size of parking spaces to be two feet
less in length than otherwise required. In such instances, the parking
layout should allow for the vehicle to overhang the curb by two feet;
such overhang area must be clear of all obstructions (signs, trees, etc.)
and may not be regarded as required landscaped area or pedestrian
circulation space.
A. General on-site circulation design standards.
(1) There shall be an adequate, safe, and convenient arrangement of
pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways, driveways, off-street
parking and loading space. Pedestrians moving between buildings
shall not be unnecessarily exposed to vehicular traffic.
(2) Roads, pedestrian walks, bicycle facilities, and open space shall be
designed as integral parts of an overall site design. They shall be
properly related to existing and proposed buildings and
appropriately landscaped.
(3) Landscaped, paved, and comfortably graded pedestrian walks,
appropriate also for use by wheelchairs, shall be provided along the
paths of the most intense use, particularly from building entrances
to parking areas and adjacent buildings. Such walks shall have a
minimum width of four feet.
(4) The materials used in the design of paving, lighting fixtures,
retaining walls, fences, curbs, and benches shall be of good
appearance, easily maintained, and appropriate to their function.
(5) Ramps shall be provided, giving access from parking areas to the
building served, for disabled persons utilizing wheelchairs.
(6) Accessways, parking areas, and loading areas shall have clearly
defined parking bays and traffic circulation lanes designated by
markings, curbs, barriers, and/or landscaped islands. To assist in
traffic channelization, raised islands shall be placed at the ends of
parking bays so that the end of the bay adjacent to a driving aisle or
ring road is clearly delineated. Such islands shall be designed and
§ 170-1702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1703
1:765
landscaped so as not to impair visibility needed for traffic flow
and turning movements. A maximum of 20 parking spaces shall
be permitted without being separated by a landscaped area/island
with a minimum 10 feet width. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
(7) The design of access and traffic control and of interior circulation
shall, in all other respects, comply with the requirements of
§§ 170-1510 and 170-1513, respectively, of this chapter.
B. General on-site parking design standards.
(1) Parking spaces shall have a dust-free, all-weather surface; this
requirement shall be met by paving unless otherwise approved by
the Board of Supervisors. Pervious surfaces such as porous paving,
concrete lattice blocks, or gravel may be substituted if approved by
the Board, e.g., for reserve or overflow parking. Pervious surfaces
shall be the only permitted means of providing parking in areas
subject to floodplain regulations. [Amended 9-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-3]
(2) Parking areas shall have a minimum slope of 1% in any direction to
provide for drainage, and a maximum slope of 5% in any direction
for safety, user convenience, and stormwater management.
(3) All parking spaces shall be marked by durable painted lines at least
four inches wide and extending the length of the space, or by curbs
or other means, to indicate individual spaces. Signs or markers
located on the surface within a parking lot shall be used as
necessary to assure efficient and safe traffic operation.
(4) Lighting shall be provided to illuminate any off-street parking
spaces to be used at night. Lighting facilities shall comply in all
applicable respects with the standards in § 170-1514 of this
chapter.
(5) Parking area landscaping and screening shall be accomplished in
accordance with §§ 170-1507 and 170-1508 of this chapter.
(6) Any person operating or owning a parking lot shall keep it free, as
may be practical, of dust and loose particles and shall promptly
remove snow and ice from the surface of the parking lot. Such
person shall also keep all adjacent sidewalks free from dirt, ice,
sleet, and snow and shall keep the sidewalks in a safe condition for
use by pedestrians.
(7) All signs, markers, or any other methods used to indicate direction
of traffic movement and location of parking spaces shall be
maintained in a neat and legible condition. Any walls or
landscaping, as well as surfacing and curbing of the parking lot,
shall be maintained in good condition throughout their use, and the
Board shall have the authority to prohibit the use of the area for
§ 170-1703 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1703
1:766
§ 170-1704. Handicapped parking. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
Handicapped parking and related facilities shall conform to the
requirements of Pennsylvania Act 235, the Universal Accessibility Act, as
amended.104 In addition, the following regulations shall apply, unless
superseded by further amendments to the aforementioned Act and its rules
and regulations:
parking purposes unless and until proper maintenance, repair, or
rehabilitation is completed.
A. In any parking area where the total number of parking spaces exceeds
five, a minimum of one space for each 25 total spaces or fraction thereof
shall be designed and designated for physically handicapped persons.
Number of spaces: Any parking lot including four or more off-street
parking spaces shall include a minimum of one handicapped space. The
following number of handicapped spaces shall be provided, unless a
revised regulation is officially established under the Federal Americans
With Disabilities Act:
Total number of parking Spaces
on Lot
Required Minimum Number/
Percent of handicapped
Parking Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of required number of spaces
1,001 or more 20, plus 1% of required number
of spaces over 1,000
B. Location. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located where they
would result in the shortest reasonable accessible distance to a
handicapped-accessible building entrance. Curb cuts shall be provided
as needed to provide an accessible route from the handicapped spaces
to an accessible entrance.
C. Minimum size. Each required handicapped parking space shall be eight
feet by 18 feet. In addition, each space shall be adjacent to a five-feet-
104. Editor's Note: See 71 P.S. § 1455.1 et seq.
§ 170-1703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1704
1:767
§ 170-1705. Schedule of required parking.
The following shall be the minimum number of off-street parking spaces
required for each land use, activity, building, or structure permitted by this
chapter. When the determination of the number of off-street parking spaces
results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of 1/2 space or
less should be disregarded and any fraction over 1/2 space shall count as
one space. Parking spaces required on the basis of building floor area shall
apply to gross leasable area as defined by this chapter, unless otherwise
specified. Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be based
on the projected maximum number of employees on duty or residing, or
both, on the premises at any one time, which would include any overlap of
employees at a change of shift.
wide access aisle. Such access aisle may be shared by two handicapped
spaces by being placed between them. However, one out of every eight
required handicapped parking spaces shall have an adjacent access
aisle of eight feet width instead of five feet.
D. Slope. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located in areas of less
than 2% slope in any direction.
E. Marking. All required handicapped spaces shall be well-marked by
clearly visible signs and pavement markings. Blue paint is
recommended.
F. Paving. Handicapped parking spaces and adjacent areas needed to
access them with a wheelchair shall be covered with a smooth surface
that is usable with a wheelchair.
A. Residential and lodging uses.
(1) Single-family and two-family dwellings: Three parking spaces for
each dwelling unit. The Board of Supervisors may require that a
street include sufficient paved width to allow on-street parking
along one or both sides of the street if determined to be necessary
to meet parking needs. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(2) Mobile homes: two parking spaces per dwelling unit.
(3) Townhouses, apartments, and similar multifamily dwellings: 2.5
parking spaces per dwelling unit, 0.5 spaces of which may be
located in convenient overflow areas for guests. The allowable
parking for apartments designed for and exclusively occupied by
individuals over the age of 55 may be reduced to 1.5 parking spaces
per household with the specific approval of the Board of
Supervisors. Garage parking spaces serving a townhouse or
apartment shall only count as 0.5 parking spaces. The Board of
Supervisors may require that a street include sufficient paved
width to allow on-street parking along one or both sides of the
street if determined to be necessary to meet parking needs.
§ 170-1704 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1705
1:768
[Amended 5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2; 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
(4) Motel, hotel: 1.2 parking spaces for each sleeping room or suite
offered for tourist accommodation. Additional parking spaces shall
be provided, equal to 60% of that which is required by this section,
for restaurants or places of assembly which are available for use by
the general public but are located within the hotel or motel.
(5) Nursing home: 1.5 parking spaces for every two beds that can be
provided at maximum design capacity of the facility.
(6) Residential care facilities. [Amended 2-5-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-3]
(a) With 20% or more of the total bed count dedicated to residents
requiring continual health-care services: 1.0 spaces for every
five resident beds or 1.0 spaces for every four dwelling units,
whichever is greater.
(b) With less than 20% of the total bed count dedicated to
residents requiring continual health care: 1.0 space for every
three resident beds or 2.0 spaces for every five dwelling units,
whichever is greater.
(7) Adult community development: Two off-street parking spaces shall
be required for each dwelling unit. However, in the case of
townhouse dwellings, an average of 0.5 spaces per dwelling unit
may be located along interior streets in locations that are
convenient to the dwellings being served, provided that the street
is of sufficient width. [Added 5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2]
(8) Continuing care retirement community (CCRC): In a CCRC, offstreet
parking shall be provided in clear proximity to each use
being served as follows: [Added 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1]
(a) One parking space shall be provided for each employee on the
largest shift; plus
(b) One parking space for every four assisted living residences;
plus
(c) One parking space for every five beds in a nursing facility; plus
(d) Parking spaces for each independent living residence in an
apartment structure in the amount of1.3; plus
(e) Two parking spaces for each independent living residence in a
single-family, two-family or townhouse structure; plus
(f) Additional reserve or overflow parking or parking for guests
and visitors as required by the Board as a condition of
§ 170-1705 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1705
1:769
conditional use approval, based upon evidence demonstrating
the need therefor.
B. Retail and service uses. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(1) Indoor retail businesses: Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used in the conduct of business, plus five parking spaces per 1,000
square feet of floor area of rooms accessible to customers. For a
shopping center, see § 170-1609.
(2) Theaters, recreation centers, swimming pools, skating rinks, and
other public or private recreation and amusement facilities:
(a) One parking space for every three customers (or patrons),
computed on the basis of maximum servicing capacity at any
one time, as shall be determined by the Township, plus one
additional space for every two persons regularly employed on
the premises at a peak period of use.
(b) Specific provisions over and above this standard may be
required for uses, such as movie theaters, involving successive
changes of patrons with a corresponding overlap in parking
required.
(3) Bowling alleys: Five parking spaces per lane.
(4) Banks, credit unions, and related retail financial service
organizations:
(a) One parking space per 75 square feet of floor area devoted to
customer service and related circulation; plus
(b) Parking for the balance of the facility used for office purposes
at a ratio of one parking space per 225 square feet of gross
leasable area.
(5) Restaurant or similar use:
(a) One space per three seats; or
(b) One space per 100 square feet of total floor area, whichever
yields the greater number of spaces.
(6) Carry-out, drive-in, drive-through, or other fast-food restaurant:
(a) Twenty-four parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet of
gross leasable area, plus two parking spaces for every three
employees.
(b) Fas-food restaurants providing drive-through window service
shall be sited in such a manner that at least 10 vehicles can
stand in line awaiting such service without blocking access to
otherwise required parking spaces.
§ 170-1705 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1705
1:770
(7) Automobile service stations: Parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business, plus:
(a) One parking space for each gas dispenser;
(b) Three spaces for each service bay or similar facility; and
(c) One space for every two persons employed on the premises.
(8) Grocery store or supermarket: Six spaces per 1,000 square feet of
gross leasable area, unless part of a shopping center containing an
additional 50,000 square feet or more of retail space, in which case
this requirement shall be considered to be met through compliance
with the overall shopping center requirements, as stipulated in
§ 170-1608.
(9) Funeral home:
(a) One space for every four seats available for persons attending
memorial services; or
(b) One space for every 50 square feet of gross leasable floor area,
whichever yields the greater number of spaces.
(10) Automobile sales:
(a) Spaces for parking of vehicles for sale or lease, which shall not
be required to meet minimum dimension and aisle width
requirements.
(b) One space for customer parking for every 25 vehicles offered
for sale or lease.
(c) One space per employee.
(d) Four spaces for every service bay or similar facility.
C. Offices.
(1) General offices (including office campus as provided in Article XII):
One parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area for
business, professional, governmental, or institutional offices,
including associated storage areas for files, equipment, or office
supplies, but excluding medical or dental offices.
(2) Medical or dental offices or clinic: One off-street parking space
shall be provided per 150 square feet of gross habitable floor area,
except one space per 300 square feet of gross habitable floor area
where medical or dental office(s) are part of a CCRC development
undertaken in accordance with the provisions set forth in
§ 170-1303. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1]
§ 170-1705 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1705
1:771
D. Industrial and warehouse uses: One parking space for each employee
on the shift of greatest employment, or one space for every 500 square
feet of gross floor area, whichever yields the greater number of spaces.
E. Community service uses and places of assembly.
(1) General places of assembly: All theaters, auditoriums, churches,
and other similar places of assembly, including those associated
with public or private educational institutions, shall provide at least
two parking spaces per five seats of the assembly or meeting space
at maximum capacity. The maximum capacity shall be determined
as allowed by applicable Fire Code or Building Code standards.105
(2) University, college, academy, or similar institution of higher
learning: One parking space for each resident student and each
faculty or staff residence on the site, plus two parking spaces for
each five seats occupied at maximum capacity, in combination, of
any assembly hall, auditorium, stadium, gymnasium, or other
places of assembly on the campus.
(3) Schools:
(a) Private vocational or similar adult trade school or training
center: One space per student.
(b) Elementary school, nursery school, day-care center: One space
per 15 students.
(c) Middle or junior high school: One space per 10 students, plus
one space per 10 fixed seats in an auditorium.
(d) High school: One space per four students, plus one space per
10 fixed seats in an auditorium.
F. Miscellaneous uses.
(1) Libraries, museums, galleries, and similar uses: Parking or storage
space for all vehicles used directly in the operation of such
establishment, plus four parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet
of total floor area.
(2) Private clubs, lodges, or other organizations of a fraternal, civic,
union-related, religious, or similar nature: One parking space for
each four members, or one space per 50 square feet used for
assembly, dining, meetings, or other specific use of the club
facilities, whichever yields the greater number of spaces, plus one
additional parking space for every two persons regularly employed
on the premises.
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Fire Prevention, and Ch. 57, Building Construction, Art. II,
Building Code.
§ 170-1705 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1705
1:772
§ 170-1706. Shared parking.
(3) Hospitals and rehabilitative services centers: 0.85 spaces per
employee on duty at any one shift change or 0.65 spaces per fulltime
equivalent total employment, whichever yields the greater
number of spaces, plus additional parking spaces for visitors on the
basis of 0.6 spaces per bed. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-1]
(4) Research and development facility: One parking space per 350
square feet of gross leasable area occupied by research and
development uses such as laboratories and testing facilities.
(5) Medical clinic and health clinic: One off-street parking space shall
be provided per 300 square feet of gross habitable floor area.
[Added 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1]
(6) Patient hostel: One off-street parking space per guest room and one
parking space per employee of the largest shift. [Added
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1]
(7) Wellness center: Five off-street parking spaces shall be provided
per 1,000 square feet of patron use area. [Added 9-15-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-1]
(8) Business center development (BCD): Parking requirements in a
BCD shall equal the collective total of parking requirements
calculated for each individual use within the BCD, as proposed at
the time of conditional use approval and as provided in this article.
As a condition of conditional use approval, the Board may modify
parking requirements to reflect potential changes of use over time
within the BCD or to reflect shared parking opportunities for two or
more individual uses. [Added 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1]
G. Other uses. The Board shall determine with which of the preceding
categories of parking regulation any unlisted use shall comply.
A. Up to 50% of the parking spaces required for a theater or other place of
primarily evening entertainment, for a church, for multifamily dwelling
units, for a VAC, or for a school may be provided and used jointly by
banks, offices, certain retail stores, repair shops, service
establishments, VAC accessory uses, and similar uses which are not
normally open, used or operated during evening hours (beyond normal
business hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.) if specifically approved by the
Board. [Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-6]
B. Written agreement assuring the retention for such purpose shall be
properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned and approved as
to form and execution by the Township Solicitor, and shall be filed and
made part of the application for a building permit.
§ 170-1705 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1706
1:773
§ 170-1707. Parking reserve area.
The number of parking spaces to be constructed may be less than the
number required herein only where the following conditions are met to the
satisfaction of the Township:
C. Such approval may be rescinded by the Board and additional parking
shall be obtained by the owners, in the event that the Board determines
that such joint use is resulting in a public nuisance or otherwise
adversely affecting the public health, safety, or welfare.
D. Upon approval of the Board, as prescribed in Subsection B above, two
or more uses may satisfy their individual parking requirements in a
common parking lot, provided that the number of parking spaces in the
lot equals the sum of the parking spaces required for each use. Parking
spaces shall be located so that no space is greater than 500 feet from
the building or use it is intended to serve, except in the case where offstreet
parking for a VAC use is provided off premises under § 170-802G,
in which case such parking spaces may be located 650 feet from
property on which the VAC use is located. [Amended 12-16-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-6]
E. Shared or common parking lots shall be provided with appropriate
signage indicating the buildings and/or uses for which the spaces have
been made available.
A. Evidence is submitted firmly documenting that the special nature of the
proposed occupancy or use of the building requires less parking area or
fewer spaces than that required by this article.
B. The land development plan submitted by the applicant indicates that
the location and layout of that portion of the required parking or
loading area deemed unnecessary at the time of application can and
will be constructed on the surface of the site, according to the
requirements of this article, in the event that the Township determines
at any time that all or any additional portion of this parking or loading is
necessary and in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare.
C. In no event shall that authorized portion of the required parking area
which is not to be constructed, but reserved for possible future use, be
counted as open space or other nonpaved area required by other
provisions of this chapter.
D. The parking reserve area shall be designed so that any required
minimum area of vegetative cover would be maintained in the event
that the parking reserve area is subsequently developed.
E. The parking reserve area shall be landscaped according to an approved
plan and in accordance with § 170-1507 of this chapter.
§ 170-1706 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1707
1:774
§ 170-1708. Parking standards for single-family residential
dwellings.
In addition to the Schedule of Required Parking, § 170-1705A(1), the
following regulations shall apply to single-family residential dwellings:
§ 170-1709. Shopping center parking.
F. The parking reserve area shall have no building, whether temporary or
permanent, erected on it at any time, except as provided in
§ 170-1709A.
A. Use of residential parking facilities. Parking facilities accessory to a
residential use in any district shall be used solely for the parking of
passenger automobiles and not more than one commercial vehicle of
not more than two tons' gross weight utilized by occupants of the
dwelling to which such facilities are accessory, or by guests of such
occupants. [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
B. A garage may be located wholly or partly inside the walls of the
principal building, or may be attached to the outer walls. If separated
from the principal building, the garage shall conform to all accessory
building requirements.
C. Areas devoted to surface parking may occupy no more than 50% of any
required front, side, or rear yard.106
D. Parking spaces shall have a dust-free, all-weather surface; this
requirement shall be met by paving unless otherwise approved by the
Board of Supervisors. Pervious surfaces such as porous paving,
concrete lattice blocks, or gravel may be substituted if approved by the
Board, e.g., for reserve or overflow parking. Pervious surfaces shall be
the only permitted means of providing parking in areas subject to
floodplain regulations. [Amended 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
E. Parking areas shall have a minimum slope of 1% in any direction to
provide for drainage, and a maximum slope of 5% in any direction for
safety, user convenience, and stormwater management.
A. Except as specified in Subsection B below, a minimum of 4.5 spaces
shall be provided for each 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area, or
fraction thereof, within the proposed shopping center. In addition, a
parking reserve area, consistent with the terms of § 170-1707, shall be
designed and shown on the plan so that, if developed, it would yield a
ratio of 5.0 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area. If,
at the end of the sixth year following full development of the tract, the
parking reserve area or any part thereof has not been developed as an
additional parking area, the applicant or the then present landowner
106. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1) and (2), which immediately followed, was
redesignated as Subsections D and E, respectively, 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1.
§ 170-1707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1709
1:775
§ 170-1710. Off-street loading.
Adequate space shall be provided to accommodate the loading and
unloading of trucks, tractors, and trailers servicing any commercial,
industrial, or large-scale residential or institutional use. Loading berth
space which is utilized for the location of trash collection or compaction
units shall be provided for and shall be in addition to the loading space
requirements provided in this section.
may petition the Board for permission to develop or otherwise utilize
the parking reserve area in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
B. A minimum of 4.0 spaces shall be provided for each 1,000 square feet of
gross leasable area or fraction thereof devoted to office use. An initial
reduction of up to 25% of this area may be permitted by the Board,
provided that sufficient land is reserved and properly identified as such
to meet the full requirements of this chapter, should the Board
subsequently deem it necessary.
A. Area of loading berths or spaces.
(1) A required off-street loading berth to be utilized in conjunction with
any use requiring tractor trailer delivery shall be at least 12 feet in
width and at least 65 feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuver
space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
(2) Required loading spaces to serve commercial uses and other
facilities with similar needs shall be at least 12 feet in width and at
least 35 feet in length, and may be located parallel to the building
served.
B. Access to loading area. Each required off-street loading space or berth
shall be afforded appropriate means of vehicular access to a street,
highway, or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic
movement.
C. Surfacing. All open off-street loading areas shall be improved with a
compacted select gravel base and surfaced with an all-weather dustless
material, suitably designed for the intended use to a standard approved
by the Township Engineer.
D. Screening. All loading berths or spaces and truck circulation areas
which abut a residential district shall be set back at least 100 feet
therefrom unless they are completely screened therefrom by building
walls, or a solid fence, wall, or landscaping, or any combination thereof,
not less than six feet in height. In no case shall such spaces or berths be
closer than 35 feet therefrom. Screening shall further comply with the
standards of § 170-1508 of this chapter.
E. Number of spaces.
§ 170-1709 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1710
1:776
(1) Buildings with commercial, industrial, or storage use which exceed
6,000 square feet of gross leasable area shall be provided with a
minimum of one off-street loading berth.
(2) Commercial or other uses which do not exceed 6,000 square feet of
gross leasable area, and which involve regular deliveries as part of
their operation, shall be provided with a minimum of one off-street
loading space.
F. Location. Loading and unloading areas shall not be located between the
building setback line and the street line. No delivery vehicle shall park
on any sidewalk. Adequate space shall be provided to accommodate the
loading and unloading of trucks, tractors, and trailers servicing any
commercial, industrial, or large-scale residential or institutional use.
Loading berth space which is utilized for the location of trash collection
or compaction units shall be provided for and shall be in addition to the
loading space requirements provided in this section. [Amended
3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
§ 170-1710 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1710
1:777

ARTICLE XVIII
Signs
[Amended 5-1-1995 by Ord. No. 95-1; 5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2;
3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2; 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4;
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1; 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-4;
3-5-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-3; 3-16-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-03]
§ 170-1800. Applicability.
Any sign erected, altered, or maintained after the effective date of this
article shall conform to the following regulations.
§ 170-1801. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to develop a comprehensive system of sign
regulations to:
A. Promote the safety of persons and property by providing that signs:
(1) Do not create traffic hazards by distracting or confusing motorists,
or impairing motorist's ability to see pedestrians, other vehicles,
obstacles or to read traffic signs.
(2) Do not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, collision, decay or
abandonment.
(3) Do promote the aesthetic quality, safety, health, and general
welfare and the assurance of protection of adequate light and air
within the Township by regulation of the posting, displaying,
erection, use and maintenance of signs.
B. Promote the efficient transfer of information through the use of signs
and to permit such use, but not necessarily in the most profitable form
or format available for such use.
C. Protect the public welfare and enhance the overall appearance and
economic value of the landscape, while preserving the unique natural
and historic environment that distinguishes the Township and
consistent with Article I, § 27, of the Pennsylvania Constitution.
D. Set standards and provide uniform controls that permit reasonable use
of signs and preserve the character of Westtown Township.
E. Prohibit the erection of signs in such numbers, sizes, designs,
illumination, and locations as may create a hazard to pedestrians and
motorists.
F. Avoid excessive conflicts from large or multiple signs, so that permitted
signs provide information while minimizing clutter, unsightliness, and
confusion.
G. Establish a process for the review and approval of sign permit
applications.
§ 170-1800 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1801
1:779
§ 170-1802. Definitions.
Words and terms used in this article shall have the meanings given in this
section. Unless expressly stated otherwise, any pertinent word or term not
part of this listing, but vital to the interpretation of this article, shall be
construed to have its legal definition, or in absence of a legal definition, its
meaning as commonly accepted by practitioners including civil engineers,
surveyors, architects, landscape architects, and planners.
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure or part of a structure, or any
device attached, represented, projected or applied by paint or otherwise, or
any structure or other surface used to communicate information, a message
or advertisement, or to attract the attention of the public to a subject or
location. The term "sign" shall include, but not be limited to, flat or curved
surfaces, all support and/or assembly apparatus, flags, banners, streamers,
pennants, insignias and medals with or without words or pictures. Signs on
vehicles shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter when the vehicle
is owned and located or parked on or in front of a lot under the control of
an occupant of the lot.
H. Address billboard signs in the C-2 District along Route 202.
The following shall not be defined as signs under this chapter:
Any surface not exceeding one square foot in area that is required
by a federal, state, county or municipal law or regulation, or by the
United States Post Office to identity a property by number, post box
number or name(s) of occupants of the property.
(1)
(2) Flags and insignia of any municipal, state or federal government.
Legal notices, identification information, or wayfinding information
provided by governmental or legislative authorities.
(3)
(4) Integral, decorative or architectural features of buildings.
Actual produce and merchandise displayed for sale that appear in
store windows.
(5)
(6) Grave markers of all types.
(7) Memorial markers.
A.
Sign types and definitions:
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign which has not been used to provide
information for a period of at least 180 days.
(1)
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign that incorporates action, motion, or
light or color changes through electrical or mechanical means.
(2)
AWNING — A cloth, plastic, or other nonstructural covering that
projects from a wall for the purpose of shielding a doorway or
window. An awning is either permanently attached to a building or
(3)
B.
§ 170-1801 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1802
1:780
can be raised or retracted to a position against the building when
not in use.
(4) AWNING SIGN — Any sisgn painted on, or applied to, an awning.
BALLOON SIGN — A sign painted on or affixed to a lighter-than-air,
gas-filled balloon.
(5)
BANNER — Any cloth, bunting, plastic, paper, or similar non-rigid
material attached to any structure, staff, pole, rope, wire, or
framing which is anchored on two or more edges or at all four
corners. Banners are temporary in nature and do not include flags.
(6)
BEACON LIGHTING — Any source of electric light, whether
portable or fixed, the primary purpose of which is to cast a
concentracted beam of light generally skyward as a means of
attracting attention to its location rather than to illuminate any
particular sign, structure, or other object.
(7)
BILLBOARD — An outdoor sign with a sign area that is between 60
square feet and 300 square feet.
(8)
BUILDING FRONTAGE — The maximum linear width of a building
measured in a single straight line parallel, or essentially parallel,
with the abutting public street or parking lot.
(9)
CANOPY — A structure other than an awning made of fabric, metal,
or other material that is supported by columns or posts affixed to
the ground and may also be connected to a building.
(10)
(11)CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is part of, or attached to, a canopy.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign or portion thereof on which
the copy or symbols change either automatically through electrical
or electronic means, or manually through placement of letters or
symbols on a panel mounted in or on a track system. The two types
of changeable copy signs are "manual changeable copy signs" and
"electronic changeable copy signs," which include: message center
signs, digital displays, and tri-vision boards.
(12)
CHANNEL LETTER SIGN — A sign consisting of fabricated or
formed three-dimensional letters, individually applied to a wall,
which may accommodate a light source.
(13)
CLEARANCE — The distance above the walkway, or other surface
if specified, to the bottom edge of a sign. This term can also refer
to a horizontal distance between two objects.
(14)
DIGITAL DISPLAY — The portion of a sign face made up of
internally illuminated components capable of changing the
message periodically. Digital displays may include but are not
limited to LCD, LED, or plasma displays.
(15)
§ 170-1802 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1802
1:781
FESTOON LIGHTING — A type of illumination comprised of either:
a) a group of light bulbs hung or strung overhead or on a building
or other structure; or b) light bulbs not shaded or hooded or
otherwise screened to prevent direct rays of light from shining on
adjacent properties or rights-of-way.
(16)
FLAG — Any sign or image printed or painted on cloth, plastic,
canvas, or other like material attached to a pole or staff and
anchored along only one edge or supported or anchored at only two
corners.
(17)
FLASHING SIGN — A sign whose artificial illumination is not kept
constant in intensity at all times when in use and which exhibits
changes in light, color, direction, or animation. This definition does
not include electronic message center signs or digital displays that
meet the requirements set forth herein.
(18)
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign supported by structures or
supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground; and that
is independent and detached from any building or other structure.
The following are subtypes of freestanding signs:
GROUND SIGN — A sign permanently affixed to the ground
at its base, supported entirely by a base structure, and not
mounted on a pole or attached to any part of a building (also
known as "monument sign").
(a)
POLE SIGN — A freestanding sign that is permanently
supported in a fixed location by a structure of one or more
poles, posts, uprights, or braces from the ground and not
supported by a building or a base structure.
(b)
(19)
GAS STATION CANOPY — A freestanding, open-air structure
constructed for the purpose of shielding service station islands
from the elements.
(20)
GAS STATION CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is part of, or
attached to, the vertical sides of the gas station canopy roof
structure. For the purposes of this article, gas station canopy signs
shall be considered wall signs.
(21)
GOVERNMENT SIGN — Any sign constructed and/or installed by a
federal, state, county or municipal government or authorized unit
or department thereof.
(22)
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign with electrical equipment installed
for illumination, either internally illuminated through its sign face
by a light source contained inside the sign or externally illuminated
by a light source aimed at its surface.
(23)
§ 170-1802 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1802
1:782
ILLUMINATION — A source of any artificial or reflected light,
either directly from a source of light incorporated within, or
indirectly from an artificial source.
EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION — Artificial light, located away
from the sign, which lights the sign, the source of which may or
may not be visible to persons viewing the sign from any street,
sidewalk, or adjacent property.
(a)
INTERNAL ILLUMINATION — A light source that is concealed
or contained within the sign and becomes visible in darkness
through a translucent surface. Message center signs, digital
displays, and signs incorporating neon lighting shall not be
considered internal illumination for the purposes of this
article.
(b)
HALO ILLUMINATION — A sign using a three-dimensional
message, logo, etc., which is lit in such a way as to produce a
halo effect (also known as "backlit illumination").
(c)
(24)
INCIDENTAL WINDOW SIGN — Signs displayed in the window of
a commercial, retail or other business establishment, which are no
larger than one square foot individually or three square feet in the
aggregate.
(25)
INFLATABLE SIGN — A sign that is an air-inflated object, which
may be of various shapes, made of flexible fabric, resting on the
ground or structure and equipped with a portable blower motor
that provides a flow of air into the device.
(26)
INTERACTIVE SIGN — An electronic or animated sign that reacts
to the behavior or electronic signals of motor vehicle drivers.
(27)
LIMITED DURATION SIGN — A nonpermanent sign that is
displayed on private property for more than 30 days, but not longer
than one year.
(28)
MANUAL CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign or portion thereof
on which the copy or symbols are changed manually through
placement or drawing of letters or symbols on a sign face.
(29)
MARQUEE — A permanent structure, other than a roof or canopy,
attached to, supported by, and projecting from a building.
(30)
(31)MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to a marquee.
MECHANICAL MOVEMENT SIGN — A sign having parts that
physically move rather than merely appear to move as might be
found in a digital display. The physical movement may be activated
electronically or by another means, but shall not include windactivated
movement such as used for banners or flags. Mechanical
movement signs do not include digital signs that have changeable,
programmable displays.
(32)
§ 170-1802 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1802
1:783
MENU SIGN — A permanent sign not greater than 32 square feet
located at, on or in the window of a restaurant, or other use serving
food, or beverages.
(33)
MESSAGE CENTER SIGN — A type of illuminated, changeable
copy sign that consists of electronically changing text located on a
lot with a gas station or an athletic field.
(34)
MESSAGE SEQUENCING — The spreading of one message across
more than one sign structure.
(35)
MULTI-TENANT SIGN — A freestanding sign located on lot on
which a shopping center or complex with multiple tenants is
located.
(36)
MURAL (or MURAL SIGN) — A large picture/image which is
painted, constructed, or affixed directly onto a vertical building
wall, which may or may not contain text, logos, and/or symbols.
(37)
NEON SIGN — A sign illuminated by a neon tube, or other visible
light-emanating gas tube, that is bent to form letters, symbols, or
other graphics.
(38)
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign that was legally erected and
maintained at the effective date of this article, or amendment
thereto, that does not currently comply with sign regulations of the
district in which it is located.
(39)
PENNANT — A triangular or irregular piece of fabric or other
material, commonly attached in strings or strands, or supported on
small poles intended to flap in the wind.
(40)
PERMANENT SIGN — A sign attached, affixed or painted to a
building, window, or structure, or to the ground in a manner that
enables the sign to resist environmental loads, such as wind, and
that precludes ready removal or movement of the sign and whose
intended use appears to be indefinite.
(41)
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign designed to be transported or moved
and not permanently attached to the ground, a building, or other
structure.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN — A type of freestanding, portable,
temporary sign consisting of two faces connected and hinged
at the top (also known as "A-frame sign").
(a)
VEHICULAR SIGN — A sign affixed to a vehicle located on
the same lot as a business and which sits or is otherwise not
incidental to the vehicle's primary purpose.
(b)
(42)
PRIVATE DRIVE SIGN — A sign located at an intersection of a
street or drive which is not publicly owned and maintained and
(43)
§ 170-1802 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1802
1:784
used only for access by the occupants of the property and their
guests.
PROJECTING SIGN — A building-mounted, double-sided sign with
the two faces generally perpendicular to the building wall, not to
include signs located on a canopy, awning, or marquee (also known
as "blade sign").
(44)
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area between the outer edge of
a paved street, road or highway and the closer of an abutting
property line or a line parallel to such outer edge to be measured
from the center line of such street, road or highway to the following
distance:
(a) Sixty feet for Routes 202 and 3.
(b) Forty feet for Routes 926 and 352.
(c) Thirty feet for collector streets.
(d) Twenty-five feet for a minor street.
(45)
PUBLIC SIGN — A sign erected or required by government
agencies or utilities.
(46)
REFLECTIVE SIGN — A sign containing any material or device
which has the effect of intensifying reflected light.
(47)
REVOLVING SIGN — A sign which revolves in a circular motion;
rather than remaining stationary on its supporting structure.
(48)
ROOF SIGN — A building-mounted sign erected upon, against, or
over the roof of a building.
(49)
(50)SCOREBOARD — A sign contained within an athletic venue.
SECURITY SIGN — A sign located on a premises on which no
trespassing, hunting, and/or soliciting are permitted (also known as
"warning sign").
(51)
SHIELDED — The description of a luminaire from which no direct
glare is visible at normal viewing angles, by virtue of its being
properly aimed, oriented, and located and properly fitted with such
devices as shields, barn doors, baffles, louvers, skirts, or visors.
(52)
SIGN AREA — The total dimensions of a sign surface used to
display information, messages, advertising, logos, or symbols. See
§ 170-1805C for standards for measuring sign area.
(53)
SIGN FACE — The part of the sign that is or can be used for the
sign area. The sign area could be smaller than the sign face.
(54)
SIGN HEIGHT — The vertical dimension of a sign as measured
using the standards in § 170-1805D.
(55)
§ 170-1802 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1802
1:785
§ 170-1803. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are unlawful and prohibited:
SIGN SUPPORTING STRUCTURE — Poles, posts, walls, frames,
brackets, or other supports holding a sign in place.
(56)
SNIPE SIGN — A sign tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or
otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, benches,
streetlights, or other objects, or placed on any public property or
in the public right-of-way or on any private property without the
permission of the property owner (also known as "bandit sign").
(57)
STOREFRONT — The exterior facade of a building housing a
commercial use visible from a street, sidewalk, or other pedestrian
way accessible to the public and containing the primary entrance
to the commercial establishment.
(58)
STREAMERS — A display made of lightweight, flexible materials,
consisting of long, narrow, wavy strips hung individually or in a
series and typically designed to move in the wind.
(59)
STREET FRONTAGE — The side or sides of a lot abutting on a
public street or right-of-way.
(60)
STREET POLE BANNER — A banner suspended above a public
street or right-of-way, sidewalk and/or parking area and attached
to a single street pole.
(61)
TEMPORARY SIGN — A nonpermanent sign that is located on
private property that can be displayed for no more than 30
consecutive days at one time.
(62)
URBAN EXPERIENTIAL DISPLAYS (UEDs) — An outdoor sign that
projects its message in three-dimensional (3-D) space.
(63)
WALL SIGN — A building-mounted sign which is either attached to,
displayed on, or painted on an exterior wall in a manner parallel
with the wall surface. A sign installed on a false or mansard roof is
also considered a wall sign (also known as: "fascia sign," "parallel
wall sign," or "band sign").
(64)
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign that is applied, painted, or affixed to a
window, or placed inside a window, within three feet of the glass,
facing the outside of the building, and easily seen from the outside.
(65)
A. Abandoned signs.
B. Snipe signs. Signs shall only be attached to utility poles in conformance
with state and utility regulations and the requirements of this chapter.
C. Mechanical movement signs, including revolving signs.
§ 170-1802 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1803
1:786
D. Pennant strings and streamers, except when located inside a stadium,
arena, or temporary fairground during a special event.
E. Animated signs, urban experiential displays, flashing signs, or signs
that scroll or flash text or graphics.
F. Inflatable devices or balloon signs, with the exception of balloons used
in temporary situations.
G. Signs which interfere with, imitate, or resemble any public sign, signal,
or device within 75 feet of a public right-of-way or within 200 feet of a
traffic control device, whichever is greater.
H. Any signs located within a public right-of-way and/or which obscure or
interfere with the line of sight at any street intersection or traffic signal,
or at any other point of vehicular access to a street.
I. Signs which prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, fire
escape, or that prevent free access from one part of a roof to any other
part. No sign shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape that creates
confusion or interferes with its use and operation.
J. Signs which emit smoke, visible vapors, particulate matter, sound, odor
or contain open flames.
K. Reflective signs or signs containing mirrors, excluding those as
approved by the Township or PennDOT for traffic use.
L. Interactive signs.
M. Signs incorporating beacon or festoon lighting.
N. Any banner or sign of any type suspended across a public street,
without the permission of the owner of the property and road.
O. Roof signs, or any portion thereof, which extends above the roofline of
any building.
P. Signs erected without the permission of the property owner, with the
exception of those authorized or required by local, state, or federal
government.
Q. Any sign having content that is not subject to the protections of the
First Amendment to the United States Constitution or Article I, Section
7, of the Pennsylvania Constitution, including, but not limited to, the
following:
(1) Obscenity/pornography.
(2) Fighting words.
(3) Incitement to imminent lawless action.
§ 170-1803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1804
1:787
§ 170-1804. Signs exempt from permit requirements.
The following signs shall be allowed without a sign permit and shall not be
included in the determination of the type, number, or area of permanent
signs allowed within a zoning district, provided such signs comply with the
regulations in this section, if any. All owners of such signs must still comply
with all applicable standards of this chapter, including the responsibility for
maintenance of signs in good and safe repair.
A. Government signs constructed and/or installed by the federal, state,
county or municipal government or an agency or department thereof
and to include the United States Postal Service.
B. Signs inside a building, or other enclosed facility, which are not meant
to be viewed from the outside, and are located greater than three feet
from the window.
C. Address signs: Up to two signs required by the federal, state, county or
municipal government or a department or agency thereof, including,
but not limited to, the United States Post Office, located on the
following uses and conforming with the dimensions set forth below as
well as the specifications for street address number posting set forth in
§ 61-5.
(1) Residential uses: signs not to exceed one square foot in area.
(2) Nonresidential uses: signs not to exceed five square feet in area.
D. Public signs: Signs erected or required by government agencies or
utilities, including those located in the public right-of-way, at railroad
crossings, on buildings that have restrooms, telephones, or similar
public convenience available, but not to exceed two square feet.
E. Private drive signs: one sign per driveway entrance, not to exceed four
square feet in area.
F. Security and warning signs: These limitations shall not apply to the
posting of signs on premises where no trespassing, hunting and/or
soliciting is permitted.
(1) Residential uses: signs not to exceed four square feet in area.
(2) Nonresidential uses: maximum of one large sign per property, not
to exceed five square feet in area. All other posted security and
warning signs may not exceed four square feet in area.
G. Flags:
(1) Location. Flags and flagpoles shall not be located within any rightof-
way.
(2) Height. Flagpoles shall have a maximum height of 30 feet in all
residential districts.
§ 170-1804 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1804
1:788
(3) Number. No more than two flags per lot in residential districts; no
more than three flags per lot in all other districts.
(4) Size. Maximum flag size is 24 square feet in residential districts.
(5) Flags may be used as permitted freestanding or projecting signs,
and, if so used, the area of the flag shall be included in, and limited
by, the computation of allowable area for signs on the property.
H. Legal notices.
I. Permanent architectural features of a building or structure, such as a
cornerstone or carving or embossment on a building, provided that the
letters are not made of a reflective material nor contrast in color with
the building.
J. Signs within four feet of a crop growing in a field. Such signs shall not
exceed four square feet and shall be removed after the field has been
harvested.
K. Incidental signs, including incidental window signs when the total area
of any such sign or all signs together does not exceed two square feet.
L. Street pole banners, located outside public rights-of-way, interior to a
campus, institutional or commercial use, provided they comply with the
following:
(1) Area: a maximum area of 12.5 square feet and a maximum width of
three feet. Up to two street pole banners are permitted per street
pole.
(2) Height:
(a) When the street pole banner's edge is less than 18 inches from
the curb, the lowest edge of the street pole banner shall be at
least 14 feet above the finished grade.
(b) When the street pole banner's edge is greater than 18 inches
from the curb, the lowest edge of the street pole banner shall
be at least eight feet above the finished grade.
(3) Location:
(a) No street pole banner shall extend beyond the curbline.
(b) Street pole banners shall maintain a minimum of three-foot
vertical clearance below any luminaries located on the pole
measured from where the ballasts connect to the poles.
(c) Street pole banners shall not interfere with the visibility of
traffic signals or signs.
(d) No street pole banner shall be located on a pole that has traffic
or pedestrian control signals.
§ 170-1804 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1804
1:789
§ 170-1805. General regulations.
M. Temporary signs in accordance with § 170-1808, Regulations by sign
type (limited duration, temporary and portable signs).
N. Any canopy or awning, as defined herein, which does not have any
lettering, logos or symbols printed, painted or otherwise affixed
thereto.
A. Sign location.
(1) No sign shall be placed in such a position as to endanger
pedestrians, bicyclists, or traffic on a street by obscuring the view
or by interfering with government street signs or signals by virtue
of position or color.
(2) Except for those classified as exempt under § 170-1804, no sign
may be located within any public right-of-way and/or occupy a clear
sight triangle of 75 feet (as measured from the center-line
intersections of two streets) shall be provided at all intersections.
The minimum clear sight triangle shall be increased to 100 feet if
either street is a collector street and to 150 feet if either street is an
arterial highway.
(3) Signs and their supporting structures shall maintain clearance and
noninterference with all surface and underground utility and
communications lines or equipment.
B. Sign materials and construction: Every sign shall be constructed of
durable materials, using noncorrosive fastenings; shall be structurally
safe and erected or installed in strict accordance with the Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code; and shall be maintained in safe condition
and good repair at all times, consistent with this section, so that all sign
information is clearly legible.
C. Sign area.
(1) The "area of a sign" shall mean the area of all lettering, wording,
and accompanying designs, logos, and symbols. The area of a sign
shall not include any supporting framework, bracing or trim which
is incidental to the display, provided that it does not contain any
lettering, wording, or symbols.
(2) Where the sign consists of individual letters, designs, or symbols
attached to a building, awning, wall, or window, the area shall be
that of the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters,
designs, and symbols.
(3) Signs may be double-sided.
(a) Only one side shall be considered when determining the sign
area, provided that the faces are equal in size, the interior
§ 170-1804 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1805
1:790
angle formed by the faces is less than 45°, and the two faces
are not more than 18 inches apart.
(b) Where the faces are not equal in size, but the interior angle
formed by the faces is less than 45° and the two faces are not
more than 18 inches apart, the larger sign face shall be used as
the basis for calculating sign area.
(c) When the interior angle formed by the faces is greater than
45°, or the faces are greater than 18 inches apart, all sides of
such sign shall be considered in calculating the sign area.
(4) Signs that consist of, or have attached to them, one or more threedimensional
or irregularly shaped objects, shall have a sign area of
the sum of two adjacent vertical sign faces of the smallest cube
encompassing the sign or object.
(5) If elements of a sign are movable or flexible, such as a flag or
banner, the measurement is taken when the elements are fully
extended and parallel to the plane of view.
(6) The permitted maximum area for all signs is determined by the sign
type and the use of the property where the sign is located.
D. Sign height.
(1) Sign height shall be measured as the distance from the highest
portion of the sign to the mean finished grade of the street closest
to the sign. In the case of a sign located greater than 100 feet from
a public street, height shall be measured to the mean grade at the
base of the sign.
(2) Clearance for freestanding and projecting signs shall be measured
as the smallest vertical distance between finished grade and the
lowest point of the sign, including any framework or other
structural elements.
(3) The permitted maximum height for all signs is determined by the
sign type and type and the use of the property where the sign is
located.
E. Sign spacing: The spacing between sign structures shall be measured
as a straight-line distance between the closest edges of each sign.
F. Sign illumination.
(1) Signs may be illuminated, unless otherwise specified herein,
consistent with the general standards for outdoor lighting as
outlined in § 170-1514 and those listed below:
(a) Light sources to illuminate signs shall neither be visible from
any street right-of- way, nor cause glare which is hazardous or
§ 170-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1805
1:791
distracting to pedestrians, vehicle drivers, or adjacent
properties.
(b) Hours of operation:
[1] Signs on nonresidential properties may be illuminated
from 6:00 a.m. prevailing time until 11:00 p.m. prevailing
time, or 1/2 hour past the close of business of the facility
located on the same lot as the sign, whichever is later.
[2] Signs shall provide an automatic timer to comply with the
intent of this subsection.
[3] The above hours of operation standards shall not apply to a
use operating 24 hours a day.
(c) Brightness: Message center signs and digital displays are
subject to the following brightness limits:
[1] The illumination of the sign shall be set so as not to be
more than 0.3 footcandle above ambient lighting
conditions, measured using a footcandle meter at 75 feet
perpendicular to the sign's display.
[2] Each sign must have a light-sensing device that will
automatically adjust the brightness of the display as the
natural ambient light conditions change to comply with the
limits set herein.
(d) Message duration: The length of time each message may be
displayed on a message center sign, digital display, or tri-vision
board sign shall be static and nonanimated and shall remain
fixed for a minimum of 30 seconds.
(e) Message transition: The length of time when a message is
transitioned on a message center sign, digital display, or trivision
board sign shall be accomplished in one second or less
with all moving parts or illumination changing simultaneously
and in unison.
(f) Default design: Any message center sign, digital display, or trivision
board shall contain a default design which shall freeze
the sign message in one position if a malfunction should occur
or, in the alternative, shut down.
(2) Types of illumination: Where permitted, illumination may be:
(a) External: Externally illuminated signs, where permitted, are
subject to the following regulations:
[1] The source of the light must be concealed by translucent
covers.
§ 170-1805 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1805
1:792
[2] External illumination shall be by a steady, stationary light
source, shielded and directed solely at the sign. The light
source must be static in color.
(b) Internal: Internally illuminated signs, where permitted, are
subject to the following regulations:
[1] Internal illumination, including neon lighting, must be
static in intensity and color.
[2] Message center signs are permitted in accordance with
the regulations contained in § 170-1805F(3).
[3] Digital displays are permitted in accordance with the
regulations contained in § 170-1805F(4).
(3) Message center signs are subject to the following regulations, in
addition to all other illumination requirements established in this
section.
(a) Sign type: Message center signs are permitted in the form of
freestanding, monument, and wall signs, in accordance with
the regulations established in §§ 170-1806 and 170-1807.
(b) Height: A message center sign shall have the same height
limits as other permitted signs of the same type and location.
(c) Area:
[1] When used other than as a billboard, message center signs
shall not exceed 50% of the sign area for any one sign, and
shall not exceed more than 30% of the total area for all
signs permitted on a property.
[2] When used as billboard, message center signs may be used
for the full permitted sign area.
(d) Maximum number: Where permitted, one message center sign
is permitted per street frontage, up to a maximum of two
message center signs per property.
(e) Message display:
[1] No message center sign may contain text which flashes,
pulsates, moves, or scrolls.
[2] The transition of a message center sign must take place
instantly (e.g., no fade-out or fade-in).
[3] Default design: The sign shall contain a default design
which shall freeze the sign message in one position if a
malfunction should occur or, in the alternative, shut down.
§ 170-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1805
1:793
(f) Conversion of a permitted non-message center sign to a
message center sign requires the issuance of a permit
pursuant to § 170-1815.
(g) The addition of any message center sign to a nonconforming
sign is prohibited.
(4) Digital display signs are subject to the following regulations in
addition to all other requirements established in this section.
(a) Sign type: Digital displays are permitted in the form of
freestanding, monument, and wall signs, in accordance with
the regulations established in §§ 170-1806 and 170-1807.
(b) Height: A digital display shall have the same height limits as
for other permitted signs of the same type and location.
(c) Area:
[1] When used other than as a billboard, digital displays shall
not exceed more than 30% of the total sign area permitted
on the site.
[2] When used as a billboard, digital displays may be used for
the full permitted sign area.
(d) Maximum number per property: Where permitted, one digital
display sign is permitted per property.
(e) Message display:
[1] Any digital display containing animation, streaming video,
or text or images which flash, pulsate, move, or scroll is
prohibited.
[2] One message/display may be brighter than another, but
each individual message/display must be static in intensity
and otherwise compliant with § 170-1805F(1)(c).
[3] The content of a digital display must transition by
changing instantly, with no transition graphics (e.g., no
fade-out or fade-in).
[4] Default design: The sign shall contain a default design
which shall freeze the sign message in one position if a
malfunction should occur or, in the alternative, shut down.
(f) Conversion of a permitted nondigital sign to a digital sign
requires the issuance of a permit pursuant to § 170-1815.
(g) The addition of any digital display to a nonconforming sign is
prohibited.
(5) Electrical standards.
§ 170-1805 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1805
1:794
§ 170-1806. Regulations by sign type: generally.
(a) Permits for illuminated signs will not be issued without an
approved electrical permit, if required. Applications for
electrical permits shall be filed at the same time as the sign
permit application.
(b) All work shall be completed in full compliance with the
Westtown Township Electrical Code as set forth in the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
(c) The electrical supply to all exterior signs, whether to the sign
itself or to lighting fixtures positioned to illuminate the sign,
shall be provided by means of concealed electrical cables.
Electrical supply to freestanding signs shall be provided by
means of underground cables.
(d) The owner of any illuminated sign shall arrange for a
certification showing compliance with the brightness
standards set forth herein by an independent contractor and
provide the certification documentation to the Westtown
Township as a condition precedent to the issuance of a sign
permit.
(6) Glare control: Glare control shall be achieved primarily through the
use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields, and baffles, and
appropriate application of fixture mounting height, wattage, aiming
angle, and fixture placement. Vegetation screens shall not be
employed to serve as the primary means for controlling glare.
A. Wall signs.
(1) No portion of a wall sign shall be mounted less than 10 feet above
the finished grade or extend out more than eight inches from the
building wall on which it is affixed. If the wall sign projects less
than three inches from the building wall on which it is affixed, the
ten-foot height requirement need not be met.
(2) More than one sign shall be permitted per wall, except that the
total area of all signs on one wall shall not exceed 10% of the
facade.
(3) No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall upon which it is
mounted or beyond the edges of same.
B. Canopy or awning signs.
(1) Canopy or awning signs must be centered within or over
architectural elements such as windows or doors.
(2) No awning or canopy sign shall be wider than the building wall or
tenant space it identifies.
§ 170-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1806
1:795
(3) Sign placement.
(a) Letters or numerals shall be located only on the front and side
vertical faces of the awning or canopy.
(b) Logos or emblems are permitted on the top or angled portion
of the awning or canopy up to a maximum of three square feet.
No more than one emblem or logo is permitted on any one
awning or canopy.
(4) Sign height.
(a) The lowest edge of the canopy or awning sign shall be at least
eight feet above the finished grade.
(5) Awnings above the ground floor may be fixed, provided they do not
project more than four feet from the face of the building.
(6) Multi-tenant buildings. If the awning or canopy sign is mounted on
a multi-tenant building, all awning or canopy signs shall be similar
in terms of height, projection, and style across all tenants in the
building.
C. Projecting signs.
(1) No portion of a projecting sign shall project more than four feet
from the face of the building.
(2) The outermost portion of a projecting sign shall not project into any
public right-of-way.
(3) Sign height. The lowest edge of a projecting sign shall be at least
10 feet above the finished grade and shall not extend above the top
of the wall upon which it is mounted.
D. Window signs.
(1) Incidental window signs shall be excluded from area calculations
for window signs.
(2) Multiple window signs shall be permitted per building, provided
that all window signs at any one time do not exceed 25% of the total
glass area on the side of the building where they are placed. For
grocery stores, food markets, and pharmacies, the total glass area
covered by window signs shall not exceed 35%.
(3) Window signs may be internally lit when located on a lot within a
commercial, multiuse or planned office campus zoning district.
E. Marquee signs.
(1) Such signs shall be located only above the principal public entrance
of a building facing a public street or parking lot.
§ 170-1806 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1806
1:796
(2) No marquee shall be wider than the entrance it serves, plus two
feet on each side thereof.
(3) Sign height.
(a) No portion of a marquee sign shall extend vertically above the
eave line.
(b) The lowest edge of the marquee sign shall be at least 10 feet
above the finished grade.
F. Freestanding signs.
(1) On any tract, the total number of freestanding signs shall not
exceed one per street frontage, regardless of location.
(2) Freestanding ground signs shall be supported and permanently
placed by embedding, anchoring, or connecting the sign in such a
manner as to incorporate it into the landscape or architectural
design scheme.
(3) Sign height. Unless otherwise specifically allowed, height
standards for freestanding signs are as follows:
(a) Ground signs shall have a maximum height of 3.5 feet, except
for those located along Route 202 or Route 3, which shall have
a maximum height of 4.5 feet.
(b) Pole signs shall have a maximum height of 15 feet. The
minimum distance between the ground surface and the bottom
of the sign face shall be four feet.
(4) Sign placement.
(a) All freestanding signs shall be set back five feet from the rightof-
way, except for government signs. Where compliance with
this standard would nonetheless create an obstruction of view,
further setback may be required.
(b) No freestanding sign may occupy an area designated for
parking, loading, walkways, driveways, fire lane, easement,
cartway of the right-of-way or other areas required to remain
unobstructed.
(c) All freestanding signs shall be located no closer to any adjacent
residential lot line, public park, church, school, or public
playground than the minimum setback or separation distance
required for any other adjacent structure or building, as
regulated by this chapter.
G. Manual changeable copy signs: Manual changeable copy signs are
permitted only when integrated into a freestanding, marquee, wall, or
portable sign.
§ 170-1806 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1807
1:797
§ 170-1807. Regulations by sign type: billboards.
A. Locations permitted.
(1) Billboard signs are permitted in the following location as a
conditional use:
(a) C-2, Highway Commercial District.
B. Sign size. A billboard sign is subject to the following size restrictions
according to the posted speed limit of the road which the billboard sign
faces.
Posted Speed Limit
(MPH)
Less Than
or Equal
to 35 36 to 45 46 to 55 56 to 65
Limited
Access
Maximum
sign area
(square
feet)
60 100 150 300 300
C. Height and location of sign.
(1) The height of a billboard sign shall be measured from the average
grade based on the area found within a fifty-foot radius of the outer
limit of the sign structure.
(2) The lowest edge of a billboard sign shall be at least seven feet
above the finished grade.
(3) Billboard signs shall have a maximum height of 24 feet.
D. Spacing. Billboard signs shall be:
(1) Set back a minimum of five feet from the ultimate street right-ofway.
(2) Set back a minimum of 40 feet from any abutting lot.
(3) Located no closer than 50 feet from any building, structure, or nonbillboard
sign located on the same property.
(4) Located no closer than 500 feet from any other billboard sign on
either side of the road measured linearly. Such separation distance
shall be increased, where as needed, to ensure that no more than
one billboard sign shall be visible to a driver at any one time.
(5) Not attached to the external wall or otherwise affixed to any part of
any building and shall not extend over any public property or rightof-
way.
§ 170-1807 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1807
1:798
(6) Not located on sewer rights-of-way, or water, electric, or petroleum
pipelines and set back a minimum of 24 feet from any easement.
(7) Not located on a bridge.
E. Number of signs per lot. There shall be no more than one billboard sign
per lot. Vertically or horizontally stacked signs shall not be permitted.
F. Double-sided billboard signs. Signs may be double-faced, provided that
the two faces are the same size and are positioned as mirror images
that are parallel and not offset from each other in any direction.
G. Message sequencing. Message sequencing across more than one sign is
prohibited.
H. Construction and maintenance.
(1) All plans for billboard signs shall be certified by a licensed engineer
registered in Pennsylvania.
(2) All billboard signs shall be constructed in accordance with
industry-wide standards established by the Outdoor Advertising
Association of America and the Institute of Outdoor Advertising, or
their successor organizations. All billboard signs shall be
structurally sound and maintained in good condition and in
compliance with the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
(3) The rear face of a single-face, billboard sign shall be painted and
maintained with a single neutral color as approved by Westtown
Township.
(4) Every three years, the owner of the billboard shall have a structural
inspection made of the billboard by a licensed engineer registered
in Pennsylvania and shall provide to Westtown Township a
certificate certifying that the billboard is structurally sound.
(5) All maintenance, cleaning and repair, including repair of torn or
worn advertising copy and removal of graffiti, shall be performed
promptly. In the event the Township notifies the owner or lessee of
any damage, vandalism, or graffiti on the billboard sign, the owner
or lessee shall repair or correct the problem within 48 hours of
such notification. If repairs and corrections are not timely, the
Township shall have the right, but not the obligation, to make
repairs or corrections and be reimbursed the cost thereof by the
owner or lessee.
(6) A billboard sign shall be properly and adequately secured to
prevent unauthorized access.
(7) A bond or other security acceptable to the Township, in the form
and amount satisfactory to the Township, shall be posted with the
Township to ensure that the billboard sign will be properly removed
after the termination of use for a period of one year.
§ 170-1807 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1807
1:799
I. Identification of sign owner. All billboard signs shall be identified on the
structure with the name, address, and phone number of the owner of
such sign.
J. Landscaping and screening requirements.
(1) Landscaping shall be provided at the base of all billboard signs.
Trees and shrubbery, including evergreen and flowering trees, of
sufficient size and quantity shall be used to achieve the purpose of
this section.
(2) Trees having a breast height diameter ("BHD") greater than four
inches, which are removed for construction of the sign, shall be
replaced on site at a ratio of one replacement tree for each
removed tree using native species with a BHD of no less than three
inches.
(3) Billboard signs shall be screened from any abutting property used
or zoned for residential use. Such screening shall consist of
evergreen trees of at least 15 feet in height at the time of planting
that form a continuous visual buffer along or near the property line
abutting the residential use or lot.
(4) If at the time of planting the evergreens do not provide for
adequate screening, a temporary, nonvegetative screen may be
required at the discretion and approval of the Township. This
screening shall not exceed the height of the existing sign and shall
be removed at the expense of the sign owner or lessee owner at
such time the evergreens provide for adequate screening as
determined by the Township.
K. Additional regulations. All billboard signs shall comply with any and all
applicable state and/or federal regulations. In the event any other
applicable regulation is in conflict with the provisions of this section,
the more stringent regulation shall apply.
L. Application/plan requirements. Plans submitted for billboard signs shall
show the following:
(1) The location of the proposed sign on the lot with the required sign
setbacks from the property line and ultimate right-of-way.
(2) The location and species of existing trees.
(3) The distance to the nearest existing billboard sign.
(4) The distance to the nearest right-of-way, property line, building,
structure, non-billboard sign, billboard sign, intersection,
interchange, safety rest area, bridge, residential district, or
institutional use, sewer rights-of-way, and water, electric or
petroleum pipelines.
§ 170-1807 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1807
1:800
§ 170-1808. Regulations by sign type: limited duration, temporary
and portable signs.
(5) Site plan containing all of the applicable requirements set forth in
the Westtown Township Zoning Code, as amended.
(6) Certification under the seal by a licensed engineer that the
billboard sign, as proposed, is designed in accordance with all
federal, state, and local laws, codes, and professional standards.
M. Illumination and changeable copy of billboard signs. Lighting shall
comply with the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America's
(IESNA) recommended practices and criteria in the IESNA Lighting
Handbook, including but not limited to criteria for full-cutoff fixtures.
(1) Billboard signs may incorporate manual changeable copy signs.
(2) Billboard signs may be illuminated, provided that:
(a) All light sources are designed, shielded, arranged, and
installed to confine or direct all illumination to the surface of
the billboard sign and away from adjoining properties.
(b) Light sources are not visible from any street or adjoining
properties.
(3) The following illumination types shall be permitted subject to the
regulations in § 170-1805F, Sign illumination:
(a) Message center sign.
(b) Digital display.
(c) External illumination.
(d) Internal illumination.
(4) Billboard signs may incorporate tri-vision boards.
(a) The length of time each message of the tri-vision board may be
displayed before changing is based upon the visibility and
posted speed limit unique to individual signs and adjacent road
conditions. The message duration for tri-vision boards shall be
calculated using the method described in § 170-1805F(1)(d),
Message duration.
N. Safety. In applying for conditional use, the applicant bears the burden
of proof to establish that the proposed billboard sign will not create a
public health or safety hazard in the manner and location that it is
proposed and in the manner by which it is to be operated.
A. Limited duration, temporary and portable signs, as defined in this
article, located on private property are subject to the regulations set
forth below. Limited duration, temporary and portable signs that
§ 170-1807 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1808
1:801
comply with the requirements in this section shall not be included in
the determination of the type, number, or area of signs allowed on a
property. Unless otherwise stated below, the requirements listed below
shall apply to signs in both commercial and noncommercial zoning
districts.
B. Size and number.
(1) Nonresidential zones:
(a) Large limited duration and temporary signs. One large sign is
permitted per property in all nonresidential zones. If a
property is greater than five acres in size and has at least 400
feet of street frontage or has more than 10,000 square feet of
floor area, one additional large limited duration sign may be
permitted so long as there is minimum spacing of 200 feet
between the two large limited duration signs.
[1] Type:
[a] Freestanding sign.
[b] Window sign.
[c] Wall sign.
[d] Banner sign.
[2] Area:
[a] Each large sign shall have a maximum area of 24
square feet.
[b] Each large banner shall have a maximum area of 32
square feet.
[3] Height:
[a] Signs that are freestanding shall have a maximum
height of eight feet.
[b] Banners shall hang at a height no greater than 24 feet
when attached to an existing structure.
(b) Small limited duration and temporary signs. In addition to the
large sign(s) outlined above, one small sign is permitted per
property in all nonresidential zones. If a property is greater
than five acres in size and has at least 400 feet of street
frontage or has more than 10,000 square feet of floor area, one
additional small sign may be permitted so long as there is a
minimum spacing of 200 feet between both sets of small
temporary signs.
[1] Type:
§ 170-1808 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1808
1:802
[a] Freestanding sign.
[b] Window sign.
[c] Wall sign.
[2] Area. Each small sign shall have a maximum area of six
square feet.
[3] Height. Small signs that are freestanding shall have a
maximum height of six feet.
(c) Portable signs.
[1] Hours of display.
[a] Signs shall not be displayed on any premises before
6:00 a.m. prevailing time and shall be removed each
day at or before 10:00 p.m. prevailing time. However,
all portable signs must be taken in during hours of
nonoperation of the business located on the property.
[b] All portable signs must be taken in during inclement
weather.
[2] Sandwich board or A-frame signs. Sandwich board signs
that comply with the requirements in this section shall not
be included in the determination of the type, number, or
area of signs allowed on a property.
[a] Number. One sandwich board sign is permitted per
establishment. For the purposes of this subsection, a
parking garage or parking lot shall be considered an
establishment.
[b] Area. Each sign shall have a maximum area of seven
square feet per sign face.
[c] Height. Signs shall have a maximum height of 3.5 feet.
[3] Sign placement.
[a] If a sign is located on a public or private sidewalk, a
minimum of 36 inches of unobstructed sidewalk
clearance must be maintained between the sign and
any building or other obstruction.
[b] The sign must be located on the premises, and within
12 feet of the primary public entrance, of the
establishment placing the sign. For the purposes of
this subsection, a public entrance includes a vehicular
entrance into a parking garage or parking lot.
§ 170-1808 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1808
1:803
[c] Portable signs shall be weighted, temporarily secured,
or strategically placed so as to avoid being carried
away by high winds.
[4] Manual changeable copy signs.
[a] Manual changeable copy signs are permitted when
integrated into a sandwich board sign.
[5] Vehicular signs. Vehicular signs are subject to the
regulations found in Chapter 162 of the Westtown
Township Code for vehicles and traffic.
(2) Residential zones:
(a) Large limited duration and temporary signs. One large sign is
permitted per property so long as the property is greater than
five acres in size and has at least 400 feet of street frontage or
has more than 10,000 square feet of floor area.
[1] Type:
[a] Freestanding sign.
[b] Window sign.
[c] Wall sign.
[d] Banner sign.
[2] Area:
[a] Each large sign shall have a maximum area of 16
square feet.
[b] Each large banner shall have a maximum area of 32
square feet.
[3] Height:
[a] Large limited duration signs that are freestanding
shall have a maximum height of eight feet.
[b] Banners shall hang at a height no greater than 24 feet
when attached to an existing structure.
(b) Small limited duration and temporary signs. One small sign is
permitted per property.
[1] Type:
[a] Freestanding sign.
[b] Window sign.
[c] Wall sign.
§ 170-1808 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1808
1:804
[2] Area. Each small sign shall have a maximum area of six
square feet.
[3] Height. Small signs that are freestanding shall have a
maximum height of six feet.
C. Permit requirements.
(1) Limited duration signs.
(a) A permit for a limited duration sign is issued for one calendar
year effective January 1 and may be renewed annually.
(b) An applicant may request up to two permits per address, but is
subject to the size and number requirements set forth in this
section.
(c) An application for a limited duration sign permit must include:
[1] A description of the sign indicating the number, size,
shape, and dimensions of the sign, and the expected length
of time the sign will be displayed;
[2] A schematic drawing of the site showing the proposed
location of the sign in relation to nearby building and
streets;
[3] The number of signs on the site.
(2) Temporary signs.
(a) Temporary signs are exempt from the standard permit
requirements, but the date of erection of a temporary sign
must be written in indelible ink on the support for the sign.
Signs without a date of erection or legible date of erection
placed on the sign support shall be removed by the Township
or the owner of the sign.
(b) Temporary signs may be displayed up to a maximum of 90
consecutive days, two times per year.
(c) Westtown Township or the property owner where the sign is
placed may confiscate signs installed in violation of this
chapter. Neither Westtown Township nor the property owner is
responsible for notifying sign owners of confiscation of an
illegal sign. The party posting the temporary sign is solely
responsible for obtaining the permission of the property owner
before posting their temporary sign.
D. Installation and maintenance.
(1) All signs must be installed such that, in the opinion of the Westtown
Township Zoning Officer, they do not create a safety hazard.
§ 170-1808 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1808
1:805
§ 170-1809. Signs located on lots with agricultural use.
In addition to the exempt signs described in § 170-1804, Signs exempt from
permit requirements, the following numbers and types of signs may be
erected on properties with active agricultural uses, subject to the conditions
specified here.
§ 170-1810. Signs located on lots with parks and open space.
In addition to the exempt signs described in § 170-1804, Signs exempt
from permit requirements, the following numbers and types of signs may
be erected on properties serving as parks and open space, subject to the
conditions specified here.
(2) All signs must be made of durable materials and shall be wellmaintained.
(3) Signs that are frayed, torn, broken, or are otherwise in a failing
physical condition will be deemed unmaintained and required to be
removed.
E. Illumination. Illumination of any limited duration, temporary or
portable sign is prohibited.
A. Any limited duration and temporary signs as defined and regulated in
§ 170-1808, Regulations by sign type (limited duration, temporary and
portable signs).
B. Freestanding signs shall be permitted subject to the following
regulations:
(1) Number: one sign at each street access, up to a maximum of two
signs per lot.
(2) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 15 square feet per
sign face.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height of six feet unless
located along Route 926 or Route 352 where the height can be
increased to eight feet.
(4) Illumination. These signs shall be nonilluminated.
C. Window signs for uses customarily associated with agricultural uses
shall be permitted subject to the following regulations.
(1) Area: A maximum of 15% of the total window area of any single
building frontage may be used for signs.
(2) Illumination. Illumination of these signs is prohibited.
A. Any limited duration and temporary signs as defined and regulated in
§ 170-1808, Regulations by sign type (limited duration, temporary and
portable signs).
§ 170-1808 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1810
1:806
§ 170-1811. Signs located on lots with residential use.
In addition to the exempt signs described in § 170-1804, Signs exempt
from permit requirements, the following numbers and types of signs may
be erected on properties utilized for residential purposes, subject to the
conditions specified here.
B. Freestanding signs shall be permitted subject to the following
regulations:
(1) Number: one sign per street access to a park or open space facility.
(2) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 24 square feet per
sign face.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height of 10 feet.
(4) Illumination. The following illumination types shall be permitted
subject to the regulations in § 170-1805F, Sign illumination.
C. Signs located on the interior of the site, the sign face of which is not
larger than 1.5 square feet, are exempt from permit requirements.
D. Signs for recreation and sporting facilities shall be allowed provided
that the following criteria is met:
(1) A maximum of 20 signs on the interior walls or fence of an open
stadium or field shall be permitted and no sign shall be greater
than 24 square feet in size and shall be nonilluminated and not
visible from any public rights-of-way.
(2) One freestanding scoreboard, not to exceed 200 square feet in area
and 20 feet in height, is permitted per playing field.
(a) The face of all scoreboards, including any attached signs and
panels, shall be permanently oriented toward the recreation
and spectator area.
(b) Illumination. The following illumination types shall be
permitted subject to the regulations in § 170-1805F, Sign
illumination.
A. Any limited duration sign as defined and regulated in § 170-1808,
Regulations by sign type (limited duration, temporary and portable
signs).
B. Signs on a lot on which a major home occupation is located shall comply
with § 170-1605G(2)(m).
C. Freestanding signs on a lot on which residential developments or
apartment buildings containing more than 10 units are located shall be
permitted subject to the following regulations:
§ 170-1810 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1811
1:807
§ 170-1812. Signs located on lots with institutional use.
In addition to the exempt signs described in § 170-1804, Exempt signs, the
following numbers and types of signs may be erected for institutional uses,
including schools, religious institutions, municipal buildings, hospitals,
clubs, or permitted uses of a similar nature subject to the conditions
specified here.
(1) Number: A maximum of two signs are permitted at primary
entrance(s) utilized to access the development.
(2) Area: freestanding sign, 15 square feet; projecting or wall sign, 10
square feet.
(3) Height: freestanding sign, 3.5 feet; projecting or wall sign, 12 feet.
(4) Illumination. The following illumination types shall be permitted
subject to the regulations in § 170-1805F, Sign illumination.
(5) For signs proposed for a location under the ownership of a private
landowner, a deed of easement or an affidavit from the property
owner where the sign is proposed shall be required as part of any
sign permit application.
(6) A maintenance agreement shall be submitted as part of the sign
permit application that states the responsible party(s) for the
ongoing maintenance of the sign.
A. Any limited duration, temporary or portable sign as defined and
regulated in § 170-1808, Regulations by sign type (limited duration,
temporary and portable signs), subject to the following regulations:
(1) One large sign with a maximum area of 24 square feet shall be
permitted on a lot with a principal educational or school use at any
time.
(2) No more than four small signs with a maximum area of six square
feet shall be permitted on a lot with a principal educational or
school use at any time.
(3) Small signs on a lot with a principal educational or school use shall
be no closer than 50 feet to another small sign measured as a
straight-line distance between the closest edges of each sign.
B. The total area of all wall, awning/canopy, freestanding, and projecting
signs shall not exceed an area equal to two square feet for every one
linear foot of building wall parallel to, and facing, any particular street.
The sign area for each street frontage shall be computed separately,
and any allowable sign area not used on one frontage may not be used
on another street frontage.
C. Signs on a lot with a park or open space use in an institutional district
shall comply with § 170-1810.
§ 170-1811 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1812
1:808
D. Freestanding signs on a lot with an institutional use, other than parks
and open space, shall be permitted subject to the following regulations:
(1) Number: one ground sign is permitted per street upon which the
property has direct frontage.
(2) Area: ground sign, 24 square feet except on lots with a principal
educational or school use, which shall have a maximum area of 50
square feet.
(3) Height: ground sign, six feet except for lots with a principal
educational or school use, which shall have a maximum height of 15
feet.
(4) Illumination. The following illumination types shall be permitted
subject to the regulations in § 170-1805F, Sign illumination:
(a) Internal illumination.
(b) External illumination.
(c) Message center sign.
(d) Digital display on lots with a principal educational or school
use.
E. Freestanding signs located on the interior of the site at least 25 feet
from the nearest property boundary line are exempt from permit
requirements, subject to the following:
(1) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 10 square feet.
(2) Height: Each sign shall have a maximum height of six feet.
(3) Illumination. Illumination of these signs shall be prohibited.
F. Wall signs shall be permitted subject to the following regulations:
(1) Number: one sign per street frontage, up to a maximum of two
signs. Where an educational use has entrances facing both a street
and a parking lot, a second sign is permitted to face the parking
lot.
(2) Area: The total area for all wall signs is subject to the regulations in
§ 170-1806A(2).
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the eave line of
the structure where it is placed.
(4) Illumination. The following illumination types shall be permitted
subject to the regulations in § 170-1805F, Sign illumination:
(a) Internal illumination.
(b) External illumination, lit from above.
§ 170-1812 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1812
1:809
§ 170-1813. Signs located on lots with commercial and industrial
uses.
Except as noted below, the following numbers and types of signs may be
erected on any lot with a principal commercial or industrial use subject to
the conditions specified here:
(c) Halo illumination or backlit letters.
G. Awning or canopy signs shall be permitted subject to the following
regulations.
(1) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the eave line.
(2) Illumination. The following illumination types shall be permitted
subject to the regulations in § 170-1805F, Sign illumination:
(a) External illumination, lit from above.
H. Projecting signs on lots with an educational use shall be permitted
subject to the following regulations.
(1) Number: one sign per building entrance.
(2) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 20 square feet per
sign face.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the eave line.
(4) Illumination. The following illumination types shall be permitted
subject to the regulations in § 170-1805F, Sign illumination:
(a) External illumination, lit from above.
A. Any limited duration, temporary or portable sign as defined and
regulated in § 170-1808, Regulations by sign type (limited duration,
temporary and portable signs).
B. The total area of all wall, awning/canopy, freestanding, and projecting
signs on lots with nonresidential uses shall not exceed an area equal to
two square feet for every one linear foot of building wall parallel to, and
facing, any particular street. The sign area for each street frontage
shall be computed separately, and any allowable sign area not used on
one frontage may not be used on another street frontage.
C. Wall signs on lots with commercial and industrial uses shall be
permitted subject to the following regulations.
(1) Number: one sign per tenant per street frontage, up to a maximum
of two signs per tenant. Where a store has entrances facing both a
street and a parking lot, a second sign is permitted to face the
parking lot.
§ 170-1812 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1813
1:810
(2) Area: The total area for all wall signs are subject to the regulations
in § 170-1806A(2).
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the eave line of
the structure where it is placed.
(4) Illumination. The following illumination types shall be permitted
subject to the regulations in § 170-1805F, Sign illumination:
(a) Internal illumination.
(b) External illumination, lit from above.
(c) Halo illumination or backlit letters.
(d) Neon lighting.
D. Awning or canopy signs on lots with commercial and industrial uses
shall be permitted subject to the following regulations.
(1) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the eave line.
(2) Illumination. The following illumination types shall be permitted
subject to the regulations in § 170-1805F, Sign illumination:
(a) External illumination, lit from above.
E. Projecting signs on lots with commercial and industrial uses shall be
permitted subject to the following regulations.
(1) Number: one sign per ground floor establishment, plus one sign per
building entrance serving one or more commercial tenants without
a ground floor entrance.
(2) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 20 square feet per
sign face.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the eave line.
(4) Illumination. The following illumination types shall be permitted
subject to the regulations in § 170-1805F, Sign illumination:
(a) External illumination, lit from above.
(b) Neon lighting.
F. Window signs on lots with commercial and industrial uses shall be
permitted subject to the following regulations.
(1) Area: A maximum of 25% of the total window area of any single
storefront may be used for permanent signs that are etched,
painted, or permanently affixed to the window. A maximum of 35%
of the total window area of any single storefront may be covered by
a combination of permanent and temporary window signs.
§ 170-1813 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1813
1:811
G. Marquee signs on lots with commercial and industrial uses shall be
permitted subject to the following regulations.
(1) Number: one marquee sign per building.
(2) Area: The total area of signs on a single marquee structure shall
not exceed 200 square feet in area.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the eave line.
(4) Illumination. The following illumination types shall be permitted
subject to the regulations in § 170-1805F, Sign illumination:
(a) Internal illumination.
(b) Message center sign.
(c) Digital display.
H. In addition to building signs, freestanding signs on lots with commercial
and industrial uses shall be permitted subject to the following
regulations.
(1) Number: one sign per street frontage, up to two signs per property
held in single and separate ownership.
(a) For permitted gas stations, one additional freestanding sign
per street frontage shall be permitted, up to two additional
signs per property.
(b) For permitted drive-through establishments, one additional
freestanding sign shall be permitted next to the drive-through
lane only.
(2) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 50 square feet plus
an additional 10 square feet per tenant up to a maximum of 100
square feet.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height of 15 feet.
(4) Illumination. The following illumination types shall be permitted
subject to the regulations in § 170-1805F, Sign illumination:
(a) Internal illumination.
(b) Message center sign.
(c) Digital display.
I. The following additional requirements shall apply to signs located in the
Planned Office Campus (POC) District.
(1) Area: ground sign, 24 square feet; wall sign, 40 square feet.
(2) Height: ground sign, 3.5 feet.
§ 170-1813 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1814
1:812
§ 170-1814. Removal of unsafe, unlawful, or abandoned signs.
§ 170-1815. Permits and applications.
A. Unsafe or unlawful signs.
(1) Whenever a sign becomes structurally unsafe and/or poses a
potential threat to the safety of a building or premises or endangers
the public safety, and such condition becomes known to the Zoning
Officer, he/she shall give written notice to the owner of the
premises on which the sign is located that such sign must be made
safe within five days, unless the Zoning Officer shall deem
appropriate a more extended period for compliance.
(2) Where in the opinion of the Zoning Officer upon careful inspection
by him/her and the Township building official, any sign as described
above constitutes an imminent hazard to public safety
necessitating immediate action, he/she shall be empowered to take
those measures he/she deems appropriate to secure, stabilize, or
remove such sign without the written notice to the owner of the
premises otherwise required by that section. Any expense directly
incurred to secure, stabilize, or remove such sign shall be charged
to the owner of the property. Where the owner fails to pay,
Westtown Township may file a lien upon the property on which such
sign was situated in the amount of the costs incurred by the
Township to secure, stabilize, or remove the sign.
(3) Failure of the Zoning Officer to remove, or require the removal of,
any unsafe sign as described in this section shall create no liability
upon, nor any cause of action against, the Zoning Officer or any
other Township official or employee for damage or injury that may
occur as a result of such sign.
B. Abandoned signs.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any property upon
which an abandoned sign is located to remove such sign within 180
days of the sign becoming abandoned as defined in this section.
Removal of an abandoned sign shall include the removal of the
entire sign including the sign face, supporting structure, structural
trim, and all associated electrical components when applicable.
(2) Where the owner of the property on which an abandoned sign is
located fails to remove such sign in 180 days, Westtown Township
may remove such sign after the Zoning Officer gives written notice
to the sign owner. Any expense directly incurred in the removal of
such sign shall be charged to the owner of the property. Where the
owner fails to pay, Westtown Township may file a lien upon the
property for the purpose of recovering all reasonable costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township,
associated with the removal of the sign.
§ 170-1814 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1815
1:813
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, alter,
repair, or relocate any sign within Westtown Township without first
obtaining a sign permit, unless the sign is specifically exempt from the
permit requirements as outlined in § 170-1804, Exempt signs.
B. In order to apply for a sign permit, the applicant must provide the
following information, in writing, to Westtown Township:
(1) Name of organization and location.
(2) Name, address, and telephone number of the property owner, and
the signature of the property owner or duly authorized agent for
the owner.
(3) Contact person and contact information.
(4) Description of the activities occurring on the site where the sign
will be installed.
(5) Description of any existing signage that will remain on the site.
(6) Identification of the type of sign(s) to be erected by the applicant.
(7) Site plan depicting the locations of proposed signage and existing
remaining signage.
(8) Two copies of a plan drawn to scale depicting:
(a) Lot dimensions, building frontage, and existing cartways,
rights-of-way and driveways.
(b) The design of each sign face and sign structure, including
dimensions, total area, sign height, depth, color scheme,
structural details, materials, lighting scheme and proposed
location.
(c) Building elevations, existing and proposed facades, parapet
walls, eave line and the location and size of all proposed and
existing permanent signage.
(d) Current photographs showing existing signs on the premises
and certifying the date on which photographs were taken.
(9) A permit fee, to be established from time to time by resolution of
Westtown Township, shall be paid.
C. Westtown Township shall have 15 business days from the receipt of a
complete application to review the application.
D. A permit shall be issued on or before the end of the fifteen-business-day
review period if the application for a new sign or renewal complies with
the regulations contained herein.
E. If Westtown Township does not issue a determination within the fifteenbusiness-
day period, the sign permit is deemed approved.
§ 170-1815 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1815
1:814
§ 170-1816. Nonconforming signs.
F. An application for a sign permit may be denied by Westtown Township
within the fifteen-business-day review period if the application fails to
comply with the standards contained herein. Westtown Township shall
inform the applicant of the reasons for denying the application for sign
permit by certified mail.
G. Upon denial of an application for a sign permit, the applicant has 30
business days to revise and resubmit the application for review by
Westtown Township. In the alternative, the applicant may also appeal
the decision of Westtown Township to the Zoning Hearing Board within
the thirty-business-day time period.
H. With the exception of lighting permits for digital signs, these permits
shall not expire provided that such signs are not abandoned or
destroyed. In the instance that substantial repair or replacement
becomes necessary (i.e., repairs that cost more than 50% of the
replacement cost of the damaged sign), the organization must apply for
a new sign permit, and pay an additional fee, if required.
A. Signs legally in existence at the time of the adoption of this article,
which do not conform to the requirements of this article, shall be
considered nonconforming signs.
B. All permanent signs and sign structures shall be brought into
conformance with the sign regulations when and if the following
occurs:
(1) The sign is removed, relocated, or significantly altered. Significant
alterations include changes in the size or dimension of the sign.
Changes to the sign copy or the replacement of a sign face on a
nonconforming sign shall not be considered a significant alteration.
(2) If more than 50% of the sign area is damaged, it shall be repaired to
conform to this article.
(3) The property on which the nonconforming sign is located submits a
subdivision or land development application requiring municipal
review and approval.
(4) The property on which the nonconforming sign is located
undergoes a change of land use requiring the issuance of either a
use and occupancy permit or a change of use and occupancy permit
by Westtown Township.
C. To determine the legal status of existing signs in each of the cases listed
in § 170-1816B, the applicant shall submit the following information to
the Westtown Township Zoning Officer:
(1) Type(s) of existing sign(s) located on the property.
(2) The area and height of all signs.
§ 170-1815 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1816
1:815
§ 170-1817. Signs located on lot with legally nonconforming uses.
§ 170-1818. Substitution clause.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, to the extent
that this chapter allows a sign containing commercial copy, it shall allow a
noncommercial sign to the same extent. The noncommercial message may
(3) For freestanding signs, the distance between the curbline or
shoulder and the nearest portion of the sign.
(4) Type of sign illumination.
(5) The material of which the sign is constructed.
(6) The building frontage.
(7) If a billboard sign, the applicant shall also submit the plan
requirements listed in § 170-1807M.
D. Prior to the events listed in § 170-1816B, nonconforming signs may be
repainted or repaired up to 50% of the replacement cost of the sign, the
sign copy may be changed, and sign faces may be replaced provided
that these actions do not increase the dimensions of the existing sign,
and do not in any way increase the extent of the sign's nonconformity.
E. Nonconforming signs shall be exempt from the provisions of
§ 170-1816B under the following conditions:
(1) The nonconforming sign possesses documented historic value.
(2) The nonconforming sign is of a unique nature or type by virtue of
its architectural value or design, as determined by the National
Park Service, Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission, or
local historical commission.
(3) When a nonconforming sign is required to be moved because of
public right-of-way improvements.
F. All nonconforming temporary signs, portable signs, and banners must
be permanently removed within 90 days of the effective date of this
article, unless specific approval is granted as provided for herein.
A. Signs on the premises of legally nonconforming uses (such as an office
in a residential area) may remain until the existing use of the premises
is discontinued.
B. If a sign wears out or is damaged (including rust, faded colors,
discoloration, holes, or missing parts or informational items), or is
changed for any other reason, the number, size, and area of all signs
relating to the premises shall not be increased beyond the
characteristics of the sign or signs that existed on that property at the
time this article was adopted.
§ 170-1816 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1818
1:816
occupy the entire sign area or any portion thereof, and may substitute for
or be combined with the commercial message. The sign message may be
changed from commercial to noncommercial, or from one noncommercial
message to another, as frequently as desired by the sign's owner, provided
that the sign is not prohibited and the sign continues to comply with all
requirements of this chapter.
§ 170-1819. Violations and penalties.
The placement of a sign that requires a sign permit without a sign permit
shall be unlawful. Violations of this article shall be treated as prescribed
within Article XXIII of the Zoning Ordinance for Violations Remedies; Fees;
Liability.
§ 170-1818 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1819
1:817

ARTICLE XIX
Nonconformities
§ 170-1900. Statement of intent.
§ 170-1901. Nonconforming uses or structures.
A. The zoning districts established by this chapter are designed to guide
future use of land in Westtown Township by encouraging the
development of desirable residential and commercial areas, with
appropriate groupings of compatible and related uses.
B. To achieve that end, the following regulations shall apply to existing
uses, structures, lots, and signs which do not conform to the provisions
of this chapter or to the provisions of any subsequent amendment
hereto. It is the policy of Westtown Township to seek the elimination of
such nonconformities to the maximum extent practical, while avoiding
undue burdens on property owners and assuring equitable treatment.
Nonconforming uses and structures, however, generally will be
permitted to remain; the purpose of regulating them is to restrict
further investment in uses or structures which are inappropriate to
their location.
C. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require a change in plans, construction, or intended use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective
date, or amendment, of this chapter and on which actual building
construction has been diligently carried on.
A. Continuation. The lawful use of a structure or land existing on the
effective date of this chapter or subsequent amendment, or authorized
by a building permit issued prior thereto and not expired, may be
continued, although such use does not conform with the provisions of
this chapter.
B. Expansion. [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
(1) A lot which is nonconforming in regard to building coverage or
impervious coverage shall not be permitted any expansion of such
coverage beyond the existing nonconformity, as applicable.
(2) A nonconforming use of any existing structure may be expanded
throughout such structure up to a maximum expansion equal to
25% of the floor area dedicated to the nonconforming use at the
time it became nonconforming and if no structural alterations are
made therein; provided that such expansion may include structural
alterations when authorized as a special exception by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
(3) A conforming structure housing a nonconforming use may be
expanded upon the lot which it occupied at the effective date of this
chapter, for purposes of the nonconforming use, up to a maximum
§ 170-1900 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1901
1:819
expansion equal to 25% of the building area of the subject structure
as it existed upon the effective date of this chapter, when
authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board may impose specific requirements on
the expansion of such a building so that the extended building
will continue to conform in all respects to the standards applicable
within the district in which it is located. The applicant shall have
the burden of proof that his application falls within the provisions
of this article and that the granting of his application will not
be contrary to the public interest. It shall also be the applicant's
burden to produce evidence in support of his application which will
assist the Zoning Hearing Board in applying the criteria set forth in
§ 170-2108 of this chapter.
(4) Where expansion of a nonconforming structure for purposes of a
conforming use may be accomplished such that the expanded
portion(s) of the structure are fully conforming to the standards
applicable within the district in which it is located, such expansion
shall be permitted by right.
(5) A nonconforming structure, regardless of use, may be expanded
upon the lot which it occupied at the effective date of this chapter,
when authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board and in accordance with the following:
(a) The Zoning Hearing Board may impose specific requirements
on the expansion of such a structure so that the extended
structure will not increase the degree of nonconformity
relative to the standards applicable within the district in which
it is located.
(b) The portion of the building area (footprint) of any such
structure which is nonconforming relative to yard setback
requirements shall not be increased by more than 25%, except
where such increase in building area shall conform with
applicable standards.
(c) Notwithstanding the above, any portion of any structure which
is nonconforming relative to applicable height limitations shall
not be expanded more than 25% at the same height as existed
at the time the structure became nonconforming. In no case
shall expansion of a nonconforming structure be permitted to
increase any nonconformity relative to height.
(d) The applicant shall have the burden of proof that his
application falls within the provisions of this article and that
the granting of his application will not be contrary to the public
interest. It shall also be the applicant's burden to produce
evidence in support of his application which will assist the
Zoning Hearing Board in applying the criteria set forth in
§ 170-2108 of this chapter.
§ 170-1901 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1901
1:820
C. Change of use.
(1) Whenever a nonconforming use of a structure or land has been
changed to a conforming use, such conforming use shall not
thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use.
(2) Any nonconforming use of a structure or land may be changed to a
use that conforms with this chapter, provided that, where required,
a use and occupancy permit is obtained for such change.
(3) A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use only when the proposed change is a use characterized by the
same or lesser impacts on adjoining properties and the zoning
district in which it is proposed, and only when authorized as a
special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board. In making its
determination, the Board shall employ, among others, the following
criteria:
(a) The applicant shall show that the nonconforming use cannot
reasonably be changed to a use permitted in the district where
it is located.
(b) Proposed structural alterations, if any, shall be deemed the
minimum necessary to facilitate the proposed use, and
generally should not create nor increase any structural or
dimensional nonconformity.
(c) The applicant shall have the burden of showing that the
proposed use will have the same or lesser impact than the
existing nonconforming use with respect to:
[1] On-street parking, traffic generation, and congestion;
[2] Noise, smoke, dust, noxious matter, heat, glare, vibration,
and other nuisance characteristics relative to the
particular use;
[3] Storage and waste disposal;
[4] External appearance;
[5] Fire hazards;
[6] Hours of operation;
[7] Volume of sewage generated;
[8] Demand for water supply; and
[9] Amount of stormwater runoff to be controlled.
D. Restoration. Any lawful nonconforming structure which has been
involuntarily damaged by fire, explosion, flood, windstorm, or similar
cause to an extent of not more than 50% of its fair market value, or
§ 170-1901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1901
1:821
§ 170-1902. Nonconforming lots of record.
§ 170-1903. Nonconforming signs.
which has been legally condemned, may be restored within the limits of
the existing foundation, and within its original dimensions. Restoration
shall commence within one year from the date of damage, destruction,
or condemnation, and shall be carried on consistently, without major
interruption, on a time schedule agreed to by the Zoning Officer at
the time of building permit issuance. Where the extent of damage
or destruction exceeds 50% of the fair market value, any restoration,
reconstruction, or new construction shall comply fully with the terms of
this chapter.
E. Discontinuance. If an owner of a building or land which is occupied by a
nonconforming use desires to discontinue such use for an extended
period of time, but intends to resume such use at a later date, he/she
may apply to the Board of Supervisors, in writing, for a certificate of
continuance, stating the reasons for and duration of the discontinuance
and the date upon which such use will be resumed.
F. Abandonment. If a nonconforming use of land or a building ceases or is
discontinued for a continuous period of six months or more and no
certificate has been granted, as stipulated in Subsection E above, such
use shall be considered to have been abandoned and any subsequent
use of such building or land shall conform to the provisions of this
chapter. Similarly, if a certificate and renewal are granted but the
nonconforming use is not resumed within the stipulated time period,
such use shall be considered to have been abandoned and any
subsequent use of such building or land shall conform to the provisions
of this chapter.
A. A lot held, in single and separate ownership, which does not meet the
minimum area or dimensional requirements of the applicable zoning
district, may be used and a structure may be built thereon, provided
that the required minimum yard areas can be complied with.
[Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord. No. 94-6]
B. Where a lot cannot meet all minimum yard requirements, or where
alterations or enlargements would result in further noncompliance with
applicable district requirements, the use of such lot shall require the
granting of a variance by the Zoning Hearing Board. [Amended
12-5-1994 by Ord. No. 94-6]
C. In the event an owner of a nonconforming lot also owns adjacent
property which, in combination, would be sufficient to enable him/her
to comply with the provisions of this chapter, such properties or
portions thereof shall be combined prior to the erection or alteration of
a building or structure.
§ 170-1901 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-1903
1:822
§ 170-1904. Nonconformities subject to floodplain regulations.
[Amended 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
The standards and procedures governing nonconforming uses and
structures subject to floodplain regulations shall be those contained in §
170-401J of this chapter.
A. Except as stipulated in Subsection B below, any sign existing at the
effective date of this chapter, or subsequent amendment, that does not
conform to the provisions of Article XVIII of this chapter shall be
considered a nonconforming sign and shall comply with the
requirements of § 170-1807C.
B. Signs which, at the effective date of this chapter or subsequent
amendment, are maintained in connection with and upon the same lot
as a lawful nonconforming use may be maintained, repaired, or
replaced with signs similar in size and character as long as such lawful
nonconforming use continues, but may not be enlarged or otherwise
substantially altered (nor may any illumination be increased or newly
installed) except in accordance with the applicable regulations in
Article XVIII.
§ 170-1903 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1904
1:823

ARTICLE XX
Administration
§ 170-2000. Duties and functions of Zoning Officer.
There shall be a Zoning Officer, appointed by the Board of Supervisors and
meeting the qualifications established by the Board, whose duty it shall
be, and who is hereby given the authority, to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. He/she shall:
A. Receive and examine all applications for permits, referring applications
to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation when
deemed advisable; record and file all applications for permits with any
accompanying plans and documents; coordinate administrative and
monitoring activities resulting from the issuance of building permits
with the Township Building Inspector.
B. Issue permits only when there is compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and with other Township ordinances.
C. Receive applications for special exceptions or variances and forward
these applications to the Zoning Hearing Board for action thereon.
D. Receive applications for appeals from alleged error of the Zoning
Officer and forward these applications to the Zoning Hearing Board for
action thereon.
E. Receive applications for conditional uses and forward these
applications to the Board of Supervisors and the Planning Commission
for action thereon.
F. Issue permits resulting from decisions on special exception or variance
applications, or from decisions on conditional use applications, only
upon written order of the Zoning Hearing Board or the Board of
Supervisors, respectively.
G. Conduct inspections or surveys to determine compliance or
noncompliance with the terms of this chapter.
H. Issue cease and desist orders, in writing, to require correction of all
conditions found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Such
written orders shall be served personally or by certified mail upon
persons, firms, or corporations deemed by the Zoning Officer to be
violating the terms of this chapter.
I. Maintain the official Zoning Map showing the current zoning
classification of all land.
J. Upon the request of the Board of Supervisors, the Planning
Commission, or the Zoning Hearing Board, present to such bodies facts,
records, or reports which they may request to assist them in making
decisions.
§ 170-2000 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2001
1:825
§ 170-2001. Requirement for building permits.
§ 170-2002. Applications for building permits.
§ 170-2003. Issuance of building permits.
A. It shall be unlawful to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any
erection, construction, alteration, demolition, or removal of any
building or structure anywhere within the Township unless a building
permit has been obtained from the Zoning Officer. A building permit
shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures, as such repairs are defined in the Township Building
Code.107
B. Applications for development of land shall be made in accordance with
the terms of Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development.
A. Any application for a building permit shall be made in writing on forms
furnished by the Township. It shall be accompanied by a plot plan
showing the exact size and location of any buildings or other structures
existing on the lot in question and the lines within which the proposed
building or other structure shall be erected or altered. In addition,
there shall be included with all applications such other plans,
documents, and information as the Zoning Officer may deem necessary
to enable him/her to ascertain compliance with this chapter and all
other pertinent ordinances.
B. Any application for construction of a use subject to floodplain
regulations, including any application for a special exception permitted
therein or for a variance, shall contain such additional information as
may be required by § 170-401 of this chapter. [Amended 9-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-3]
A. The Zoning Officer shall issue a building permit only after he/she has
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Zoning Officer shall
review the permit application to determine if all other necessary
governmental reviews and permits have been obtained, including but
not limited to those required by Act 537, the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act (35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.); the United States Clean
Water Act; the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act (32 P.S.
§ 679.101 et seq.); and the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (35 P.S.
§ 691.1 et seq.). No permit shall be issued until this determination has
been made.
107. Editor's Note: See Ch. 57, Building Construction, Art. I, Building Code.
§ 170-2001 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-2003
1:826
§ 170-2004. Requirement of use and occupancy permits.
C. A building permit shall be issued, or the application denied, within 15
days of submission of the application, unless the Zoning Officer will
require a more extended time period to obtain and/or review any
additional plans, documents, or other information he/she deems
necessary to determine compliance with applicable ordinances, as
authorized by § 170-2002A above. Where such an extension of time will
be needed, the Zoning Officer shall seek written concurrence from the
applicant; in the absence of such written concurrence, the Zoning
Officer shall have the right to deny the application within the fifteen-day
period.
D. Upon completion of the addition to, erection or alteration of any
structure, or portion thereof, authorized by any building permit
obtained in compliance with this article, and prior to use or occupancy
of such structure, the holder of such permit shall notify the Zoning
Officer of such completion. Use and occupancy shall not be authorized
until the Zoning Officer has certified that the work has been inspected
and approved as being in conformity with this and other applicable
ordinances, and has issued a use and occupancy permit as provided
below. The Zoning Officer or his agent must, within three working days
of the notice, inspect the premises or the occupancy shall be considered
approved.
A. A use and occupancy permit shall be required prior to any of the
following: [Amended 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
(1) Use and occupancy of any new building or new portion of building
not previously occupied and for which electrical, plumbing or
heating was installed.
(2) Change in classification/type of use of any building or structure.
(3) Use of land or change in the use thereof, except that the use of land
or change in use for agricultural purposes shall not require a
permit.
(4) Change in use, or extension, of a nonconforming use.
(5) Change or transfer of ownership.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy any building or
other structure or land, as described above, until a use and occupancy
permit has been duly issued therefor.
C. A certificate of use and occupancy of an accessory dwelling shall
prominently indicate that it is valid for a period of one year from the
date of issuance and that continued occupancy of the accessory
dwelling beyond that period shall be unlawful unless, prior thereto, the
owner applies for and receives a renewal permit. [Added 5-21-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-5]
§ 170-2003 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2004
1:827
§ 170-2005. Applications for use and occupancy permits. [Amended
5-21-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-5]
All applications for use and occupancy permits and renewals thereof shall
be made in writing on forms furnished by the Township and shall include
all information necessary to enable the Building Inspector to ascertain
compliance with this chapter, including the notice of completed work on
the structure as required in § 170-2003 and the identity of the occupants of
accessory dwellings to demonstrate compliance with § 170-1603A(2)(c) and
(d).
§ 170-2006. Issuance of use and occupancy permits. [Amended
5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
§ 170-2007. Sign permits.
All requirements for sign permits are contained in § 170-1808 of this
chapter.
§ 170-2008. Issuance or refusal of permits.
D. A certificate of use and occupancy of an accessory dwelling unit shall
not be issued or renewed unless it is demonstrated by the applicant that
the accessory dwelling unit and its use and occupancy complies with all
regulations applicable thereto, including, but without limitation, the
occupancy requirements of § 170-1603A(2)(c) and (d). [Added
5-21-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-5]
A. No use and occupancy permit shall be issued until the Building
Inspector has certified that the proposed use complies with all
applicable provisions of this chapter and has inspected the premises to
confirm compliance of the building. No building that was erected or
altered pursuant to a building permit shall be occupied until inspected
and certified as to compliance with all zoning, construction, safety and
sanitary ordinances, codes and regulations. Upon a change or transfer
of ownership, the Building Inspector shall certify only compliance with
the codes and standards identified on the resale inspection report
authorized by the Township.
B. Pending completion of a building or of alterations thereto, a temporary
use and occupancy permit may be issued by the Building Inspector for
temporary occupancy of a part or all of a building, provided that such
temporary occupancy will not in any way jeopardize life or property and
is limited to a period of less than 90 days.
A. If the Zoning Officer or Building Inspector determines that an
application is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, it shall
be his duty to issue the appropriate permit. If he/she determines that an
application is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, it
shall be his duty to refuse the permit, in which case he/she shall inform
§ 170-2004 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-2008
1:828
§ 170-2009. Conditional uses.
the applicant as to the prescribed method of appeal or further
application for approval.
B. Upon the granting of a building permit, the Building Inspector shall
issue to the applicant a placard, confirming the granting of such permit,
to be displayed upon the premises in a manner conspicuous to the
public for a period of 30 days. Failure to so display said placard shall
result in revocation of the building permit.
A. Statement of intent. This chapter provides for certain uses to be
permitted within the Township as conditional uses. In so providing, the
Board of Supervisors recognizes that these uses may or may not be
appropriate at every location within any specific district and,
accordingly, has established standards and criteria by which it can
evaluate and decide upon applications for such uses. It is intended that
these uses, constituting major uses having the potential for substantial
impact upon the community, shall comply with the standards for
conditional uses hereinafter set forth, in addition to the relevant
stipulations of the district in which the conditional use is authorized. In
the sole discretion of the Board of Supervisors, failure to comply with
these standards may be deemed a basis for the imposition of
appropriate conditions to a grant of approval. Where there is a conflict
between the standards set forth in this section and other standards
elsewhere established by this or other applicable chapters, it is
intended that the more stringent standards shall apply, and it is not the
intent of this section to abrogate or impair any other such standards or
requirements. Where any use or any applicable design criteria subject
to conditional use approval also is a part of an overall land development
plan subject to application for approval of a special exception, such use
or design criteria may be considered for approval by the Zoning
Hearing Board as part of the applicable special exception application in
lieu of separate submission of an application for conditional use
approval. Similarly, where any use or any applicable design criteria
subject to special exception approval also is a part of an overall land
development plan subject to application for conditional use approval,
such use or design criteria may be considered for approval by the Board
of Supervisors as part of the applicable conditional use application in
lieu of separate submission of an application for approval of a special
exception.
B. Submission and content of conditional use applications.
(1) It shall be the burden of the applicant to demonstrate compliance
with the standards for conditional use contained in this section and
with any other relevant stipulations of this chapter, and to indicate
means by which potential impacts from the proposed use will be
mitigated.
§ 170-2008 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2009
1:829
(2) An application for conditional use approval shall be submitted on a
form provided by or otherwise acceptable to the Township and shall
be accompanied by an application fee, the amount of which shall be
established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
(3) An accurate site plan prepared by a qualified professional shall be
submitted. Such site plan shall accurately show topography and
existing and proposed development.
(a) Detailed grading plans, stormwater calculations, profiles and
similar engineering details are not required to be submitted
until a preliminary or final plan application is made under
Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development.
(b) If a traffic study is required by this chapter or Chapter 149,
Subdivision and Land Development, it shall be submitted with
the conditional use application.
(c) The approximate location of stormwater basins and swales
shall be shown.
(d) The application shall include sufficient information, e.g.,
preliminary site grading and road profiles, preliminary
stormwater management analysis, etc., to preliminarily
determine compliance with the Township natural feature, site
analysis, conservation design process (if applicable) and
density requirements.
(4) The scale of the site plan shall be one inch equals 50 feet. If the site
plan is on more than one sheet, then the overall layout shall also be
submitted on a single sheet. If only a portion of a tract is proposed
for development, the submittal shall show how this portion will be
fully coordinated with the development of future portions of the
tract.
(5) Where specific conditional use submission requirements are
contained within another article of this chapter and are applicable
to a particular conditional use authorized by that article, those
requirements shall be adhered to and shall prevail in any instance
of conflict or overlap.
(6) In addition to demonstrating compliance with all standards
applicable to the conditional use being requested, the site plan
shall show the applicant's intentions with regard to the following:
(a) Site access, interior circulation, and parking.
(b) Location, approximate dimension, and arrangement of all
areas devoted to ground cover, trees, screen planting, open
space, recreation, and similar purposes, as applicable.
§ 170-2009 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-2009
1:830
(c) Adequate handling of stormwater, in the form of a preliminary
written analysis and conclusions as to anticipated methods,
prepared by a registered professional engineer.
(d) Location, planned uses, approximate overall dimensions, gross
floor area, coverage, and height of each building or structure.
(e) Strong consideration shall be given to incorporation of LEED
(Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) certified
building design principals recommended by the US Green
Building Council. [Added 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1]
(7) Site analysis and the conservation design process.
C. Application review procedures.
(1) The application shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer. If it is
deficient with regard to any required components, procedures, or
fees, the Zoning Officer shall so notify the applicant. This review
and notification shall occur prior to the scheduling of a public
hearing on the application. If such identified deficiencies are not
remedied in the form of a resubmitted application, such
deficiencies shall constitute grounds for denial of the application by
the Board of Supervisors subsequent to public hearing.
(2) The Board of Supervisors shall schedule and hold a public hearing
on the application pursuant to public notice within 60 days of filing
unless the applicant, in writing, waives or extends the time
limitation.
(3) At least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, one copy of the
application shall be furnished to the Township Planning
Commission, together with a request that it submit
recommendations to the Board for consideration at the hearing.
The Planning Commission, in its review of the conditional use
application, shall evaluate in particular the generalized site plan in
relation to the Township Comprehensive Plan and the physical
development of the Township.
(4) A stenographic record of the hearing proceedings shall be made by
a court reporter. The appearance fee for the court reporter shall be
shared equally by the applicant and the Board. Any party
requesting the original transcript or a copy of the transcript shall
bear the cost of same.
(5) The plan presented at the public hearing shall be essentially the
same as that reviewed by the Planning Commission. Changes
deemed by the Planning Commission to be substantial may result in
rescheduling the public hearing where the Planning Commission
finds that such changes necessitate a greater period of time for
review and comment.
§ 170-2009 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2009
1:831
(6) Upon review of the application in terms of the standards and
criteria of this chapter, the Board of Supervisors shall render a
decision within 45 days of completion of the public hearing process.
(7) In approving a conditional use application, where such use is
authorized under this chapter, the Board of Supervisors may, at its
sole discretion, attach such conditions to its approval as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. Such conditions
may include, but need not be limited to:
(a) Specific modifications to area and bulk requirements as might
otherwise be applicable;
(b) Provisions for additional utility or traffic safety facilities;
(c) Securing of additional easements or property to assure proper
site design; or
(d) Modification to the applicable design standards.
(8) If the Board of Supervisors approves the application and
accompanying generalized site plan, such approved plan shall
accompany any application for subdivision or land development as
prescribed by Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development, in
addition to the detailed working drawings normally required, and
any application for a building permit. The issuance or rejection of a
building permit shall take place in the regularly prescribed manner
herein pertaining to building permits, but shall be preceded by
compliance with Chapter 149, Subdivision and Land Development.
(9) Any grant of conditional use approval shall be deemed null and void
six months from the date of such approval if, within that period, no
application is made for a building permit, a use and occupancy
permit, or subdivision or land development approval, as
appropriate, unless the Board of Supervisors shall grant an
extension.
D. Standards for conditional use approval. [Amended 5-3-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-2]
(1) In reviewing and acting upon an application for conditional use, the
Board of Supervisors shall evaluate the degree of compliance with
the following standards:
(a) The uses proposed shall be limited to those authorized as
conditional uses within the district in which the lot or parcel is
situated.
(b) The proposal shall be consistent with the Township
Comprehensive Plan and with the purpose of this chapter to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.
§ 170-2009 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-2009
1:832
§ 170-2010. Limited Township and Municipal Authority Exemption.
[Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(c) The appropriate use, and the value, of adjacent property will
be safeguarded.
(d) The development, if more than one building, will consist of a
harmonious grouping of buildings or other structures.
(e) If the development is to be carried out in progressive stages,
each stage shall be so planned that the conditions and intent of
this chapter shall be fully complied with at the completion of
any stage.
(f) The demand created by the proposed use upon public services
and facilities such as water supply, sewage disposal, police and
fire protection, emergency services, open space and recreation
facilities, and the public school system has been considered
and, where necessary, adequate arrangements for expansion
or improvement are assured.
(g) The design and use of any new construction and the proposed
change of design (if any) and proposed change in use of
existing buildings will be compatible with the existing designs
and uses in the immediate vicinity and that the proposed
design or use shall be compatible with the character of the
neighborhood.
(h) The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to prove to the
satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors, by credible evidence,
that the use will not result in or substantially add to a
significant traffic hazard or significant traffic congestion. The
peak traffic generated by the development shall be
accommodated in a safe and efficient manner. Such analysis
shall consider any improvements to streets that the applicant is
committed to complete or fund. [Added 5-3-1999 by Ord. No.
99-2]
(2) The Board of Supervisors shall weigh each case on its own merits,
separately, based upon pertinent information presented or known
to it, and without regard to any previous case.
A. The minimum lot area, minimum lot width and minimum street frontage
requirements of this chapter shall not apply to uses or structures owned
by Westtown Township or by a municipal authority created solely by
Westtown Township for uses and structures that are intended for a
public utility, stormwater or public health and safety purpose.
B. This chapter shall allow a lot or structure to become nonconforming if
necessary to provide for needed acquisition of right-of-way by the
Township or PennDOT for a street, utility or stormwater improvement.
§ 170-2009 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2010
1:833

ARTICLE XXI
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 170-2100. Establishment and membership. [Amended 3-3-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-2]
§ 170-2101. Organization of Board.
The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve
annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any
hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall not be less than a
majority of all the members of the Board, but the Board may appoint a
hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its
behalf and the parties may waive further action by the Board, as provided
in § 170-2103. The Board may make, alter, and rescind rules and forms for
its procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Township and laws of the
commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business and
shall submit a report of its activities to the Board of Supervisors once a year.
§ 170-2102. Expenditures for services; fees.
A. There shall be a Zoning Hearing Board which shall consist of three
members, who shall be appointed by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors. The membership of the Zoning Hearing Board shall consist
of residents of the Township. Their terms of office shall be three years
and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire
each year. The Zoning Hearing Board shall promptly notify the Board of
Supervisors of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill
vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. Members
of the Zoning Hearing Board shall hold no other office in the Township.
Any member of the Zoning Hearing Board may be removed for
malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office or for other just
cause by a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors taken after the
member has received 15 days advance notice of the intent to take such
a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the
member shall request it in writing.
B. When used hereafter in Article XXI, the word "Board" shall mean the
Zoning Hearing Board.
C. The Board of Supervisors may appoint alternate members of the Zoning
Hearing Board who shall serve as authorized under the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.108
A. Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Board of Supervisors, the
Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants, and other technical and clerical services. Members of the
Board may receive compensation for the performance of their duties, as
may be fixed by the Board of Supervisors.
108. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 170-2100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2102
1:835
§ 170-2103. Hearings.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
the following requirements:
B. The applicant before the Board shall deposit with the Treasurer of the
Township the appropriate filing fee. Fees shall be established, by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors, for purposes as prescribed in
Section 908(1.1) of the Municipalities Planning Code [53 P.S.
§ 10908(1.1)]. Funds deposited in excess of the actual cost of the
requested hearing shall be returned to the applicant upon completion of
the proceedings. In the event that the costs of the hearing exceed the
funds deposited, the applicant shall pay to the Treasurer of the
Township funds equal to such excess costs within 30 days of the Board's
request.
A. The Board shall fix a reasonable time and place for public hearings and
shall give notice thereof as follows:
(1) By giving public notice thereof, as defined by this chapter.
(2) By providing, by certified mail, a written notice thereof to the
applicant at least 14 days before the date fixed for the hearing.
(3) By mailing a written notice thereof to the applicant, the Zoning
Officer, the Township Secretary, each member of the Board of
Supervisors, the Secretary of the Chester County Planning
Commission, and to every person or organization who shall have
registered with the Board for the purpose of receiving such notices,
accompanied by the appropriate mailing fee. The Board of
Supervisors may fix an annual fee for provision of notices to such
registered persons or organizations.
(4) By posting the written notice of said hearing in a conspicuous
location on the affected tract of land, at least one week prior to the
hearing.
(5) By mailing or delivering a notice thereof to the owner of every lot
on the same street within 500 feet (measured along the street
frontage) of the lot or building in question, and of every lot not on
the same street but within a radius of 500 feet of the said lot or
building, provided that failure to give notice as required by this
subsection shall not invalidate any action taken by the Board.
The notice herein required shall state the location of the lot or
building and the general nature of the question involved, as well
as the date, time, and place of the hearing.
B. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board, or the Board may
appoint any member as a hearing officer. The decision or, where no
decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Board, but the
§ 170-2102 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-2103
1:836
parties may waive decision or findings by the Board and accept the
decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
C. The parties to the hearing shall be the Township, any person affected by
the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board, and any other person, including civic or community
organizations, permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that
purpose.
D. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board, or the hearing officer
presiding, shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and documents requested by the
parties.
E. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
F. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
G. A stenographic record of the proceedings shall be made by a court
reporter. The appearance fee for the court reporter shall be shared
equally by the applicant and the Board. Any party requesting the
original transcript or a copy of the transcript shall bear the cost of
same. Copies of graphic or written material received in evidence shall
be made available to any party at cost.
H. Once an application has been duly filed, the Board or the hearing officer
shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his
representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon
notice and opportunity for all parties to participate; shall not take
notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or other
materials unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the
material so noticed; and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings
with any party or his representative unless all parties are given an
opportunity to be present.
I. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before
the Board or hearing officer. Each decision shall be accompanied by
findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, together with the
reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of this chapter or
of any act, rule, or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision
relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in
the light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing
officer, and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings
are final, the Board shall make his report and recommendations
available to the parties within 45 days, and the parties shall be entitled
§ 170-2103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2103
1:837
§ 170-2104. Appeals from the Zoning Officer.
The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant
that the Zoning Officer has failed to follow prescribed procedures or has
misinterpreted or misapplied any provisions of a valid ordinance or map
or any valid rule or regulation governing the action of the Zoning Officer,
as stipulated under the terms of Section 909.1(a) of the Municipalities
Planning Code [53 P.S. 10909.1(a)].
§ 170-2105. Challenge to validity of Zoning Ordinance or Map.
The Board shall hear any substantive challenge to the validity of this
chapter or the Zoning Map, except a challenge brought before the Board
of Supervisors under the terms of Section 609.1 or 916.1(a)(2) of the
Municipalities Planning Code [53 P.S. § 10609.1 or 10916.1(a)(2)]. The
Board also shall hear any challenge to the validity of this chapter raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or
adoption, where such challenge is raised by an appeal taken within 30 days
after the effective date of the ordinance. In all such challenges, the Board
shall take evidence and make a record thereon as provided in § 170-2102. At
the conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall decide all contested questions
of interpretation and shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact, which
shall become part of the record on appeal to court.
§ 170-2106. Challenge to flexible development procedures.
Challenges to the validity of the flexible development provisions of Article
IX of this chapter, and appeals from any action of the Zoning Officer
thereunder, shall be governed by § 170-2104 of this article. When the Board
of Supervisors, however, has held a hearing upon an application for
development under Article IX of this chapter, such hearing shall be deemed
to make written representations thereon to the Board prior to final
decision or entry of findings, and the Board's decision shall be entered
no later than 30 days after the report of the hearing officer. Where
the Board, or the hearing officer with power to render a decision, fails
to render a decision within the period required by this subsection,
the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to
an extension of time.
J. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him/
her by certified mail not later than the day following its date. To all
other persons who have filed their name and address with the Board no
later than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or
otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the
place at which the full decision or findings may be examined. Copies of
the decision or findings, provided that the applicant shall also be filed
with the Township Secretary, Planning Commission, and Zoning Officer.
§ 170-2103 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-2106
1:838
in lieu of a hearing by the Board provided for under § 170-2104, and appeal
from any decision or determination of the Board of Supervisors (including a
challenge to the validity of any provision of such ordinance) shall lie directly
to the court.
§ 170-2107. Variances.
A. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the
provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant. The Board may, by rule, prescribe the form of application.
The procedure shall be as follows:
(1) A preliminary written application shall be filed with the Zoning
Officer, who shall verify that the application is complete, and that
the application is properly filed for a variance and not for a change
to the Zoning Ordinance or Map concerning a use or district. If the
latter is the case, the applicant shall be advised of the proper
procedures, as stipulated by this chapter.
(2) Upon acceptance by the Zoning Officer that the application is
complete, correct, and proper, a formal filing for consideration of
the variance request shall be made by the Zoning Officer to the
Zoning Hearing Board, together with the comments and
recommendations of the Zoning Officer. Copies of the filing and
comments shall be submitted to the Township Planning
Commission and Board of Supervisors.
(3) A public hearing shall be properly advertised in accordance with
the requirements established in § 170-2103 of this chapter.
(4) At least 30 days prior to the public hearing, the Planning
Commission shall submit its written comments and
recommendations on the application to the Zoning Hearing Board,
or a written statement that it chooses to make no comments and
recommendations. The Zoning Hearing Board shall not make a
decision on the application until receipt of the Planning
Commission's comments or its statement of no comment. When
submitted, the comments of the Planning Commission shall be
considered by the Board, but shall not be binding.
(5) Upon completion of the public hearing, the Board may grant a
variance, provided that the procedures specified above are met and
the following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions, and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
§ 170-2106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2107
1:839
§ 170-2108. Special exceptions. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
Where this chapter has stated special exceptions to be granted or denied
by the Board pursuant to express standards and criteria, the Board shall
hear and decide requests for such special exceptions in accordance with
such standards and criteria. In granting a special exception, the Board
may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in the chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter. The procedures for acting on a special exception
request shall be the same as those specified for variances under § 170-2107,
except that the findings contained in Subsections A(5)(a) through (e) of
§ 170-2107 shall not be applicable. Where any use or any applicable design
criteria subject to conditional use approval also is a part of an overall land
development plan subject to application for approval of a special exception,
such use or design criteria may be considered for approval by the Zoning
Hearing Board as part of the applicable special exception application in
lieu of separate submission of an application for conditional use approval.
Similarly, where any use or any applicable design criteria subject to special
exception approval also is a part of an overall land development plan subject
to application for conditional use approval, such use or design criteria may
be considered for approval by the Board of Supervisors as part of the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located;
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the area and bulk regulations or design
standards of the Zoning Ordinance, and that the authorization
of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable
use of the property, but shall not allow a change in use to one
not permitted by right in that district;
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant;
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, not substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, and not
be detrimental to the public welfare; and
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
B. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purpose of this chapter. The Board shall require that all other
applicable land development regulations apply.
§ 170-2107 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-2108
1:840
applicable conditional use application in lieu of separate submission of an
application for approval of a special exception.
A. Application shall be made in writing, indicating the section of this
chapter under which an exception is sought. The application shall
include a reasonably exact, dimensional sketch showing the placement
and use of the proposed buildings and details of parking, loading,
lighting, utility systems, sidewalks, and other pedestrian areas,
including those within 250 feet of adjoining properties or structures.
B. Further, a description of the uses proposed shall be included in
sufficient detail so that potentially detrimental impacts, if any, can be
determined.
C. The Board shall hear and decide all requests for special exceptions, as
identified within this chapter, in accordance with the following
standards and criteria:
(1) Relationship to the Comprehensive Plan. Consideration of the size,
scope, extent, and character of the proposed special exception and
assurance that such proposal is consistent with the purposes and
objectives of the Westtown Township Comprehensive Plan,
including protection and promotion of the public health, safety, and
welfare.
(2) Suitability of the tract. Consideration of the suitability of the
proposed tract including, as applicable, environmental conditions,
highway access, and availability of sewer and water service, and of
the extent to which the proposed use is susceptible to regulatory
restriction through the imposition of appropriate conditions.
(3) Impact on existing neighborhood character. Consideration of the
extent to which the proposed special exception will alter unduly the
character of the existing neighborhood and adjacent tracts, and the
effectiveness of proposed or potential mitigation measures;
consideration of the character and type of development in the area
surrounding the location of the proposed special exception, and a
determination that the proposal, if approved, will constitute an
appropriate use in the area.
(4) Impact on circulation. Consideration of the effects the proposed
special exception may have on traffic patterns and volumes, access,
and parking.
(5) Economic impact. Consideration of the character and type of
development proposed in terms of generating revenue for the
Township and imposing demands on municipal services.
D. Persons with disabilities. After the Zoning Officer receives a complete
written application, the Zoning Hearing Board shall grant a special
exception allowing modifications to specific requirements of this
chapter that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning
§ 170-2108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2108
1:841
§ 170-2109. Expiration of approval for special exception or
variance.
Any approval of a special exception or variance request shall be deemed null
and void six months from the date of such approval if, within that period,
no application is made for a building permit, a use and occupancy permit,
or subdivision or land development approval, as appropriate, unless the
Zoning Officer shall grant a six-month extension.
§ 170-2110. Parties appellant before the Board.
Appeals and proceedings under §§ 170-2104, 170-2105, and 170-2106 may
be filed with the Board in writing by any officer or agency of the Township,
or by any person aggrieved. Request for a variance under the terms of
§ 170-2107, or for a special exception under the terms of § 170-2108, may
be filed by any landowner or any tenant with the permission of such
landowner.
§ 170-2111. Time limitations.
Hearing Board are required under applicable federal law to provide a
reasonable accommodation to serve persons who the applicant proves
have disabilities as defined in and protected by such laws.
(1) Such reasonable accommodations shall be requested in accordance
with the U.S. Fair Housing Act Amendments and/or the Americans
with Disabilities Act, as amended.
(2) If the applicant is requesting a reasonable accommodation under
the United States Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 or the
Americans with Disabilities Act, the applicant shall identify the
disability which is protected by such statutes, the extent of the
modification of the provisions of this chapter necessary for a
reasonable accommodation, and the manner by which the
reasonable accommodation requested may be removed when such
person(s) with a protected disability no longer will be present on
the property.
(3) Any modification approved under this section may be limited to the
time period during which the persons with disabilities occupy or
utilize the premises.
A. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Board later
than 30 days after an application for development, preliminary or final,
has been approved by the appropriate Township officer, agency, or body,
if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the
approval in any manner unless such person alleges and proves that he/
she had no notice, knowledge, or reason to believe that such approval
had been given. If such person has succeeded to his interest after such
approval, he/she shall be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in
interest.
§ 170-2108 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-2111
1:842
B. The failure of anyone other than the landowner to appeal from an
adverse decision on a tentative plan pursuant to § 170-911 of this
chapter, or from an adverse decision by the Zoning Officer on a
challenge to the validity of the Zoning Ordinance or Map, pursuant to
Section 916.2 of the Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10916.2),
shall preclude an appeal from a final approval except in the case where
the final submission substantially deviates from the approved tentative
submission.
§ 170-2111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2111
1:843

ARTICLE XXII
Amendments
§ 170-2200. Power of amendment.
The Board of Supervisors may from time to time amend, supplement,
change, modify, or repeal this chapter, including the Zoning Map and its
overlays, by proceeding in the manner prescribed in this article and in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Municipalities Planning
Code (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.).
§ 170-2201. Initiators of amendment proposals.
§ 170-2202. Procedures for consideration of proposed amendments.
A. Proposals for amendment of this chapter may be initiated by the Board
of Supervisors on its own motion, by the Township Planning
Commission, or by petition of one or more owners of property to be
affected by the proposed amendment.
B. A landowner may submit a proposed curative amendment, challenging
the validity of the Zoning Ordinance, in accordance with the terms of
Section 609.1 of the Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. 10609.1).
The Board of Supervisors shall proceed and act upon any such proposal
in the manner stipulated by Section 609.1.
A. Proposals initiated by the Board of Supervisors. The Board of
Supervisors shall refer every proposed amendment that it originates to
the Township Planning Commission and the County Planning
Commission.
B. Proposals initiated by the Township Planning Commission. The
Township Planning Commission may at any time transmit to the Board
of Supervisors any proposal for the amendment of this chapter.
C. Proposals initiated by property owner's petition. Each petition by one or
more owners of property to be affected by a proposal for amendment
shall be submitted in writing to the Township Secretary, together with a
fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors. No part of such fee shall be refundable to a
petitioner. Upon receipt of said petition, the Board of Supervisors shall
transmit a copy of the petition to the Township Planning Commission
and the County Planning Commission.
D. Referral to Township and County Planning Commission.
(1) Any proposed amendment, other than one originated by the
Township Planning Commission, shall be referred by the Board of
Supervisors, at least 30 days prior to the hearing on the
amendment, to the Township Planning Commission. That
Commission shall consider whether or not such proposed
amendment would be, in its view, consistent with and desirable in
§ 170-2200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2202
1:845
§ 170-2203. Public hearing.
§ 170-2204. Readvertisement of amendments.
furtherance of the Comprehensive Plan upon which this chapter
is based, as the same may be modified from time to time. The
Commission shall transmit its conclusion thereon, together with
its reasons therefor, to the Board of Supervisors. The Board of
Supervisors shall take such conclusion and reasons into
consideration in reaching its decision, but shall not be bound
thereby.
(2) All proposed amendments shall be submitted by the Board of
Supervisors to the Chester County Planning Commission for review
and comment, in accordance with the terms of Article VI of the
Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10601 et seq.). The Board
shall not act upon the proposed amendment until a report is
received from the County Planning Commission or the time period
for such a response has elapsed; the Board shall not be bound by
the recommendations of the county.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall determine whether any proposal for
amendment prepared and submitted in accordance with § 170-2202 is
appropriate to be presented at a public hearing. Where the Board
deems it appropriate, the required public hearing shall be held within
60 days from the date of the submission of the said proposal to the
Board of Supervisors or the Board's determination to consider its own
amendment.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, fix the time and place for
the public hearing, and shall give notice of such hearing as prescribed
in Section 610(a) of the Municipalities Planning Code [53 P.S.
10610(a)]. The notice shall state the particular nature of the matter to
be addressed through the proposed amendment and a reference to a
place in the Township where copies of the proposed amendment may be
examined or purchased at a charge not exceeding the cost thereof.
C. If the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of
the public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the Township along
the perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The
affected tract or area shall be posted at least one week prior to the date
of the hearing.
A. In the event substantial amendments are made to the proposed
amendment, then the Board, at least 10 days prior to the scheduled
enactment, shall readvertise, in a newspaper of general circulation
within the Township, a brief summary setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail together with a summary of the proposed
amendments. The Board also shall readvertise any proposed
amendment where the scheduled date of enactment is more than 60
§ 170-2202 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-2204
1:846
days following the date of the last advertisement of the proposed
amendment.
B. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment shall be
forwarded to the Chester County Planning Commission.
§ 170-2204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2204
1:847

ARTICLE XXIII
Violations Remedies; Fees; Liability
§ 170-2300. Actions contrary to terms of chapter.
It shall be a violation of this chapter to undertake any action which is
contrary to the terms of this chapter, including but not limited to the failure
to obtain a building permit or use and occupancy permit as stipulated in
Article XX.
§ 170-2301. Enforcement notice.
§ 170-2302. Causes of action.
A. If it appears to the Township that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Board shall authorize the Zoning Officer to initiate
enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement notice. By means
of the enforcement notice, the Zoning Officer may order discontinuance
of illegal use of land or structures; removal of illegal structures or
additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto; or discontinuance
of any illegal work being done.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel,
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall, at minimum, state the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other persons against
whom the Township intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation, with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of the ordinance.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board, in accordance with the procedures set forth
in this chapter.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation with the possibility of sanctions.
A. Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint,
stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the Zoning
§ 170-2300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2302
1:849
§ 170-2303. Enforcement remedies.
Any person, partnership, or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied, or be payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the District Justice determining that there has been a violation
further determines that there was a good-faith basis for the person,
partnership, or corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have
been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice. Thereafter, each day that
a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments,
costs, and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be paid over to the Township.
§ 170-2304. Fees and expenses.
Officer. He/she shall record properly such complaint, investigate, and
take action thereon as provided by this chapter.
B. In case any building, structure, landscaping, or land is, or is proposed
to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted,
maintained, or used in violation of this chapter, the Board of
Supervisors or the Zoning Officer or any aggrieved owner or tenant of
real property who shows that his property or person will be
substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent, restrain, correct, or abate such building, structure,
landscaping, or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act,
conduct, business, or use constituting a violation.
C. Where any action authorized in Subsection B above, is instituted by a
landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon the
Township at least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun, by
serving a copy of the complaint upon the Board. No such action may be
maintained until such notice has been given.
A. Permit applications. Fees for building permit or use and occupancy
permit applications shall be paid in accordance with a fee schedule
adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. Such schedule may
be revised, as necessary, by resolution of the Board.
(1) Upon submission of an application or appeal before either the
Board of Supervisors or the Zoning Hearing Board, the applicant
§ 170-2302 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-2304
1:850
§ 170-2305. Municipal liability.
The granting of any permit under this chapter shall create no liability upon,
nor a cause of action against any Township official or employee for damages
or injury that may occur from the use, construction, or enlargement of
structures or the use of land.
shall deposit an amount of money in accordance with a schedule
of applicant expenses, adopted by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors. The Township Secretary shall have the sole discretion
to determine in which category an application falls and, therefore,
what amount is due.
(2) If, at any time, the charges then made against the applicant's
deposit shall render the balance insufficient to ensure payment of
all expenses that may accrue in the disposition of the pending or
application, the Township Secretary shall obtain from the applicant
additional deposits to assure adequate funds to pay such expenses
as they may accrue. Prior to final disposition of the matter, the
amount of the deposit balance shall not be less than 15% of the
initial deposit amount. The failure of the Township Secretary or the
Zoning Hearing Board to require and obtain additional deposits
from time to time shall not relieve the applicant from liability for
expenses in excess of deposits. Any amount deposited in excess of
actual final expenses shall be refunded to the applicant.
B. Miscellaneous expenses. For each certified statement of compliance of
any property with the provisions of this chapter, there shall be a fee
paid in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 170-2304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2305
1:851

ARTICLE XXIV
Historic Preservation
[Added 3-4-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-1]
§ 170-2400. Westtown Township Historical Commission.
The Westtown Township Historical Commission shall be established and
operated in accordance with the following provisions:
A. Statement of purpose. The mission and purpose of the Historical
Commission is to foster a community appreciation of the rich and varied
history of the Township. The mission includes educating residents about
lands, buildings, and sites of historic, architectural, archaeological, or
cultural significance and the people who worked, farmed, and lived
here.
B. Establishment and membership. There is hereby established a
Historical Commission to be known as the "Westtown Township
Historical Commission," which shall consist of seven members who
shall all be residents of the Township and who shall be appointed by the
Board of Supervisors. The membership of the Commission shall include
individuals who have an interest or expertise in history, archaeology or
historic preservation. Members shall serve without pay, but shall be
reimbursed for any personal expenditure in the conduct of Commission
business when pre-authorized by the Board of Supervisors. [Amended
1-5-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-2]
C. Membership terms. Each Commission member shall serve for a term of
three years which shall be so fixed that no more than two terms shall
expire each year. The Commission shall notify the Board of Supervisors
of any vacancies in the Commission. Appointments to fill vacancies for
the unexpired terms shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term.
Members shall serve at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors and
may be removed by the Board at any time without cause.
D. Organization. The Commission shall annually elect from its own
membership a Chair, who shall direct the activities of the Commission,
and such other officers as may be required for the conduct of its
business. A quorum shall be not less than a majority of the current
membership. The Commission may make, alter, and rescind rules and
forms for its procedures consistent with the ordinances of the Township
and laws and regulations of the Commonwealth. The Commission shall
keep full public records of its business and shall submit a report of its
activities to the Board of Supervisors annually or as otherwise
determined necessary by the Board.
E. Expenditures for services. Within the limits of funds appropriated by
the Board of Supervisors, the Commission may make recommendations
on contracting services necessary for its operations.
§ 170-2400 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2400
1:853
F. Functions and duties. In accordance with the foregoing statement of
purpose, the Commission's primary purpose shall be to advise the
Board of Supervisors, the Planning Commission and the Zoning Hearing
Board of the Township on matters pertaining to the historic resources of
the Township, including the following responsibilities, subject to the
prior approval of the Board of Supervisors:
(1) Gather documentary evidence, illustrations, photographs, and
other appropriate materials to establish historic sites worthy of
listing in an Historic Resources Map of the Township, and to
maintain a system for the continued survey and inventory of
historic buildings, sites, structures, and objects in the Township.
(2) Conduct research on and nominate significant resources to the
State and National Registers of Historic Places and any other
appropriate lists or programs.
(3) Advise the Township Manager and Building Code Officer on the
issuance of any permits which would affect historic resources. If a
permit application is submitted for the demolition and/or exterior
alteration of any historic resource identified on the Historic
Resources Map, the permit shall be held for a period not to exceed
30 days to afford the Historical Commission the opportunity to
work with the property owner to document the property prior to
work commencing. If the property owner declines to allow for
documentation within the 30 days, it shall not serve as a means to
deny the permit application. [Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-2]
(4) Review and comment on subdivision or land development
applications which contain historic resources, or are within 300
feet of an historic resource, in accordance with the requirements
and procedures of the Township.
(5) Make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors concerning
revisions, updates, or corrections to the Historic Resources Map as
outlined in § 170-2400G. [Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-2]
(6) Maintain an updated inventory which clearly identifies buildings,
sites, structures, objects, and districts and their respective
classifications on the Historic Resources Map as outlined in
§ 170-2400G. [Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-2]
(7) Develop programs to inform and educate residents about the
history of the Township, its historic sites and historic personages.
(8) Consider, promote and apply for grants, financial assistance, and
technical help from other agencies and organizations for the
preservation of historical sites; and report all related actions to the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 170-2400 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-2400
1:854
(9) Prepare and submit a yearly budget by August 31 to the Board of
Supervisors for sums deemed necessary to carry out the objectives
of the Commission.
(10) Assist individual property owners with voluntary decisions
pertaining to historic resources in terms of their use, maintenance,
or enjoyment by other Township residents.
(11) Identify resources suffering from neglect and confer and advise
with property owners to voluntarily alleviate and correct neglect
situations.
(12) Advise appropriate Township officials on all requests for special
exceptions, conditional uses or variances affecting historic
resources.
(13) Perform any other activities relating to its mission as might be
requested by the Board of Supervisors.
(14)Work with other municipalities in the promotion of historic
resources having an extra municipal dimension.
(15) Present to the Board of Supervisors recommendations for
ordinances and proposed steps to preserve, protect, and restore all
historic areas, historic buildings, historic landmarks, or other
historic resources within the Township.
G. Historic Resources Map. The Historical Commission shall maintain the
Township Historic Resources Map, including the respective
classifications of the historic resources. The Commission shall specify
the resources located upon each property to which the regulation
herein applies. Such regulation applicable to structures shall not apply
to those structures designated to be noncontributing resources. Where
not otherwise specified on the Historic Resources Map, the entire
property shall be regulated as a historic resource. [Added 3-7-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-2]
(1) Identified historic resources. Historic resources are considered to
be any building, site, structure, object or district that has been:
(a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic
district;
§ 170-2400 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2400
1:855
(c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places under
a Commonwealth of Pennsylvania historic preservation
program which has been approved by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
(d) Individually listed on a Township inventory of historic places
under a historic preservation program that has been certified
either:
[1] By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
[2] Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(2) Revisions, updates, or corrections to the Historic Resources Map.
(a) Any building, structure, site or object ("resource") may be
proposed for addition to or removal from the Historic
Resources Map by:
[1] The owner of such resource;
[2] The Historical Commission;
[3] The Board of Supervisors; or
[4] Notice from the designating organization (Pennsylvania
Historical and Museum Commission or National Register)
that the historic resource has been added to its Historical
Resources Inventory or no longer meets the criteria upon
which its classification has been based.
(b) All proposals for addition to or removal from the Historic
Resources Map shall be referred to the Historical Commission.
The Historical Commission shall hold a public meeting for
which advanced written notice must be provided to the
owner(s) of the resource affected. The Historical Commission
shall consider public comment and/or documentary evidence
regarding the proposal at the public meeting.
(c) The Historical Commission shall present a written report to the
Board of Supervisors within 30 days of the close of public
comment at the final public meeting on the proposed revision,
update, or correction, stating its recommendation and grounds
therefor.
(d) After receiving and considering the recommendations of the
Historical Commission, the Board of Supervisors may adopt a
resolution to add or delete resources to or from the Historic
Resources Map or otherwise correct an entry thereupon.
Written notice of the proposed action of the Board of
Supervisors shall be given to the resource owner.
§ 170-2400 WESTTOWN CODE § 170-2400
1:856
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2001-4 6-4-2001 Street vacation NCM
2001-5 8-6-2001 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
2001-6 12-17-2001 Township Manager
amendment
Ch. 22
2001-7 10-15-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2002-1 1-7-2002 Delinquent Tax
Collector
Ch. 154, Art. IV
2002-2 3-4-2002 Pension agreement
amendment
NCM
2002-3 4-2-2002 Intermunicipal
agreement for GIS
system
NCM
2002-4 6-3-2002 Sewers system
regulations
amendment
Ch. 132, Art. III
2002-5 7-22-2002 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 149
2002-6
2002-7 8-5-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 162
2003-1 2-18-2003 West Chester Area
Council of
Governments
NCM
2003-2 3-3-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2003-3 3-17-2003 Sewer system
regulations
amendment
Ch. 132, Art. I
2003-4 10-6-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 162
2003-5 12-15-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 162
2004-1 1-5-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 162
§ 170-2400 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:857
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2004-2 3-15-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 162
2004-3 6-21-2004 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 140
2004-4 7-6-2004 Uniform construction
code
Ch. 57, Art. III
2004-5 8-16-2004 Street vacation NCM
2004-6 Number not used
2004-7 9-20-2004 Sewer system
regulations
amendment
Ch. 132, Art. I
2004-8 9-20-2004 Stormwater
management
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2013-5
2004-9 Tabled
2004-10 12-6-2004 Sewer system
regulations: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 132, Art. I
2005-1 Refinancing series of
1997 bond
NCM
2005-2 2-7-2005 Pretreatment
standards and
regulations for
industrial wastewater
discharges
Ch. 132, Art. IV
2005-3 Salaries NCM
2005-4 5-2-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2005-5 Pension Plan revision NCM
2005-6 12-19-2005 Taxation: emergency
and municipal services
tax
Ch. 154, Art. V
2005-7 12-19-2005 Sewers amendment Ch. 132
2006-1 7-3-2006 Verizon franchise
agreement
NCM
2006-2 7-3-2006 Sewers amendment Ch. 132
2006-3 10-16-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2006-4 2006 General
obligation bond
NCM
2006-5 12-18-2006 Sewer system
regulations: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 132, Art. I
§ DL-1 WESTTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:858
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2007-1 1-2-2007 Fire hydrant tax
repealer
Ch. 154, Art. II,
footnote only
2007-2 2-20-2007 Realty transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 154, Art. III
2007-3 4-2-2007 Property maintenance Ch. 126
2007-4 4-2-2007 Residential Code Ch. 57, Art. I
2007-5 4-2-2007 Building Code Ch. 57, Art. II
2007-6 12-3-2007 Streets and sidewalks:
sidewalk and curb
maintenance and snow
and ice removal
Ch. 146, Art. II
2007-7 12-17-2007 Sewer system
regulations: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 132, Art. I
2007-8 12-17-2007 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 154, Art. V
2008-1 9-15-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2008-2 9-2-2008 Trees: obstruction of
public rights-of-way
Ch. 158, Art. I
2008-3 12-15-2008 Sewer system
collection and
conveyance
regulations: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 132, Art. I
2009-1 3-2-2009 Streets and sidewalks:
sidewalk maintenance
and repair and snow
and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 146, Art. II
2009-2 Pending adoption
2009-3 7-6-2009 Alarm systems Repealed by Ord.
No. 2009-6
2009-4 7-6-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2009-5 9-21-2009 Stormwater
management
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2013-5
2009-6 12-7-2009 Alarm systems Ch. 45
2009-7 12-7-2009 Parks and Recreation
Commission
Ch. 24
2009-8 12-7-2009 Municipal claims and
liens: collection of fees
Ch. 107, Art. I
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:859
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2010-1 1-19-2010 Sewer system
collection and
conveyance
regulations:
pretreatment
standards and
regulations for
industrial wastewater
discharges amendment
Ch. 132, Art. IV
2010-2 4-5-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 162
2010-3 9-7-2010 Sewer system
collection and
conveyance
regulations: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 132, Art. I
2010-4 11-1-2010 Taxation: earned
income tax
Ch. 154, Art. I
2010-5 11-15-2010 Taxation: rental status
and occupancy
reporting
Ch. 154, Art. VI
2010-6 12-20-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 162
2010-7 12-20-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 162
2011-1 3-7-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 162
2011-2 3-7-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 162
2011-3 4-4-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 162
2011-4 6-20-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2011-5 Bond NCM
2012-1 2-6-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2012-2 Bond NCM
2012-3 3-5-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2012-4 3-5-2012 Municipal claims and
liens: collection of fees
amendment
Ch. 107, Art. I
2012-5 5-21-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
§ DL-1 WESTTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:860
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2012-6 12-17-2012 Sewer system
collection and
conveyance
regulations: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 132, Art. I
2013-1 3-4-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2013-2 11-18-2013 Brush, grass and
weeds amendment
Ch. 54
2013-3 12-2-2013 Sewer system
collection and
conveyance
regulations: on-lot
sewage management
Ch. 132, Art. V
2013-4 12-2-2013 Building construction:
uniform construction
code amendment
Ch. 57, Art. III
2013-5 12-16-2013 Stormwater
management
Ch. 144
2013-6 12-16-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2014-1 7-7-2014 Pensions NCM
2014-2 11-17-2014 Sewers: on-lot sewage
management
amendment
Ch. 132, Art. V
2015-1 1-5-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2015-2 1-5-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2015-3 2-17-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2015-4 2-17-2015 Intermunicipal
agreements: PSATS
Unemployment
Compensation Group
Trust
Ch. 18, Art. III
2015-5 2-17-2015 Intermunicipal
agreements:
Pennsylvania
Townships Health
Insurance Cooperative
Trust
Ch. 18, Art. IV
2015-6 6-15-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2015-7 6-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 162
2016-1 2-1-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2016-2 3-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:861
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2016-3 4-4-2016 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 126
2016-4 5-16-2016 General obligation
bond
NCM
2016-5 9-6-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2016-6 11-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2017-1 5-1-2017 Insurance: fire
insurance claims
Ch. 99
2017-2 7-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2017-3 9-5-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 170
2017-4 7-17-2017 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2018-01 7-16-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 170
2018-02 10-15-2018 Intermunicipal
Agreements: Fire
Protection Services
Ch. 18, Art. V
2018-03 12-17-2018 Sewer System
Collection and
Conveyance
Regulations: Rents and
Charges Amendment
Ch. 132, Art. I
2019-01 6-3-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 170
2019-02 5-6-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 170
2019-03 Not adopted
2019-04 6-3-2019 Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 47
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-05 8-19-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No.
2020-01
19
2019-06 9-16-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 170 19
2019-07 12-2-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 162 19
§ DL-1 WESTTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:862
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-08 12-2-2019 Sewer
System
Collection
and
Conveyance
Regulations:
Rents and
Charges
Amendment
Ch. 132, Art.
I
19
2020-01 3-16-2020 Repeal of
Ord. No.
2019-05
Ch. 170,
reference
only
19
2020-02 2-18-2020 Alarm
Systems
Amendment
Ch. 45 19
2020-03 3-16-2020 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 170 19
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:863