BOROUGH OF WAYNESBURG
ZONING ORDINANCE
OCTOBER 2017

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I: GENERAL PROVISIONS ............................................................................. 1
1-101 TITLE
1-102 SHORT TITLE
1-103 STATEMENT OF PURPOSES
1-104 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
1-105 INTERPRETATION
1-106 REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
1-107 VALIDITY
1-108 EFFECTIVE DATE
Article II: DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................... 6
2-201 RULES OF INTERPRETATION
2-202 DEFINITIONS
Article III: District Regulations ................................................................................. 49
3-301 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS
3-302 ZONING DISTRICT MAP AND BOUNDARIES
3-303 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
3-304 PERMITTED USES
3-305 USES FOR WHICH NO PROVISION IS MADE
3-306 LOT, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
3-307 R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
3-308 R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
3-309 R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
3-310 B-1 GENERAL BUSINESS
3-311 C CONSERVATION
3-312 U-1 UNIVERSITY
3-313 U-2 UNIVERSITY FIELDS
3-314 M-1 MANUFACTURIING
3-315 DOWNTOWN PARKING OVERLAY
Article IV: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS ................................................................ 65
4-401 APPLICABILITY
4-402 APPLICATION PROCEDURE
4-403 GENERAL STANDARDS AND CRITERIA
4-404 STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR SPECIFIC USES
Article V: GENERAL REGULATIONS ........................................................................... 120
5-501 GENERAL INTENT
5-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
5-503 ACCESSORY USES
5-504 FENCING, SCREENING AND RETAINING WALLS
5-505 SIGNS
5-506 OFF-STREET PARKING
5-507 TEMPORARY BUILDING OR USES
5-508 OUTDOOR STORAGE
Article VI: ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS ....................................... 143
6-601 GENERAL STANDARDS
6-602 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
6-603 EROSION / SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
Article VII: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT STANDARDS .............................................. 149
7-701 SEE ORDINANCE NO. 3 OF 2015
Article VIII: NONCONFORMITIES .............................................................................. 150
8-801 CONTINUATION
8-802 UNLAWFUL USE NOT AUTHORIZED
8-803 ALTERATIONS, REPAIR, ENLARGEMENT OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
8-804 ALTERATIONS, ENLARGEMENT OR EXPANSION OF NONCONFORMING USE
8-805 CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING USE
8-806 ABANDONMENT OF NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE
8-807 MANUFACTURED HOMES
8-808 NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD
8-809 STATUS OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
8-810 HISTORICAL LANDMARKS
8-811 DISTRICT CHANGES
Article IX: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT ................................................... 155
9-901 ZONING OFFICER
9-902 REQURED ZONING PERMITS
9-903 SCHEDULE OF FEES
9-904 ZONING HEARING BOARD
9-905 APPEALS
9-906 AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING ORDINANCE OR MAP
9-907 MUNICIPAL CURATIVE AMENDMENTS
9-908 ENFORCEMENT NOTICE
9-909 CAUSES OF ACTION
9-910 ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
Appendix
Use Table (Permitted and Accessory Uses)
Zoning Map
1
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-101 TITLE
An ordinance to establish zoning regulations for the use of land, structures, area of
lots, bulk of buildings and other structures, the density of population, the provision
of off-street parking and loading spaces and similar accessory regulations for the
Borough of Waynesburg, Pennsylvania, and for such purposes to divide the Borough
into zoning districts; and, further, to provide for administrative enforcement and
amendment thereof in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247 as reenacted and
amended.
1-102 SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Waynesburg Zoning
Ordinance”. It is also hereafter referred to as “the Zoning Ordinance” or “this
Ordinance”. The zoning district map shall be known and may be cited as the “Official
Waynesburg Zoning Map” or “zoning map.”
1-103 STATEMENT OF PURPOSES
The zoning regulations and districts set forth in this Ordinance are intended to
achieve, among others, the following purposes:
103.1. Community Development Objectives
1. Transform the circulation system through downtown Waynesburg to
achieve a balance between efficient vehicle access and the creation of
2
a safe, inviting environment that attracts activity to the core business
district.
2. Strengthen the core business district as the borough’s economic engine
and primary gathering place.
3. Refine and promote a unique community identity that reflects
commonly held values and assets that can be marketed to attract
visitors and investment.
4. Encourage investment in the borough’s housing stock to ensure that
neighborhoods remain stable, safe and attractive.
5. Improve public infrastructure by prioritizing and strategically
implementing upgrades according to identified need.
6. Ensure local land use ordinances are consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan.
103.2 Relationship to the Comprehensive Plan
1. This Ordinance is enacted to promote orderly plan of development
according to the adopted Waynesburg Borough Comprehensive Plan,
including data on existing conditions, statements concerning the
proposed plan evaluations of implementation techniques. Such
material shall be considered as legislative history and shall be utilized
when necessary to establish policy in the interpretation of this
ordinance.
1-104 APPLICATION OF THE REGULATIONS
104.1 Uniformity of Regulations and Exceptions: The regulations established by
this Zoning Ordinance shall be minimum regulations and shall apply
uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except that additional
3
classifications may be made within any district for the purposes of: (1)
making transitional provisions at or near the boundaries of districts; (2)
regulating nonconforming uses and structures; (3) regulating, restricting or
prohibiting uses and structures at or near major thoroughfares, their
intersections and interchanges, natural or artificial bodies of water; places
of relatively steep slope or grade; public buildings and grounds; places
having unique historical or patriotic value or interest; floodplain areas and
other places having a special character or use affecting or affected by their
surroundings. Among several classes of zoning districts, the provisions for
permitted uses may be mutually exclusive, in whole or in part.
104.2 Compliance: No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or
occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except
in conformity with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance. No changes
shall be made in the contour of the land; no grading; excavation; removal or
destruction of topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of land shall be
commenced until the zoning certificate has been issued in compliance with
the terms of this Ordinance.
104.3 Future Annexations: All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the
Municipality shall be considered to be in the R-1 Residential District until
otherwise classified.
104.4 Reclassification of Public Facility If Use Ceases: In the case that any public
building, facility or land area, such as a school, recreation area, community
center or municipal building, shall cease to be used according to its intended
function, the Planning Commission shall study the existing zoning
classification of the property on which the said use is located and shall make
recommendations to the Governing Body on any necessary zoning changes
4
to ensure a suitable reuse of the parcel. This study and recommendation
shall be made by the Governing Body within 90 days of the notification by
the appropriate public entity of the intent to terminate the existing use of
the property.
104.5 Preservation of Other Regulations: Regardless of any other provision of this
Ordinance, no land shall be used and no structure erected or maintained in
violation of any federal, state or county law or regulation. Currently, the
Municipality does not have a Subdivision/Land Development Ordinance and
these provisions must be met by the Greene Co. Subdivision Ordinance.
104.6 Pending Building Permits: Nothing in this Ordinance shall require any change
in construction or use of any structure for which a building permit was
lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, or any
amendment thereto, provided that construction has begun or a contract or
contracts have been let pursuant to the permit issued prior to the effective
date of this Ordinance. However, any building permit which was issued
subsequent to the first public hearing on this Ordinance built prior to the
Ordinance's effective date shall be declared void at the time of adoption of
this Ordinance, if the structure or use does not conform to the provisions of
this Ordinance and if no substantial construction has begun or contract(s)
let.
104.7 Public Utility Corporations: The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply
to any existing or proposed building as stated in Section 619 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
1-105 INTERPRETATION
105.1 Wherever the regulations within this zoning Ordinance are at variance with
other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or
covenants, those which impose the most restrictive requirements shall
5
govern.
105.2 No structure or use which was not lawfully existing at the time of the
adoption of this Ordinance shall become or be made lawful solely by reason
of the adoption of this Ordinance; and to the extent that said unlawful
structure or use is in conflict with the requirements of this Ordinance, said
structure remains unlawful hereunder.
1-106 REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
All existing ordinances or parts of ordinances which are contrary to or conflict with
the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance are hereby repealed, to the extent necessary
to give this zoning Ordinance full force and effect.
1-107 VALIDITY
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance
as a whole or any part thereof, and the parts or sections remaining shall remain in
effect as if the part of the section declared unconstitutional had never been a part
thereof.
1-108 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon adoption by the Governing Body.
6
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
2-201 RULES OF INTERPRETATION
201.1 For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted or defined as follows.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
Words in the singular shall include the plural.
The word “person” includes a corporation, company, partnership and
association, as well as an individual.
The word “lot” includes the words “plot” or “parcel.”
The term “shall” is always mandatory.
The words “used” or “occupied” as applied to any land or building shall be
construed to include the words “intended, arranged or designated to be used
or occupied.”
The word “building” includes the word “structure.”
201.2 The particular shall control the general.
201.3 Whenever a measurement of distance is called for by this Ordinance, it shall
be taken from the principal entrance or access of one use or structure to the
principal entrance/access of another along the most direct line or route on,
along or across public streets.
2-202 DEFINITIONS
In addition to the following definitions, diagrams illustrating key lot, area and
dimensional terms appear at the end of this Article. In case of any difference of
meaning or implication between the text of this Ordinance and any caption or
7
illustration, the text shall control.
ACCESSORY DWELLING STRUCTURE - An accessory building that is used to provide a
living space separate from the primary structure for a person, or persons, related by
birth, marriage or adoption to the residents of the primary structure.
ACCESSORY USE – A use, building or structure, the use of which is customarily
incidental and subordinate to the main or principal use, building or structure and
which is located on the same lot therewith.
ADULT ORIENTED USE – the definition for this term and for all uses included under
this term shall apply as are provided in Title 68, Part II, Subpart E, Chapter 55, Section
5502 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, as amended. Such definitions in
Pennsylvania Statues are hereby included by reference, including but not limited to,
the definitions for “Adult Bookstore,” “Adult Entertainment,” “Adult Mini-Motion
Picture Theater,” “Adult Motion Picture Theater,” “Sexual Activities,” “Specified
Anatomical Areas,” and “Specified Sexual Activities.”
AGRI-BUSINESS, SALES AND PROCESSING – Any agricultural operation, other than a
Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation (CAFO) or Concentrated Animal Operation
(CAO), that involves the production, value-added processing, sales and tasting of
horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, food or beverage, cider-press, baking, which
occurs within an enclosed permanent structure, including convenience retail.
AGRICULTURE – See Urban Agriculture.
ALLEY – A narrow service way providing a secondary public means of access to the
rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
ALTERATION – An incidental change, rearrangement, replacement or enlargement in
the structural parts or in the means of egress, whether by extending on a side or by
increasing in height, or the moving from one location or position to another; or by
change in use from that of one district classification to another.
8
APPLICANT – A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an
application for development including his/her heirs, successors and assigns.
APARTMENT – (See dwelling, multifamily).
ATHLETIC FIELDS – A piece of land prepared for playing a game. This definition
includes Waynesburg University’s Football Stadium
BAR AND NIGHTCLUBS - A business which sells alcoholic beverages for consumption
on the premises as the principal use and which may offer food for consumption on
the premises as an accessory use.
BASEMENT OR CELLAR – A story wholly or partly underground. A basement shall be
counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement if the vertical distance
between the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground is more than 5 feet.
BED & BREAKFAST – A dwelling which is the principal residence of the operator where
sleeping rooms are offered to transient overnight guests for compensation and
where the only meal included with the overnight accommodations is breakfast.
BILLBOARD – A sign, other than one indicating a business conducted on the premises,
upon which advertising matter of any character is printed, posted or lettered; it may
be either freestanding or attached to the surface of a building or other structure, or
applied directly to the surface (See also Sign).
BLOCK – An area bounded by three or more streets.
BOARD – The Zoning Hearing Board established by this Ordinance.
BUFFER AREA – An area of land which may include natural or artificial land forms or
a planted area with shrubs, bushes, trees, grass or other ground cover material;
which provides a compact visual screen and protection for adjacent properties.
BUILDING – Any covered structure that is permanently affixed to the land; included
shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human occupancy.
9
BUILDING LINE – A line which designates the minimum distance that a building must
be erected from a street right-of-way line. Such distance shall be measured at right
angles from the front street right-of-way which abuts the property upon which said
building is located and be parallel to said right-of-way line. The building line shall not
include steps.
BUILDING AREA – The area of the lot within the building lines, bounded by the
required yards; where there is no required yard, then bounded by the lot line.
BUILDING SPACING – The minimum distance between two buildings. The building
spacing shall be measured from the outermost wall or projections, excluding bay
windows, chimneys, flues, columns, ornamental features, cornices and gutters,
provided these exceptions do not encroach more than 2 feet.
BULK – The term used to describe the size of buildings and their relationship to one
another, to open areas, and to lot lines. Requirements relating to the bulk include
standards for size, including area, height and floor area of a building; the number of
dwelling units in a residential building in relationship to the area of the lot; and areas
in yards or other open spaces.
BUSINESS SERVICES – Establishments engaged in rendering services to businesses
and offices including, but not limited to, advertising; mailing; data processing; office
supplies; building maintenance; equipment servicing, rental, leasing and sales;
employment service; and other similar business services.
CANOPY – A lightweight structure attached to the ground and/or to a wall and
extended over a sidewalk or other pedestrian walkway, where such structure is used
primarily for purposes of shelter and not advertising.
CARPORT – A structure used for the shelter of a vehicle and which includes a roof
attached to the side or back of the principal building and/or supported by four
columns and which is open on two or more sides from the roof to the ground over
10
which it stands (unless specified otherwise herein).
CAR WASH – A structure, or portion thereof, either fully or partially enclosed, where
one or more vehicles may be washed using mechanized equipment or by self-service.
CELLAR – (See Basement).
CEMETERY – A burial place or graveyard including mausoleum, but not including a
crematory.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY – A certificate issued by the Zoning Officer upon site
inspection, attesting that the use or structure meets all requirements of this
Ordinance, complies with all approved plans and may be used or occupied for the
specified use.
CHURCH – (See Place of Worship).
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE – A triangular area of unobstructed vision at the intersection
of two streets or of a driveway and a street defined by line of sight a given distance
from the intersection of the center lines of two streets or the center lines of the
driveway and the street.
CLINIC, DRUG TREATMENT - A facility for the dispensing of pharmaceuticals for the
treatment of drug addiction, including but not limited to suboxone and methodone
clinics.
CLUB – An association organized and operated not for profit for persons who are
bona fide members paying annual dues, and which owns, hires, or leases premises,
the use of which premises is restricted to such members and their guests. The affairs
and management of such association are conducted by a board of directors,
executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual
meeting. Food, meals and beverages may be served on such premises, provided
adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. Alcoholic beverages
may be sold or served to members and their guests, provided such service is
11
secondary and incidental to the promotion of some other common objective of the
organization, and further provided that such sale or service of alcoholic beverages is
in compliance with all applicable federal, state, county and local laws.
COLLEGE ADMINISTRATION / OFFICES – A building or group of buildings used for
administrative, executive, professional, research or laboratory activities officially
affiliated with a college.
COLLEGE CLASSROOMS – Educational facilities owned and operated by a college for
the purpose of group instruction.
COMMERCIAL – Engaging in a business, enterprise, activity, or other undertaking for
profit.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION – Bowling alleys, billiard and pool halls, golf courses
(regular and miniature), gymnasiums, exercise or fitness centers, swimming pools,
and similar uses, which are operated on a commercial, for-profit basis.
COMMERCIAL SCHOOL – An establishment providing non-academic and non-credited
training, vocational or trade education courses and programs for a fee.
COMMON OPEN SPACE – A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a
combination of land and water within a development site and designed and intended
for the use or enjoyment of residents or occupants of the development, but excluding
streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public facilities.
COMMUNITY CENTER - A structure or area used for fraternal, social, cultural, and/or
recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to serve significant
segments of the local community.
COMMUNITY GARDEN – Any community-driven production of horticulture,
floriculture, viticulture and vegetable production for sales and meeting the needs of
a charitable food distribution system.
CONDITIONAL USE – An authorized use, which may be granted only by the Governing
12
Body pursuant to express standards and criteria prescribed in this Ordinance and
defined in Article VI in the M.P.C.
CONTRACTOR’S OFFICE – The office for businesses engaged in the building trades
including: general contractors; highway and street construction; heavy construction;
plumbing, heating, air conditioning; painting, paperhanging and decorating;
electrical; masonry and other stonework; carpentry and flooring; roofing and sheet
metal; concrete work; water well drilling; and similar trades. This does not include
the exterior storage of equipment and supplies.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN – A temporary sign erected during the course of construction
only announcing the name of the contractors, architects, and owner associated with
this project.
CONDOMINIUM – Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate
ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely
by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the
undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners. For
purposes of this ordinance, condominium refers to a method of owning real estate
and not to a type of unit or structure.
CONSTRUCTION – The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, extension,
expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure, including the placement
of manufactured homes.
CONSTRUCTION TRAILER – A vehicle with or without its own motive power and used
for a temporary field office or storage purposes at a construction site.
CONVERSION APARTMENT - A dwelling or other building existing at the effective date
of this Ordinance which is converted for residential occupancy by more than one
family, provided that the exterior design of structure is not changed from the
character of a single-family unit and further provided that each dwelling unit
13
resulting from such conversion shall comply with regulations provided for in Article
IV of this Ordinance.
CORNER LOT – (See Lot, Corner).
COUNCIL – The Council of the Municipality of Waynesburg.
COUNTY – Greene County, Pennsylvania.
DAY – Days shall be measured by calendar days wherever a time period is stipulated
in this Ordinance.
DAY CARE CENTER – The following are types of day care centers:
CHILD – A facility providing care, supervision and/or Instruction for children
under the age of 12 years for a period of less than 24 hours and licensed to
operate as such by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.
ADULT – A facility providing care for less than 24 consecutive hours for adults
who are not relatives of the operator and who because of physical or mental
infirmity require assistance to meet personal needs, but who do not require
nursing care.
DECK – A structure, either built on-grade or above grade, used for outdoor seating or
gathering that does not contain walls but may contain a roof or handrail.
DENSITY – A measure of intensity of use expressed as in dwelling units per acre.
DEVELOPMENT – Any change to real estate; including but not limited to the erection,
construction or placement of a structure or building, utilities, streets, parking and
loading areas or other paved filling, grading, excavation, mining, drilling or dredging
operations, the placement of manufactured homes, and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN – The provisions for the development of a site, including a plan
or subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of building and other
structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking
14
facilities, common open space and public facilities.
DEVELOPMENT SIGN – A temporary sign, erected during the course of construction
and/or development only, by the owners, developer or their agent.
DEVELOPER – Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the permission
of such landowner, who undertakes a development.
DORMITORY – Building and premises where full-time students reside and are
currently enrolled in a college or university.
DUPLEX – (See Dwelling, Two Family).
DWELLING – Any building or portion thereof constituting a separate independent
housekeeping establishment for one or more persons, and containing independent
cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities. It shall not be deemed to include hotels,
nursing homes, institutional facilities, personal care homes, group residences, and
residence clubs.
DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME - A transportable, single family dwelling
intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more
units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for
occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations.
The manufactured home must bear a label, as required and referred to in the
Act of November 17, 1982 (P.L. 676, No. 192), known as the Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Authorization Act, which certifies
that it conforms to Federal Construction and safety standards adopted under
the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (Public Law 93-383, 88
Stat. 633), nor shall it apply to industrialized housing, as defined in the Act of
May 11, 1972 (P.L. 286, No. 70), known as the Industrial Housing Act. Except as
provided in the Uniform Construction Code, said Code does not apply to a new
15
manufactured housing assembled by and shipped from the manufacturer and
which bears said label.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY – A residential building containing three or more
separate dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED – A detached residential dwelling unit,
occupied by only one family, that has a permanent footing and foundation and
complies with the building code requirements. This category includes modular
homes.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE - a set of three or more attached dwelling units, which
are completely separated from each other by one or two vertical party walls.
DWELLING, TWO FAMILY – A detached building, occupied by only two families,
independent of each other, with two units either attached side by side or one
above the other with each unit having means of egress directly to the outside,
at grade, or via an exterior stair to grade.
ELDERLY HOUSING – A residential building containing dwelling units whose principal
use is occupancy by residents who are sixty (60) years of age or older or physically
handicapped residents of any age and which may contain special features associated
with the needs of the elderly or handicapped which are not usual in construction for
dwellings and must conform to present A.D.A. design requirements.
ELECTRONIC NOTICE - A notice given by a municipality through the internet of the
time and place of a public hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be
considered at the hearing.
ENGINEER – A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and duly appointed as the engineer for the municipality.
EXISTING USE OR STRUCTURE – A use or structure in existence as of the effective date
of this Ordinance.
16
FAMILY – One or more persons related by blood, adoption, or marriage, occupying a
dwelling and living and cooking together as single housekeeping units as
distinguished from a group occupying a personal care home, club, fraternity or hotel.
Or a group of not more than four persons, who need not be related by blood,
marriage or adoption, who are living together in a dwelling unit and maintaining a
common household.
FAMILY DAY CARE -- A residential accessory use providing supervision and activities,
including nutritional, developmental, rehabilitative, habilitative, recreational and
educational needs, for a portion of a twenty-four (24) hour day to up to six children
unrelated to the operator.
FARMER’S MARKET - A pre-designated area, with or without temporary structures,
where vendors and individuals who have raised vegetables or produce (or have
taken the same on consignment for retail sale) sell vegetables, produce, flowers,
orchard products, locally produced packaged food products, and/or animal
agricultural products
FENCE – Any structure constructed of wood, metal, wire, mesh or masonry erected
for the purpose of screening one property from another to assure privacy, protection
or confinement of the property.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION - Financial or fiduciary institution, including savings and
loan, finance companies, credit unions and other similar institutions that provide
retail banking services to individuals or businesses.
FLOODPLAIN – A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or
watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; and/or an area
subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters.
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT – All areas subject to the inundation by waters of the 100-year
flood, including areas identified as floodway (FW), flood-fringe (FF) and general
17
floodplain area (FA). The basis for delineation of this district shall be the same as
designated in the documentation of the Flood Insurance study, the Flood Insurance
Rate Map and the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map for the Municipality, as
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA).
FLOOR AREA RATIO – The gross floor area of the structure divided by the lot area of
the zoning lot on which the building is place.
FRONT YARD – (See Yard, Front).
FUNERAL HOME - A building or part thereof used exclusively for human burial
services. Such building may contain space and facilities for:
1. Embalming and the performance of other services used in the preparation of
the dead for burial;
2. The performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures;
3. The storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral
supplies; and
4. The storage of funeral vehicles, but shall not include facilities for
cremation.
GARAGE – A fully enclosed building for the storage of motor vehicles, not including
buildings in which fuel is sold, or repair or other service is performed.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION – Building and premises where petroleum products,
batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and sold at retail, and
where services may be rendered in connection with these products, such as state
inspection, greasing, hand washing, polishing, lubricating and similar services, and
minor repair work.
GRADE – A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level
adjoining the building at all exterior walls. When the finished ground level slopes
away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest
18
points within the area between the building and lot line or, when the lot line is more
than 6 feet from the building, between the building and a point 6 feet from the
building.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA (GLA) – Total floor area designed for the exclusive use and
occupancy of building occupants, including basements, mezzanines and upper floors,
but not including public or common areas such as public toilets, corridors, stairwells,
elevators, machine and equipment rooms lobbies or mall areas, whether open or
enclosed. GLA shall be measured from the center line of joint partitions and from the
outside wall faces. It is the area upon which tenants pay rent, including sales area and
integral stock areas.
GROUP CARE FACILITY – An establishment that provides room and board to persons
who are residents by virtue of receiving supervised specialized services limited to
health, social and/or rehabilitative services provided by governmental agencies or
any licensed non-profit social service corporation. Supervision shall be provided by
responsible adults whose number shall be determined and certified by the
sponsoring agency. However, one(l) responsible adult shall always be in actual
residence on a twenty-four (24) hour basis. The number of residents within this
structure shall not exceed then (10) persons, including supervisory adults. This
category shall not include facilities for persons who are criminal offenders or who are
awaiting trial for any crimes.
HEIGHT, MAXIMUM – The vertical distance measured from the average of the
elevation of the proposed finished grades immediately adjacent to all exterior walls
of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of
mansard roofs; and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and
gambrel roofs. Chimneys, flues, stacks, fire escapes, gas holders, elevator enclosures,
ventilators, skylights, water tanks and similar roof structures required to operate and
maintain the building on which they are located shall not be included in calculating
19
maximum height.
HOME BASED BUSINESS, NO-IMPACT - A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as
a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether
vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises in
excess of those normally associated with residential use. Must satisfy the following
requirements:
1. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
2. The business shall employ no employees other than family members residing
in the dwelling.
3. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or inventory
of a substantial nature.
4. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but not
limited to, parking, signs or lights.
5. The business activity may not use any equipment or process which creates
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic interference,
including interference with radio or television reception, which is detectable in
the neighborhood.
6. The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in
volume or type, which is not normally associated with residential use in the
neighborhood.
7. The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and may not
occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
8. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
HOME OCCUPATION – An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit solely by members
of the family residing on the premises, provided such occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to the unit's residential purpose and shall be conducted
entirely within the principal residential structure with the exception of horticulture,
20
floriculture, viticulture and vegetable production for value added processing, which
can occur outside of the principal dwelling.
HOSPITAL – A duly licensed institution providing acute medical or surgical care and
treatment for the sick and injured.
HOTEL/MOTEL – A building or group of buildings containing rooms, which provide
sleeping accommodations for transient guests on a daily or weekly basis. The term
shall include motor hotel, motor inn, motor lodge, tourist court, inn and similar uses.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE – A surface which resists the entrance or passing through of
water or other liquids.
INDUSTRIAL – (See Manufacturing).
INSTITUTIONAL FACILITY – An establishment that provides room and board to more
than eight persons who are residents by virtue of receiving supervised, specialized
services limited to health, social and/or rehabilitative nature. The facility is operated
by a governmental agency, their licensed or certified agents or any other responsible
social service corporation. The facility shall be appropriately staffed on a 24-hours
basis as normally prescribed by County or Commonwealth regulations. This facility
shall not include business or professional offices, business activities, fraternal or
social clubs, hospitals, nursing homes, rooming or boarding homes.
JUNKYARD – (See Salvage Yard).
KENNEL – Any lot or premises on which four or more dogs, cats or other domestic
animals, at least four months in age are kept.
LAND DEVELOPMENT – Shall include one of the following:
1. The improvement of one lot, or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels
of land for any purpose involving:
a. a group of two or more buildings or
21
b. the division or allocation of land or space between or among two or more
existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or
other features
2. A subdivision of land
3. Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the M.P.C.
LANDOWNER – The legal or beneficial owner of land including the holder of an option
or contract to purchase (whether or not such an option or contract is subject to any
condition); a lessee if he is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the
landowner or other person having a proprietary interest in the land, shall be deemed
to be a landowner.
LAUNDROMAT - An establishment that is primarily engaged in dry cleaning and
laundry services including the pressing, repair, and dry cleaning of clothing, apparel,
or other fabric.
LIBRARY - Any premises, building or part of a building where books, films, maps and
other educational materials are kept for reading, reference and lending by the public.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL - A use engaged in the manufacturing, predominately from
previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing,
fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, and sales and
distribution of such products.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET – Off-street space conveniently located, accessible and
properly designed for the temporary use by vehicles making bulk pickups or deliveries
of merchandise or materials.
LOT – Any parcel or tract of land on which buildings are placed, together with the
required open spaces, or a vacant parcel as established by a plat. Such lot shall front
on an improved public street or on an approved private way.
22
LOT, CORNER – A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot
abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight
lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of
the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
LOT, INTERIOR – A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on only one street.
LOT, THROUGH – A lot with the frontage on two parallel, or approximately parallel
streets, and which is not a corner lot; may also be referred to as a double frontage
lot.
LOT AREA – The total area within the boundary of a lot but excluding any area of land
within the right-of-way of any public street.
LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT – The quotient obtained by dividing the total lot area
by the total number of dwelling units to be located on such lot.
LOT COVERAGE – That percentage of a lot which when viewed directly from above
would be covered by a structure or structures, or any part thereof, excluding
protecting roof eaves.
LOT DEPTH – The distance between the midpoints of the front lot line and the rear
lot line.
LOT LINE, FRONT – A street right-of-way line forming the boundary of a lot.
LOT LINE, REAR – The lot line that is most distance from, and is, or is most nearly,
parallel to, the front lot line. If a rear lot lines is less than 15 feet long, or if the lot
comes to a point at the rear, the rear lot lines shall be a line at least 15 feet long, lying
wholly within the lot, parallel to the front line. If a zoning lot has two or more front
lot lines, the owner or developer shall designate the yard which is to be the rear yard.
LOT LINE, SIDE – A lot line which is neither a front lot line nor a rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH – The distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the
23
lot depth at the established front building line.
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT – A parcel of land in a manufactured home park,
improved with the necessary utilities connections and other appurtenances
necessary for the erection thereon of a single manufactured home, which is sold or
leased by the park owner to the occupants of the manufactured home erected on the
lot.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK – A parcel (or continuous parcels) of land, which has
been planned for the placement of two or more manufactured homes.
MANUFACTURING – Businesses engaged in the mechanical or chemical
transformation of materials or substances into new, value added products including
agriculture, food and beverage production or processing, or businesses engaged in
assembling component parts of manufactured products if the new product is neither
a structure nor other fixed improvement.
MANUFACTURING OF PA LIQUOR CONTROL BOARD (LCB) CONTROLLED BEVERAGES
– Any business holding a license issued by the LCB to engage in the manufacture,
transportation and sale of malt or brewed beverages, also any person engaged in the
legal manufacture of malt or brewed beverages within the territorial limits of the
United States, outside the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA – Marijuana for certified medical use as legally permitted by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with Act 16.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY – A person, including a natural person,
corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any combination
thereof, which holds a permit issued by the Department of Health (DOH) of the
Commonwealth to dispense medical marijuana.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA, GROWING / PROCESSING – A person, including a natural
person, corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any
24
combination thereof, which holds a permit issued by the Department of Health
(DOH) of the Commonwealth to grow and process medical marijuana.
MEDICAL OFFICE / CLINIC – A facility for the examination and treatment of ill and
afflicted human out-patients, including doctor and dental offices and urgent care
clinics, provided that patients are not kept overnight except under emergency
conditions.
MICROBREWERY - Establishment engaged primarily in the retail sale of prepared
food for consumption, which includes the brewing of beer as an accessory use. The
brewing operation produces beer and ale by mashing, cooking and fermenting and
does not include the production of any other alcoholic beverage.
MIXED USE OR OCCUPANCY – The conduct or carrying on of two or more uses in one
building or on one zoning lot.
MOBILE HOME – Factory built homes not bearing a label, as required and referred to
in the Act of November 17, 1982 (P.L. 676, No. 192), known as the Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Authorization Act, which certifies that it
conforms to Federal Construction and safety standards adopted under the Housing
and Community Development Act of 1974 (Public Law 93-383, 88 Stat. 633), nor shall
it apply to industrialized housing, as defined in the Act of May 11, 1972 (P.L. 286, No.
70), known as the Industrial Housing Act and the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code. Normally, these homes are constructed prior to 1976.
MODULAR HOMES – Sectional prefabricated buildings that consist of multiple
modules or sections which are manufactured in a facility and then delivered to their
intended site of use. The modules are assembled into a single building using either a
crane or trucks. Modular homes are designed for erection or installation on a sitebuilt
permanent foundation or designed to be moved once so erected or installed on
the site-built permanent foundation. Modular homes are designed and built to
conform to the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code with a building permit is
25
required from the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough. A Manufactured Home
is not Modular Home. Modular Homes are single family dwellings.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (PLANNING CODE FOR MPC) – The Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968 (P. L. 805, No 247 as amended, 53 P.S.
10101 et. seq.).
NONCONFORMING LOT – A lot which does not comply with the applicable area and
bulk provisions of this ordinance or an amendment hereafter enacted, which lawfully
existed prior to the enactment of this Ordinance or any subsequent amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE – A structure, or part of a structure manifestly not
designed to comply with the applicable area, bulk or other provisions in this
ordinance or an amendment hereafter enacted, which lawfully existed prior to the
enactment of this Ordinance or any subsequent amendment. Such nonconforming
structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE – A use, whether of land or of structure, which does not
comply with the applicable use provisions in which this Ordinance or an amendment
hereafter enacted, which lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this Ordinance or
any subsequent amendment.
NURSERY / GREENHOUSE – The indoor raising of plants, shrubs, and trees for sale
and transplantation.
NURSING HOME, INSTITUTIONAL FACILITY – An institution for the care of children,
the aged or infirm, who are residents by virtue of requiring specialized care and
supervision relating to health, social and/or rehabilitative services. The facility shall
be licensed or certified in accordance with state and county laws and regulations. The
term shall not include facilities or acute care or institutions for the care and treatment
of mental illness; alcoholism, or narcotics addiction.
OFFICE, BUSINESS / PROFESSIONAL– The office of an engineer, doctor, dentist,
26
attorney, real estate broker, insurance broker, architect, or other similar professional
person; and any office used primarily for accounting, correspondence, research,
editing or administration. Not included in this definition are banks and other financial
institutions.
OPEN SPACE – Land set aside and used for recreation, agriculture, resource
protection or a buffer area, which is freely accessible to all residents of a
development although restrictions may apply to agricultural areas. Open space does
not include land occupied by nonrecreational buildings, roads and required parking
areas or yards of dwelling units required by this Ordinance. Open space is normally
left in a natural state, except if safely precludes this, and also with the exception of
recreation areas which may be surfaced.
PA DEP – The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PENNDOT – The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PARKING SPACE – An off-street space for parking motor vehicles and which has a
hard, all-weather surface (asphalt, concrete covered to permit reasonable use at all
times) and is at least 9 feet wide by 18 feet long, exclusive of passageways, driveways
and access lanes.
PERIMETER – The outer boundary of a development site or area.
PERSON – An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation,
firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PERSONAL CARE HOME – A facility licensed by the Commonwealth located within a
dwelling where room and board is provided to more than three (3) permanent
residents who are not relatives of the operator and who are mobile or semi-mobile
and require specialized services in such matters as bathing, dressing, diet, and
medication prescribed for self-administration for a period exceeding twenty-four (24)
27
hours, but who are not in need of hospitalization or skilled or intermediate nursing
care.
PERSONAL SERVICE – A commercial establishment providing services and/or goods
to individuals. This includes but is not limited to barber shops, beauty salons,
dressmakers and seamstresses, tailoring, massage therapy business, shoe repair, and
similar such establishments.
PLACE OF WORSHIP – A church, synagogue or similar place where religious services
are held.
PLANNING COMMISSION – The Municipality of Waynesburg Planning Commission.
POLITICAL SIGN – A temporary sign which indicates the name, cause or affiliation of
anyone seeking public office or which refers to an issue of concern which a public
election is scheduled to be held.
PORCH – A roofed, open structure projecting from the front, side or rear wall of a
building, and having no enclosed feature of glass, wood or other material more than
30 inches above the floor thereof, except awning or screening or the necessary
columns to support the roof.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING – A building or buildings in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which the building is situated.
PRINCIPAL USE – The main use of land or structures as distinguished from the
subordinate or accessory use.
PRINTING AND PUBLISHING ESTABLISHMENT – Establishments whose primary
business is engaged in printing by letterpress, lithography, gravure, screen, offset or
other common process including electrostatic (xerographic) copying and other "quick
printing" services; and establishments serving the printing trade such as
bookbinding, type-setting, engraving, photoengraving and electrotyping. This group
also includes establishments that publish newspapers, books and periodicals,
28
whether or not they do their own printing; and establishments manufacturing
business forms and binding devices.
PRIVATE – Of or pertaining to any building, structure use or activity limited to
members of an organization or to other persons specifically invited or permitted
where no advertisement or inducement has been made to the general public.
PRIVATE CLUB – An association organized and operated not for profit for persons who
are bona fide members paying annual dues and which premises are restricted to such
members and their guests. The affairs and management of such association are
conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by
the members. Food, meals and beverages may be served on such premises, provided
adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. Alcoholic beverages
may be sold or served to members and their guests, provided such service is
secondary and incidental to the common objective of the organization and provided
that such sale is in compliance with all applicable federal, state, county, and local
laws.
PUBLIC – Of or pertaining to any building, structure, use or activity belonging to, or
affecting, any duly authorized government body.
PUBLIC/ESSENTIAL SERVICE – Underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, water
or communication transmission, distribution, collection, supply or disposal systems
and their required buildings and fire or emergency service stations, provided such
facilities are owned and operated by a governmental agency or entity regulated
and/or licensed by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission (PUC). Public/essential
services shall not include public or private incinerators, landfills, or similar waste
disposal facilities, whether or not owned or operated by a government or PUCregulated
entity.
PUBLIC MEETING – A forum held pursuant to notice under the act of July 3, 1986, (P.L.
388, No. 84), known as the “Sunshine Act”.
29
PUBLIC NOTICE – Notice published once each week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notices shall state the time
and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at
the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC PARKS / RECREATION – Land or buildings for the pursuit of sports and similar
leisure time activities such as parks, swimming pools, tennis courts or ball fields,
which are operated by governmental or nonprofit organizations. Excluded are any
amusement establishments or other recreational facilities of a commercial nature
(see Commercial Recreation).
PUBLIC PARKING GARAGE - A building with multiple stories of off-street parking
spaces where vehicles are temporarily stored with or without a nominal fee, in
association with occupational, retail, entertainment, recreational, municipal,
educational or residential use(s).
PUBLIC PARKING LOT – Any lot, parcel or yard used regularly in whole or part for the
storage or parking of more than two vehicles where such usage is-not incidental to or
in conjunction with a one or two family home.
PUBLIC USE OR BUILDING - Building or facility operated by a governmental agency or
philanthropic organization, where administrative activities are conducted or social or
educational services are provided to the public. Such uses shall include, but are not
limited to, a municipal/county building, library, community center, museum, or
similar use/facility, excluding a school or recreational facility as defined by this
Ordinance.
RADIO, TELEPHONE OR SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA - Any structure or device used for
the purpose of collecting or transmitting, electromagnetic waves, including but not
limited to direction antennas (such as panels, microwave dishes) and satellite dishes
and omni-directional antennas (such as wind antennas).
30
RAILROAD OR TRUCK TERMINAL - The premises and building(s) where cargo is stored
and where railroad cars and trucks load and unload cargo for shipment or distribution
on a regular basis, and which may include facilities for the temporary storage of loads
prior to shipment and facilities for the maintenance of transport vehicles.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE – A single or multiple-axle, non-self-propelled or selfpropelled
structure mounted on wheels or otherwise capable of being made mobile
for the purpose of travel, recreational and vacation use, including but not limited to,
travel trailers, motor homes, tent trailers, boats and boat trailers, horse trailers, or
campers.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT – A use devoted to research design, laboratory work
and or experimentation and any processing and fabrication incidental thereto,
provided no materials or finished products shall be manufactured, processed or
fabricated on the premises for sale except such as are incidental to said laboratory
research, design and or experimentation conducted on said premises.
RESTAURANT – A structure in which the principal use is the preparation and sale of
food and beverages, where food sales constitute more than 80 percent of the gross
sales receipts for food and beverages. Primary food service is via tableside ordering
and/or consumption but can include a delicatessen and curb-side pick up. Take-Out
service is permitted, but drive-thru service is not permitted.
RETAIL STORE – Commercial establishments engaged in selling merchandise directly
to customers for personal or household consumption and rendering services
incidental to the sale of goods.
CONVENIENCE RETAIL – Establishments selling merchandise for daily
consumption and purchase, such as food drugs and similar items. For purposes of
this Ordinance, eating and drinking establishments are excluded from this
category.
31
SHOPPER'S RETAIL – Establishments selling a wide variety of comparison goods,
such as apparel, furniture, household and electrical appliances, hardware,
sporting goods, computers and specialty merchandise such as jewelry, stationery,
antiques and gift items. For purposes of this Ordinance, retail sales of building
materials; plumbing, heating, electrical and ventilating materials and equipment;
garden supplies; automobiles, trucks and other vehicles; boats; gasoline; and
automotive parts are excluded from this category.
In determining the applicability of any specific use to this definition, the
Municipality shall be guided by the groupings utilized in the federal Standard
Industrial Classification Manual (most current edition).
SALVAGE (OR JUNK) YARD – Any area where scrap metal, paper, rags, tires and other
waste and/or used materials are brought, sold, exchanged, stored, bailed, packaged,
disassembled or handled; or where inoperable machinery or motor vehicles are
collected, dismantled, stored or sold or parts. Any use conducted entirely within an
enclosed building is not a salvage yard.
SCHOOL – A place of instruction operated by a public or religious organization, having
regular sessions, with regularly employed instructors and meeting all the
requirements of the PA Department of Education for providing primary, secondary,
vocational or post-secondary education. This definition shall not include privately
operated, for-profit schools of trade, vocation, avocation or business.
SCREEN – Decorative fending or evergreen vegetation maintained for the purpose of
concealing from view the area behind such structures or evergreen vegetation.
SELF SERVICE STORAGE UNITS – A building or group of buildings in a controlled and
fenced compound that contains varying sizes of individual compartmentalized, and
controlled access stalls or lockers which are leased to individuals for the storage of
the individual’s property, possessions or wares. All storage shall be with a completely
enclosed building or buildings. There shall be minimum spacing of twenty-five (25)
32
feet between buildings for traffic circulation, parking and fire lane purposes. All
outside lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties.
SERVICE BUSINESS – Commercial establishments that provide a wide variety of
services for individuals, business and government establishments and other
organizations.
PERSONAL SERVICES – Establishments providing services generally involving the
care of the person or his/her apparel such as laundries, dry cleaning shops
(excluding dry cleaning plants), barber/beauty shops, photographic studios, shoe
repair, baking and catering and similar services. For the purposes of this
Ordinance, funeral homes/mortuaries and vehicular repair services are excluded
from this category.
BUSINESS SERVICES – Establishments providing services primarily to business
establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as advertising and public relations,
management and consulting services, security and maintenance services,
equipment rental/leasing, computer and data processing services.
In determining the applicability of any specific use to this definition, the
Municipality shall be guided by the groupings utilized in the federal Standard
Industrial Classification Manual (most current edition).
SHOPPING CENTER – A group of more than three commercial businesses developed
as a single entity and sharing a common parking lot.
SIGN – A structure that is arranged, intended, designed or used to advertise,
announce or direct; or any device, illustration, description or identification posted,
painted, or placed in some fashion on a building, structure or any surface for such a
purpose. For the purpose of removal, signs shall also include all sign structures.
AWNING, CANOPY SIGN – A sign consisting of individual cut-out letters and/or
symbols which are painted, stenciled, or otherwise placed on a non-permanent
33
awning or canopy.
BILLBOARD – An off-premises sign which advertises an establishment, activity,
person, product or service which is unrelated to or unavailable on the premises
where the building is located.
BUILDING SIGN – An on-premises sign permanently affixed to a building,
including:
(i) BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGN - A sign containing only the name
and address of the occupant of the premises, or in the case of a multifamily
building containing only the name and address of the building.
(ii) CANOPY (OR AWNING) SIGN - A sign that functions as a roof-like
shelter, either permanent, retractable or removable, made of canvas
or other material that is affixed to a building or self-supporting and
provides protection from sun, rain, snow and other elements but
excluding marquees.
(iii) MARQUEE SIGN - A sign that is attached to, in any manner, or
supported by a permanent roof-like shelter extending from part of all
of a building face and may or may not project over the public right-ofway.
(iv) PROJECTING SIGN - A sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner
that its leading edge extends more than six (6) inches beyond the
surface of such building or wall.
(v) WALL SIGN - A sign attached to and erected parallel to the face of an
outside wall of a building, projecting outward no more than six (6)
inches from the wall of the building.
(vi) WINDOW SIGN - A sign or group of signs affixed to the inside of a
display window in a commercial establishment which advertises a
product or service available on the premises or which announces or
34
promotes a special sale or special event.
FREESTANDING SIGN - An on-premises sign supported by structures or supports
that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from
any building or other structure., including:
(i) GROUND (OR MONUMENT) SIGN - A sign having a support structure
that is a solid-appearing base constructed of a permanent material,
such as concrete block or brick. All other freestanding sign types not
meeting the definition of a monument sign shall be either a pole sign
or a pylon sign.
(ii) ON-LOT DIRECTIONAL SIGN - A sign which conveys instructions or
directions with respect to the use of the lot or building on which the
sign is located, including but not limited to signs which indicate street
addresses and the availability of parking, telephones rest-rooms, and
other conveniences for the general public.
(iii) POLE SIGN - A sign that is supported from the ground by an exposed
pole(s) or a three-dimensional support structure that is less than onethird
(1/3) the width of the sign face.
(iv) PYLON SIGN - A sign that is supported by one or more structural
elements which are architecturally similar to the design of the sign or
where the support structure is more than one-third (1/3) the width of
the sign face.
TEMPORARY SIGN - A sign that is not permanently affixed to the ground, building
or structure and is temporary in nature, designed to be removed upon conclusion
of an event or within a specified time period including:
(i) CONSTRUCTION - A sign announcing the name of contractors,
mechanics or artisans engaged in performing work on the premises.
(ii) DEVELOPMENT - A sign erected during the period of construction
35
and/or development of a property by the contractor and developer or
their agent.
(iii) PORTABLE - A sign that is not permanently affixed to a building, a
structure or the ground which is designed to be moved from place to
place, such as sandwich board signs.
(iv) REAL ESTATE - A sign advertising the sale or rental of premises. The
sign may also bear the words “sold”, “sale pending” or “rented” across
their face.
(v) SPECIAL EVENT DISPLAY - A banner, flag, pennant or similar display
constructed of durable material and affixed to the wall of a building
or a freestanding structure erected whose sole purpose is to advertise
a special event.
SIGN AREA – The area defined by the frame or edge of a sign, excluding the necessary
supports or uprights on which the sign may be placed. Where there is no frame or
edge to the sign, the area shall be defined by a projected, enclosed, four-sided
(straight sides) geometric shape which most closely outlines the copy of letters of the
said sign. If the sign consists of more than one section or module, all areas shall be
totaled.
SIGN FEATURES
CHANGEABLE COPY - A sign whose informational content can be changed or
altered by manual or electronic means. A sign on which the only copy that
changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall
be considered a 'time and temperature portion of a sign and not a changeable
copy sign for purposes of this Chapter.
DIGITAL - A sign with a fixed or changing message composed of a series of lights,
including light emitting diode (LED), which may be changed through electronic
means without altering the face or surface of the sign.
36
INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED - A sign which is lighted by means of lamps or lighting
devices external to, and reflected on, the sign, which lighting is stationary and
constant in intensity and color at all times and which is shielded so that the
illumination is concentrated on the face of the sign and there is no spillover of
illumination or glare beyond the face of the sign.
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED - A sign which is lighted by means of lamps or lighting
devices internal to the sign, which lighting is either behind the face of the sign
or is an integral part of the sign structure and the advertising effect.
SITE PLAN – A plan of a proposed development or use on which is shown topography,
location of all buildings, structures, roads, right-of-ways, boundaries, all essential
dimensions and bearings any other information deemed necessary by the
Municipality or prescribed by this Ordinance.
SLOPE – The face of an embankment or cut section: any ground whose surface makes
an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are expressed in a
percentage based upon vertical distance in feet per 100 feet or horizontal distance.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL -- An energy conversion system, including
appurtenances, which converts solar energy to a usable form of energy to meet all
or part of the energy or heating requirements of the on-site user, or which is to be
sold to a utility company to be used by others, or sold directly to other users. A solar
energy system may be ground-mounted (i.e., placed on top of the ground surface) or
roof-mounted (i.e., placed on or as an integral part of a building). A small solar energy
system is for personal use in residences, commercial properties and institutions (as
opposed to installed on large parcels of land for the purpose of generating revenue
or utility-scale systems designed to benefit the community or an entire institution).
SPECIAL EXCEPTION – Approval for a particular use granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board, according to the provisions contained in this Ordinance and Articles VI & IX of
37
the M.P.C.
STEPS – A construction or series of constructions placed for a foot support to
effectuate the ascending or descending of a person or persons from one level of
elevation to another.
STORAGE SHED – A small accessory structure, either wholly or partially enclosed,
serving for storage of tools, equipment, supplies or other similar materials for
safekeeping.
STORY – A story is that part of a building between the surface of any floor and the
next floor above it or, in its absence, then the finished ceiling or roof above it. A “split
level” story shall be considered a second story if its floor level is 6 feet or more above
the level of the line of the finished floor next below it. Any floor under a sloping roof
at the top of a building which is more than 2 feet below the top plate shall be counted
as a story; and, if less than 2 feet below the top plate, it shall be counted as a halfstory.
A basement shall be counted as a story if it averages more than 5 feet above
grade.
STREET – Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane,
alley, viaduct or other way, whether public or private, used or intended to be used by
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
STREET GRADE – The officially established grade of the street upon which a lot fronts.
If there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the street shall be taken
as the street grade.
STREET LINE – The line defining the edge of the legal width of a dedicated street rightof-
way.
STREET – TYPE – Streets may be classified according to the following:
STREET, ARTERIAL – Streets designed to carry high volumes of traffic from one
area of the community to another to link one community with another.
38
STREET, COLLECTOR – Streets designed to collect traffic from local streets and
then to convey it to the major arteries.
STREET, LOCAL – Streets designed to serve only the traffic needs of and provide
access to a limited area or neighborhood.
STRUCTURE – Any assembled, erected or constructed object having a stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not it is affixed to the land. This includes,
but is not limited to, carports, porches, storage sheds or containers, free standing
posts, pillars and similar uses. It shall not include sidewalks, driveways, or patios.
STUDENT – A person who is registered to be enrolled or who is enrolled and
matriculating at a post-secondary school as a student or who is on a semester or
summer break from studies at a post-secondary school.
STUDENT HOUSING – A building which contains a dwelling unit occupied by two or
more students who are not related to each other by birth, adoption or marriage.
SUBDIVISION – The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means
into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land, including changes in
existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future of lease, transfer or
ownership, or building, or lot development, provided however, that the division of
land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any
new structure or easement of access, shall be exempted.
SWIMMING POOL – A body of water in an artificial or semi-artificial receptacle or
other container, whether located in or out of doors, used as a recreational facility for
swimming, bathing or wading and having a depth of over 24 inches. A swimming pool
shall be deemed to include all building, equipment and appurtenances incidental to
such a pool.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE OR USE – Any structure or use which, by the type of
materials, construction or intended purpose, is erected or located for not more than
39
twelve months. Included are tents, stands, construction trailers and other structures
or uses of similar character.
TRAILER – A vehicular portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a
temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes having a body width not
exceeding 8 feet.
URBAN AGRICULTURE - The use of land for horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and
vegetables.
USE – The specific purpose of which land or a building is designed, arranged, intended
or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The terms “permitted use”,
“conditional use” or “special exception use” shall not be deemed to include any
nonconforming use.
VARIANCE – Permissive waivers from the terms of this Ordinance, granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board in case where a literal enforcement of provisions of the
Ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, due to special conditions that are not
self-imposed by the property owner, provided the variance is determined not to the
contrary to the public interest and the spirit and intent of this Ordinance as defined
in Articles VI and IX of the M.P.C.
VEHICULAR REPAIR GARAGE – Any building or premises where automobile repairs
take place. This includes rebuilding or major reconditioning of work or damaged
motor vehicles or trailers or any parts thereof, collision service, painting and engine
steam cleaning.
VEHICULAR SALES / SERVICES - Any facility or lot used for the sale or repair of motor
vehicles.
VETERINARY OFFICE (CLINIC OR HOSPITAL) - An establishment of a licensed
practitioner primarily engaged in the practice of veterinary medicine, dentistry or
surgery for animals. Accessory uses may include the confinement of animals for
40
medical reasons, grooming and destruction.
WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTION AND WAREHOUSING - Businesses primarily engaged in
storing and selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional,
or professional users; or, to other wholesalers.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL - All equipment, machinery and structures utilized in
connection with the conversion of kinetic energy of wind into electrical power. This
includes, but is not limited to, storage, electrical collection and supply equipment,
transformers, service and access roads, and one or more wind turbines, which have
a total rated nameplate capacity of not more than 100kW/ 0.1MW.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES – The following definitions pertain apply
to wireless communications facilities.
ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT: Any equipment serving or being used in conjunction
with a wireless telecommunications facility or wireless support structure. The
term includes utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators,
batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds, shelters or
similar equipment.
ANTENNA: Telecommunications equipment that transmits and receives
electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of wireless
communications services. An antenna shall not include private residencemounted
satellite dishes or television antennas or amateur radio equipment
including, without limitation, ham or citizen band radio antennas.
BASE STATION: A structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables
Federal Communications Commission-licensed or authorized wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network.
The term does not encompass a tower as defined in this subpart or any
equipment associated with a tower.
41
(i) The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with
wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public
safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services (i.e., wifi) and fixed
wireless services (i.e. point to point microwave transmissions) such as
microwave backhaul.
(ii) The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas,
coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and
comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration
(including Distributed Antenna Systems and small-cell networks).
(iii) The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the time the
relevant application is filed with the Borough under this subpart, supports
or houses equipment described in sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) of this section
that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting
process, or under another State or local regulatory review process, even if
the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing
such support.
(iv) The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant
application is filed with the Borough under this section, does not support
or house equipment described in sub-paragraphs (i) or (ii) of this section.
COLLOCATION: The mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an
eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving
radio frequency signals for communications purposes.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM (DAS): A small network of antennas that are
connected to a common source that provides coverage in a building or a small
geographic area.
42
ELIGIBLE FACILITES REQUEST: Any request for modification of an existing
tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical
dimensions of such tower or base station, involving (i) collocation of new
transmission equipment; (ii) removal of transmission equipment; or (iii)
replacement of transmission equipment.
ELIGIBLE SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any tower or base station, provided that it is
existing at the time the relevant application is filed.
EQUIPMENT COMPOUND: An area surrounding or adjacent to a wireless
support structure within which base stations, power supplies or accessory
equipment are located.
FT. WORTH ATTACHMENT: A non-freestanding pole which is attached to an
electrical transmission tower which is used to support antennas and accessory
equipment and which is anchored to the ground and obtains lateral bracing by
direct attachment to the electrical transmission tower.
MINIMUM FUNCTIONAL HEIGHT: Minimum height necessary for a WCF to
function satisfactorily.
MODIFICATION: The improvement, upgrade or expansion of existing wireless
telecommunications facilities or base stations
on an existing wireless support structure or the improvement, upgrade or
expansion of the wireless telecommunication facilities located within an
existing equipment compound, if the improvement, upgrade, expansion or
replacement does not substantially change the physical dimensions of the
wireless support structure.
MONOPOLE: A tower which consists of a single pole structure without any guy
wires, designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure, to support
43
communications antennas and connect appurtenances.
REPLACEMENT: The replacement of existing wireless telecommunications
facilities on an existing wireless support structure or within an existing
equipment compound due to maintenance, repair or technological
advancement with equipment composed of the same wind loading and
structural loading that is substantially similar in size, weight and height as the
wireless telecommunications facilities initially installed and that does not
substantially change the physical dimensions of the existing wireless support
structure.
RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW): The surface of and space above and below any real
property in the municipality in which the federal government,
Commonwealth, municipality or municipal authority has a regulatory interest,
or interest as a trustee for the public, as such interests now or hereafter exist,
including, but not limited to, all streets, highways, avenues, roads, alleys,
sidewalks, tunnels, viaducts, bridges, skyways, or any other public place, area
or property under the control of the federal government, Commonwealth,
municipality or municipal authority, and any non-exclusive public or utility
easements established, dedicated, platted, improved or devoted for utility
purposes. Private rights-of-way and other government-owned lands not listed
above shall not be considered a right-of-way. The phrase “in the right(s)-ofway”
means in, on, over, along, above and/or under the Right(s)-of-Way.
SITE: For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, the current
boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any
access or utility easements currently related to the site, and, for other eligible
support structures, further restricted to that area in proximity to the structure
and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.8
44
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY: State-of-the-art design techniques used to blend
objects into the surrounding environment and to minimize the visual impact
as much as possible. These design techniques are applied to wireless
communications towers, antennas and other facilities which blend the
proposed WCF into the existing structure
or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it less visible to the casual
observer. Such methods include, but are not limited to, architecturally
screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted antennas painted to
match the existing structure and facilities constructed to resemble trees,
shrubs, light poles, utility poles or flag poles.
SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE OR SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE: A modification
substantially changes the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure
if it meets any of the following criteria:
(i) for towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases
the original height of the tower by more than 10% or by the height of one
additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing
antenna not to exceed twenty feet, whichever is greater; for other
existing towers or base stations, it increases the original height of the
structure by more than 10% or more than ten feet, whichever is greater.
Changes in height should be measured from the original support
structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated
horizontally, such as on buildings' rooftops; in other circumstances,
changes in height should be measured from the dimensions of the tower
or base station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any
modifications that were approved prior to the passage of the Spectrum
Act.
(ii) for towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves
45
adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude
from the edge of the tower more than twenty feet, or more than the
width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever
is greater; for other existing towers or base stations, it involves adding
an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from
the edge of the structure by more than six feet;
(iii) for any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more than the
standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology
involved, but not to exceed four cabinets; or, for towers in the public
rights-of-way and base stations, it involves installation of any new
equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground
cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of
ground cabinets that are more than 10% larger in height or overall
volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure;
(iv) it entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site.
TOWER: Any structure that exceeds ten feet (10') in height and is built for the
sole or primary purpose of supporting any Federal Communications
Commission-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities,
including structures that are constructed for wireless communications
services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety
services, as well as unlicensed wireless services (i.e. wifi) and fixed wireless
services (i.e. point to point microwave transmission) such as microwave
backhaul, and the associated site. A building, water tower, electrical
transmission tower, utility pole, light pole, traffic signal pole, flag pole or other
similar structure designed and constructed for a sole or primary purpose other
than supporting any Federal Communications Commission-licensed or
authorized antennas and their associated facilities, as well as a Ft. Worth
46
Attachment shall not be considered a tower.
TOWER BASED COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIY (Tower-Based WCF): Wireless
communications facilities that include the installation of a new tower to
support the transmission equipment. A WCF that requires the replacement of
an existing structure (i.e. building, water tower, utility pole, light pole, traffic
signal pole, flag pole or other similar structure) to support the weight of a WCF
is not considered a new Tower-Based WCF.
TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT: Equipment that facilitates transmission for any
Federal Communications Commission-licensed or authorized wireless
communications service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers,
antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply.
The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications
services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety
services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services
such as a microwave backhaul.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) ON EXISTING STRUCTURE:
Wireless communications facilities located on existing structures such as, but
not limited to buildings, water towers, electrical transmission towers, utility
poles, light poles, traffic signal poles, flag poles and other similar structures
that do not require the installation of a new tower. This term includes the
replacement of an existing structure with a similar structure that is required
to support the weight of the proposed WCF.
WIRELESS: Transmissions through the airwaves including, but not limited to,
infrared line of sight, cellular, personal communications service (PCS),
microwave, satellite, or radio signals.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF): The set of equipment and
47
network components including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base
stations, cabling and accessory equipment, used to provide wireless data and
telecommunication services. The term shall not include the wireless support
structure.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a guyed or
self-supporting monopole or tower, electrical transmission tower, water
tower or other structure not classified as a wireless support structure,
including but not limited to buildings, light poles, utility poles, traffic signals
and other similar structures that could support the placement or installation
of wireless telecommunications facilities if approved by the municipality.
YARD – An open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. (See illustrations).
YARD, FRONT – A yard extending along the full width of a front lot line and back to
the required building line. On corner and through lots, front yards shall be provided
along all street frontages.
YARD, REAR – The required open space extending from the rear of the main
building to the rear lot line (not necessarily a street line) across the entire width of
the lot.
YARD, SIDE – The required open space between the side (face) of any buildings
and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line
not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed as a side line. In the case of a through
lot, side yards shall extend from the rear line of the required front yards. On corner
lots, one yard not fronting on the two streets shall be designated a side yard.
ZONING CERTIFICATE – A certificate issued by the Zoning Officer, stating that the
purpose for which a building or land is to be used complies with all applicable
requirements of this Ordinance for the zoning district in which it is located or is to be
48
located.
ZONING HEARING BOARD – The Zoning Hearing Board of the Municipality of
Waynesburg.
49
ARTICLE III
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
3-301 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS
The Municipality of Waynesburg is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
R-1 Low Density Residential
R-2 Medium Density Residential
R-3 High Density Residential
B-1 General Business
C - Conservation
U-1 University
U-2 University Fields
M-1 Manufacturing
3-302 ZONING DISTRICT MAP AND BOUNDARIES
302.1 Boundaries Established: The boundaries of the various zoning districts are
hereby established on the map entitled “Official Zoning Map” on file in the
office of the Zoning Officer/ Building Inspector and found in the Appendix of
this Ordinance. This map with all explanatory matter thereon is hereby made
part of this Ordinance. The Official Zoning Map shall be dated and shall carry
the appropriate signature certifying that is true map adopted by Waynesburg
Borough. All amendments shall be identified on the map and similarly
certified.
The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, the parcel
lines.
302.2 Interpretation: Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are
at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map or in other
circumstances not specifically covered above, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
interpret the district boundaries.
302.3 Future Street Vacation: In the event that a street, alley or other way shown
on the Zoning District Map is vacated, the property formerly in said street
right of way shall be included within the zoning district of the adjoining
50
property on either side of said vacated street or way. Where said street forms
a zoning district boundary, the new district boundary shall be the new
property line created by the former, centerline of said vacated street.
3-303 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
303.1 District regulations governing the uses and area and dimensional standards
for each zoning district shall be as set forth in the Schedule of District
Regulations which follows.
303.2 Additional Standards for B-1 and M-1 Districts
1. All operations, activities and storage shall be conducted wholly inside a
building or buildings unless otherwise specified within this Ordinance.
2. All premises shall be furnished with all-weather hard surface walks,
driveways, parking and loading areas.
3. Portions of the property not covered with buildings, roads, walkways,
parking and loading areas, or similar uses shall be planted and suitably
landscaped.
4. No building on an industrial property shall be used for residential
purposes, except that a security guard or custodian may reside on the
premise.
5. Temporary sale of merchandise in front of the premises may be
permitted only as a seasonal sale or seasonal sidewalk sale, subject to
the provisions of section 5-507 of this Ordinance.
6. All uses shall comply with the environmental performance standards of
this Ordinance located in Article VI.
3-304 PERMITTED USES
304.1. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following abbreviations shall have the
following meanings:
P = Permitted use by right (decision by Zoning Officer)
51
SE = Special Exception (decision by the Zoning Hearing Board)
304.2. The use tables within each of the subsections of this Article and the full use
table in the Appendix of this Ordinance contains the list of uses that are
permitted within each of the zoning districts.
304.3. Unless otherwise provided by State or Federal law or specifically stated in this
Ordinance, any land or structure shall only be used or occupied for a use
specifically listed in this Article as being allowed in the zoning district where
the land or structure is located. Such use shall only be permitted if the use
complies with all other requirements of this Ordinance.
3-305 USE FOR WHICH NO PROVISION IS MADE
305.1. Whenever, a use is not specifically permitted in any district established under
this Ordinance, and an individual makes an application for such use, the
Zoning Officer shall refer the application to the Zoning Hearing Board who
may authorize the use by special exception in the appropriate district.
3-306 LOT, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
306.1 Lot Area: Any lot together with the required yards and open areas on it shall,
be equal to or exceed the minimum lot area established for the zoning
district in which it is located. In case of a subdivision or combination of lots,
no lot shall be created which does not meet the requirements of this
Ordinance.
306.2 Required Lot Area: Any portion of a lot once designated as a yard or as lot
area per dwelling unit in compliance with the lot area requirements of the
Ordinance, shall not be counted again as a required yard or lot area per
dwelling unit for another lot or building, nor shall it be sold as a separate lot.
306.3 Building on Nonconforming Lots of Record: Any nonconforming lot of record,
as defined by this Ordinance, may be used for the erection of a structure
conforming to the use of the district in which it is located subject to the
provisions of Article 8 of this Ordinance.
52
306.4 Front Yards on Corner Lots: Lots which abut on more than one street shall
provide the required front yards along every street.
306.5 Yard Exceptions: Where more than fifty percent (50%) of the lots within a
block contain existing structures, the setbacks may be reduced to conform
to the setback lines of the existing structures.
306.6 Projections into Required Yards: All structures, whether or not attached to
the principal structure and whether open or enclosed including porches,
balconies, or other platforms above normal grade level, shall not project into
any minimum front, side, or rear yard with the following exceptions:
1. A buttress, chimney, cornice, pier, or pilaster which does not project
more than 18 inches from the wall of a building may project into a
required yard.
2. Balconies or other above-ground platforms and access steps to a
structure, not exceeding 6 feet in width, may extend up to 3 feet into a
required yard.
3. A porch for a residential structure may extend into a required side yard,
provided the porch is not more than 10 feet in height and is no closer
than 5 feet to any side lot line or 10 feet to any rear lot line.
306.7 Access to Public Street: All lots shall have access either directly or via a
driveway to a public street. Such driveway shall have a uniform width of not
less than 12 feet.
306.8 Height Exceptions: Church spires and towers, water towers and tanks, and
electric transmission towers may exceed the maximum height for the zoning
district in which they are located. However, no such structure shall exceed
75 feet in height and the required side yards shall be increased one foot for
each 5 feet over 45 feet in height.
3-307 R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
53
307.1 Purpose: It is the intent and purpose of the R-1 District to provide for and
protect single-family residential development in established neighborhoods.
307.2 Permitted Uses:
Residential
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached P
Dwelling, Two Family SE
Institutional
Cemetery SE
Community Center SE
Community Garden SE
Funeral Home SE
Place of Worship SE
Public / Essential Services P
Public Parks / Recreation P
Public Use or Building SE
School SE
Wireless Communications Facility on Existing Structure SE
Commercial
Bed & Breakfast SE
Urban Agriculture P
Accessory Uses
Accessory Dwelling Structure P
Accessory Uses common in residential districts such as swimming pools, sheds,
play structures, garages, gazebos, etc.
P
Family Day Care P
Home-Based Business, No Impact P
Home Occupation SE
Solar Energy System, Small P
Wind Energy System, small P
Key: P = Permitted by Right, SE = Special Exception
307.3 Dimensional Requirements
Uses
Min. Lot
Area
Min.
Front
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Min.
Side
Yard
Max. Lot
Coverage
Min. Lot
Width
Max. Building
Height
Dwelling,
Single
Family
4,400
S.F.
Avg./35’* 25’ 10’ 40% 50’
30’ or 2.5
Stories,
whichever is
greater
54
All other
uses
10,000
S.F.
25’ 25’ 25’ 40% 50’
30’ or 2.5
Stories,
whichever is
greater
Accessory
Uses
N/A N/A 5’ 5’ N/A N/A 15’
* See Section 306.5
3-308 R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
308.1 Purpose: It is the intent and purpose of the R-2 District to provide for
primarily residential development in neighborhoods that can
accommodate a higher density than found in the R-1 District.
308.2 Permitted Uses
Residential
Conversion Apartment SE
Dwelling, Multi-Family SE
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached P
Dwelling, Townhouse P
Dwelling, Two Family P
Group Care Facility SE
Personal Care Home SE
Institutional
Cemetery SE
Community Center P
Community Garden SE
Funeral Home SE
Place of Worship SE
Private Club SE
Public / Essential Services P
Public Parking Lot SE
Public Parks / Recreation P
Public Use or Building SE
School SE
Wireless Communications Facility on Existing Structure SE
Commercial
Bed & Breakfast SE
Urban Agriculture P
Accessory Uses
Accessory Dwelling Structure P
Accessory Uses common in residential districts such as swimming pools,
sheds, play structures, garages, gazebos, etc.
P
55
Family Day Care P
Home-Based Business, No Impact P
Home Occupation SE
Parking Lot SE
Solar Energy System, Small P
Wind Energy System, small P
Key: P = Permitted by Right, SE = Special Exception
308.5 Dimensional Requirements
Uses
Min. Lot
Area
(Sq.Ft.)
Min.
Front
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Min.
Side
Yard
Max. Lot
Coverage
Min. Lot
Width
Max. Building
Height
Dwelling,
Single Family
4,400 5’ 25’ 5’ 40% 40’
38’ or 3 Stories,
whichever is
greater
Dwelling,
Two Family
7,500 8’ 20’ 7’ 65% 40’
38’ or 3 Stories,
whichever is
greater
Dwelling,
Multi-Family
10,890 25’ 25’ ? 50% 50’
38’ or 3 Stories,
whichever is
greater
All other uses 10,000 25’ 25’ 25’ 40% 50’
38’ or 2.5 Stories,
whichever is
greater
Accessory
Uses
N/A N/A 5’ 5’ N/A N/A 15’
3-309 R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
309.1 Purpose: It is the intent and purpose of the R-3 District to provide for
higher density, multi-family residential development.
309.2 Permitted Uses:
Residential
Conversion Apartment SE
Dwelling, Manufactured Home P
Dwelling, Multi-Family SE
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached P
Dwelling, Townhouse P
Dwelling, Two Family P
Group Care Facility SE
Manufactured Home Park P
56
Personal Care Home SE
Institutional
Cemetery SE
Community Center P
Community Garden SE
Funeral Home SE
Place of Worship SE
Private Club SE
Public / Essential Services P
Public Parking Lot SE
Public Parks / Recreation P
Public Use or Building SE
School SE
Wireless Communications Facility on Existing Structure SE
Commercial
Bed & Breakfast SE
Urban Agriculture P
Accessory Uses
Accessory Dwelling Structure P
Accessory Uses common in residential districts such as swimming pools,
sheds, play structures, garages, gazebos, etc.
P
Family Day Care P
Home-Based Business, No Impact P
Home Occupation SE
Parking Lot SE
Solar Energy System, Small P
Wind Energy System, small P
Key: P = Permitted by Right, SE = Special Exception
309.3 Dimensional Requirements
Uses
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Front
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Min.
Side
Yard
Max. Lot
Coverage
Min.
Lot
Width
Max. Building
Height
Dwelling,
Single Family
4,400
S.F.
5’ 25’ 5’ 40% 40’
38’ or 3 Stories,
whichever is
greater
Dwelling, Two
Family
7,500
S.F.
8’ 20’ 7’ 65% 40’
38’ or 3 Stories,
whichever is
greater
Dwelling,
Multi-Family
10,890’ 25’ 25’ ? 50% 50’
38’ or 3 Stories,
whichever is
greater
All other uses
10,000
S.F.
25’ 25’ 25’ 40% 50’ 38’ or 2.5
Stories,
57
whichever is
greater
Accessory Uses N/A N/A 5’ 5’ N/A N/A 15’
3-310 B-1 GENERAL BUSINESS
310.1 Purpose: It is the intent and purpose of the B-1 Business district to provide
suitable locations for various retail and service commercial businesses as
well as other types of office uses.
310.2 Permitted Uses:
Residential
Apartment, 2nd Story and above P
Conversion Apartment SE
Dwelling, Multi-Family P
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached P
Dwelling, Townhouse P
Dwelling, Two Family P
Group Care Facility SE
Nursing Home / Institutional Facility SE
Personal Care Home SE
Institutional
Community Center P
Community Garden P
Day Care Center, Adult or Child SE
Funeral Home P
Library P
Medical Office / Clinic P
Place of Worship SE
Private Club P
Public / Essential Services P
Public Parking Lot SE
Public Parks / Recreation P
Public Use or Building P
School P
Veterinary Office (Clinic or Hospital) P
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-Based
(located in the ROW)
SE
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-Based,
Less than 40' (located out of the ROW)
SE
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-Based,
More than 40' (located out of the ROW)
SE
58
Wireless Communications Facility on Existing
Structures
SE
Commercial
Agri-Business, Sales and Processing P
Bars and Nightclubs P
Bed & Breakfast P
Business Service P
Car Wash SE
Commercial Recreation P
Commercial School P
Contractor’s Office P
Financial Institution P
Gasoline Service Station SE
Hotel / Motel SE
Kennel SE
Laundromat P
Microbrewery P
Office, Business / Professional P
Nursery / Greenhouse SE
Personal Service P
Printing and Publishing Establishment SE
Public Parking Garage SE
Restaurant P
Retail Store P
Shopping Center SE
Urban Agriculture P
Vehicular Repair Garage SE
Vehicle Sales / Services SE
Industrial
Manufacturing of PA LCB Controlled Beverages SE
Self Service Storage Units SE
Accessory Uses
Drive Through SE
Gas Station SE
Home-Based Business, No Impact P
Home Occupation SE
Parking Lot P
Solar Energy System, Small P
Wind Energy System, small P
Key: P = Permitted by Right, SE = Special Exception
310.3 Dimensional Requirements
59
Uses
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Front Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Min. Side
Yard
Max. Lot
Coverage
Min. Lot
Width
Max.
Building
Height
All uses 2,500 S.F.
Build-to-line:
Buildings shall be
built to the
sidewalk; or avg.
of adj. w/ a max
of 20’; or 10-20’
w/plaza /
courtyard /
outdoor dining
5’
0’ if share
party
wall; 10’
if not
100% 25’
44’ or 4
Stories,
whichever
is greater
3-311 C CONSERVATION
311.1 Purpose: It is the intent and purpose of the C Conservation District to preserve
areas designated for public parks, recreation and open space.
311.2 Permitted Uses:
Institutional
Community Garden P
Public Parks / Recreation P
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-
Based (located in the ROW)
SE
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-
Based, Less than 40' (located out of the
ROW)
SE
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-
Based, More than 40' (located out of the
ROW)
SE
Wireless Communications Facility on
Existing Structures
SE
Commercial
Urban Agriculture P
Accessory Uses
Parking Lot SE
Key: P = Permitted by Right, SE = Special Exception
60
3-312 U-1 UNIVERSITY
312.1 Purpose: The intent and purpose of the U-1 University District is to
recognize the existence of Waynesburg University as it presently exists and
to provide for a mixture of institutional, commercial and residential uses
surrounding the University.
312.2 Permitted Uses:
Residential
Dormitory P
Dwelling, Multi-Family SE
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached P
Dwelling, Townhouse P
Dwelling, Two Family P
Group Care Facility SE
Nursing Home / Institutional Facility SE
Personal Care Home SE
Student Housing P
Institutional
College / Administration Offices P
College Classrooms P
Community Center P
Community Garden SE
Day Care Center, Adult or Child SE
Funeral Home SE
Library P
Medical Office / Clinic SE
Place of Worship SE
Private Club SE
Public / Essential Services P
Public Parking Lot SE
Public Parks / Recreation P
Public Use or Building SE
School P
Veterinary Office (Clinic or Hospital) SE
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-Based
(located in the ROW)
SE
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-Based,
Less than 40' (located out of the ROW)
SE
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-Based,
More than 40' (located out of the ROW)
SE
Wireless Communications Facility on Existing
Structures
SE
61
Commercial
Bed & Breakfast SE
Business Service SE
Car Wash SE
Commercial Recreation SE
Commercial School SE
Contractor’s Office SE
Financial Institution SE
Gasoline Service Station SE
Hotel / Motel SE
Laundromat SE
Office, Business / Professional SE
Nursery / Greenhouse SE
Personal Service SE
Public Parking Garage SE
Restaurant SE
Retail Store SE
Shopping Center SE
Urban Agriculture P
Industrial
Self Service Storage Units SE
Accessory Uses
Accessory Dwelling Structure P
Family Day Care P
Home-Based Business, No Impact P
Home Occupation SE
Parking Lot P
Solar Energy System, Small P
Wind Energy System, small P
Key: P = Permitted by Right, SE = Special Exception
312.3 Dimensional Requirements
Uses
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Front
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Min.
Side
Yard
Max. Lot
Coverage
Min.
Lot
Width
Max. Building
Height
Dwelling,
Single Family
4,400
S.F.
5’ 25’ 5’ 40% 40’ *
Dwelling, Two
Family
7,500
S.F.
8’ 20’ 7’ 65% 40’ *
Dwelling,
Multi-Family
10,890
S.F.
25’ 25’ 25’ 50% 50’ *
62
Dormitories
21,700
S.F.
45’ 35’ 20’ 50% 70’ *
All other uses
10,000
S.F.
25’ 25’ 25’ 40% 50’ *
Accessory Uses N/A N/A 5’ 5’ N/A N/A 15’
*All areas East of Morris St. / 66’ or 6 stories, whichever is greater
*All areas West of Morris St., but South of First Ave. / 44’ or 4 stories, whichever is greater
*All areas West of Morris St., but North of First Ave. / 38’ or 3 stories, whichever is greater
3-313 UNIVERSITY FIELDS
313.1 Purpose: The intent and purpose of the U-2 University District to provide
area for the University’s athletic fields and associated parking.
313.2 Permitted Uses:
Institutional
Athletic Fields P
Community Garden P
Public Parking Lot P
Public Parks / Recreation P
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-
Based (located in the ROW)
SE
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-
Based, Less than 40' (located out of the
ROW)
SE
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-
Based, More than 40' (located out of the
ROW)
SE
Wireless Communications Facility on
Existing Structures
SE
Accessory Uses
Parking Lot P
Key: P = Permitted by Right, SE = Special Exception
3-314 M-1 MANUFACTURING
314.1 Purpose: It is the intent and purpose of the M-1 Manufacturing District to
63
provide for light and heavy industrial uses in areas that have traditionally
provided these types of uses and to limit the impacts to residential
neighborhoods.
314.2 Permitted Uses:
Institutional
Clinic, Drug Treatment SE
Community Garden P
Medical Marijuana Dispensary SE
Public / Essential Services P
Public Parking Lot P
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-Based
(located in the ROW)
SE
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-Based,
Less than 40' (located out of the ROW)
SE
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-Based,
More than 40' (located out of the ROW)
SE
Wireless Communications Facility on Existing
Structures
SE
Commercial
Adult Oriented Uses SE
Agri-Business, Sales and Processing P
Contractor’s Office P
Gasoline Service Station P
Office, Business / Professional P
Printing and Publishing Establishment P
Restaurant P
Retail Store P
Urban Agriculture P
Vehicular Repair Garage P
Vehicular Sales / Services P
Industrial
Light Industrial P
Manufacturing SE
Manufacturing of PA LCB Controlled Beverages SE
Medical Marijuana, Growing / Processing SE
Railroad or Truck Terminal P
Research and Development P
Salvage Yard SE
Self Service Storage Units P
Wholesale Distribution and Warehousing SE
Accessory Uses
64
Any accessory use incidental to the primary uses
above (dependent on Zoning Officer approval)
SE
Gas Station SE
Parking Lot P
Solar Energy System, Small P
Wind Energy System, small P
Key: P = Permitted by Right, SE = Special Exception
314.3 Dimensional Requirements
3-315 DOWNTOWN PARKING OVERLAY DISTRICT
315.1 There are no minimum parking requirements for the properties located
within the downtown parking overlay district, which is delineated on the
Waynesburg Borough Official Zoning Map located in the Borough Office and
the appendix of this Ordinance.
Uses
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Front Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Min. Side
Yard
Max. Lot
Coverage
Min. Lot
Width
Max.
Building
Height
All uses 2,000 S.F. 40’ 30’ 20’ 70% None
38’ or 3
Stories,
whichever
is greater
65
ARTICLE IV
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
4-401 APPLICABILITY
Applications for special exceptions, when listed as permissible by Article 3, shall be
approved or denied by the Zoning Hearing Board, in accordance with the standards
and criteria of this Article, the zoning district regulations, and other applicable
provisions of this Ordinance.
4-402 APPLICATION PROCEDURE
402.1 Application Content
Applications for special exceptions shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer
in the form prescribed by Waynesburg Borough. Such materials shall include
site and building plans which clearly identify the location, size, shape, and
use of the proposed site and structures, surrounding land uses within onequarter
mile, proposed vehicular and pedestrian accesses, and other
information necessary to evaluate the application according to the
standards contained in this Ordinance.
402.2 Review Procedure
1. The Zoning Officer shall forward all special exception use applications
to the Zoning Hearing Board for review and comment.
2. The Zoning Officer shall notify the Greene County Planning Commission
of all applications for special exceptions to provide the Commission with
an opportunity to present testimony before the Zoning Hearing Board,
if desired. The Zoning Hearing Board shall review and approve or deny
applications for special exceptions in accordance with the provisions of
Section 9-904 of this Ordinance & Article IX of M.P.C.
402.3 Revocation of Approval
66
Approval of a special exception use shall lapse after nine months from the
date of approval if the provisions in section 9-902 for obtaining zoning
certificates and completing work are not met. One (1) extension of up to
nine additional months may be granted by the Zoning Officer where the
applicant can show good cause for the delay.
4-403 GENERAL STANDARDS AND CRITERIA
403.1. Before approving a special exception application, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall determine that the proposed use will not alter the established
character and use of the neighborhood or district in which it is located and
that it will not substantially impair the use or development of adjacent
properties. The following general standards, among other things, shall be
used in the evaluation. These standards shall be in addition to any other
applicable requirements in this Ordinance.
1. The proposed use complies with all applicable provisions and
requirements for that type of use contained in this Ordinance, unless a
variance to any provision has been granted by the Zoning Hearing Board,
and with other applicable local County and Commonwealth ordinances,
laws and regulations.
2. The proposed use is compatible with the surrounding land uses, and it
will not have a negative impact on the existing neighborhood or
development in terms of air and water quality, noise, potential hazards,
illumination and glare, and restrictions to natural light and circulation.
3. The site for the proposed use is suitable in terms of size, topography,
soil conditions and similar physical features.
4. The proposed use and site provides for safe, adequate vehicular and
pedestrian access. It has access from a street capable of handling the
traffic generated by the proposed use, and it will not result in undue
traffic congestion and hazardous conditions on adjacent streets. The use
67
provides for safe, efficient internal circulation and sufficient off-street
parking and loading.
5. The proposed use complies with all applicable standards and
requirements for providing sanitary sewage disposal, water supply,
stormwater management, solid and toxic waste storage and disposal.
6. The proposed use provides screening and/or buffer areas as required
by this Ordinance.
7. The proposed use/development conforms to the scale, character and
exterior appearance of existing structures and uses in neighborhoods in
which it is located.
4-404 STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR SPECIFIC USES
For the uses identified in this section, Council or the Zoning Hearing Board, as
appropriate, shall also determine that the proposed use complies with these
standards, in addition to other applicable requirements in this Ordinance.
(NOTE: Uses are listed in alphabetical order.)
404.1 Adult Oriented Use
1. No adult-oriented establishment shall be located within 200 hundred
(200) feet of any residential zoning district, as measured from the
property line to the residential zoning district line.
2. No adult-oriented establishment shall be located within five hundred
(500) feet of any religious uses, educational uses, day care facilities and
recreational uses, as measured from the property line to the property
line of such use.
3. No adult-oriented establishment shall be located within five hundred
(500) feet of any an existing adult-oriented establishment as measured
from the property line.
4. A 50 feet buffer yard shall be provided along the side and rear lot lines.
68
If such buffer area does not include substantial mature trees that will
be preserved, it shall include continuous screening by evergreen trees
with an initial height of five (5) feet.
5. An adult-oriented establishment may be open for business Monday
through Saturday from 7:00AM to 1:00AM prevailing time only. No
adult-oriented establishment shall be open at any time on Sunday or
on a legal holiday as set forth in the Act of May 31, 1893, P.L. 188 § 1,
as amended, 44 P.S. §11.
6. No materials or merchandise of any kind offered for sale, rent, lease,
or loan or for view upon the premises of an adult-oriented
establishment shall be exhibited or displayed outside of a building or
structure.
7. The exterior of the building may include one (1) wall sign or parallel
sign identifying the name of the adult business or entertainment use,
which shall not exceed 20 square feet in size.
8. Free standing signs, banners, directional signs, illuminated signs,
portable signs, roof signs, seasonal signs and billboards shall be
prohibited on the property.
9. Window signs shall be limited to twenty-five (25) percent of the total
window area and shall not include any graphic or pictorial depiction of
material related to specific sexual activities or anatomical areas.
10. Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials related to
specific sexual activities or anatomical area shall not be shown or
exhibited so as to be visible to the public from the exterior of the
building.
11. For public health reasons, private booths of any kind are prohibited.
This specifically includes, but is not limited to, booths for viewing adult
movies or nude dancers.
12. Only "lawful" massages as defined by State court decisions shall be
69
performed in a massage parlor.
13. No adult-oriented establishment or massage parlor shall be used for
any purpose that violates any Federal, State or municipal law.
14. No use may include live actual or simulated sex acts nor any physical
or sexual contact between employees and entertainers or between
employees or entertainers and customers. At an adult-oriented
establishment involving "live entertainment", employees or
entertainers shall maintain a minimum distance of three (3) feet from
customers. This shall include, but not be limited to, a prohibition on
"lap dancing."
15. Any application for an adult-oriented establishment use shall state the
names and business addresses of: a) all individuals intended to have
more than a 5 percent ownership in such use or in a corporation
owning such use and b) an on-site manager responsible to ensure
compliance with this Ordinance on a daily basis. A telephone number
shall be provided where the on-site manager can be reached during
business hours. Such information shall be updated at the beginning of
each year in writing to the Zoning Officer.
404.2 Bed & Breakfast
1. The minimum lot area required shall be 5,000 square feet.
2. The maximum number of sleeping quarters offered shall be seven (7).
3. The owner/operator shall be a full-time resident of the dwelling.
4. No meals, other than breakfast shall be served on the premises. Meals
shall not be served to customers who are not overnight guests.
5. The maximum length of stay for any guest shall be seven (7)
consecutive overnight stays in any thirty (30) day period.
6. No sign shall be permitted other than a place card mounted on the wall
70
of the dwelling, which shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area and
which shall contain only the name and address of the Bed and Breakfast
and the name of the proprietor.
7. One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided on the lot for each
sleeping room, located on the side or rear lots only, not to be located
within the setbacks, and be screened on three sides by a four (4) foot
compact hedge, fence and/or other landscape features as may be
required by the zoning Hearing Board.
8. There shall be no cooking facilities in the sleeping quarters.
9. Amenities such as swimming pools, porches, gazebos, etc. shall be for
guests only.
404.3 Business Service
1. Business services shall be limited to activities with a performance impact
typical of office and retail activities.
2. The facility shall not produce odors, gas, dust or any other atmospheric
pollutant detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons living
or working in the surrounding area, nor shall it produce noise in excess of
applicable noise standards under state law and any other applicable laws.
404.4 Car Wash
1. Repair work and car lubrication are not permitted.
2. Washing facilities are permitted within a structure with open ends on
two sides of the wash bay.
3. Drainage water shall be controlled so that it does not flow or drain onto
adjacent property or public/private property.
4. In addition to the required parking areas, a minimum of five (5)
standing spaces, in tandem, shall be provided. These standing spaces
71
shall not interfere with the use of any required parking spaces and shall
not inhibit the free flow of traffic on the site, block any right-of-way
and be completely contained within the buildable area of the lot.
5. The facility shall be connected to the public storm sewer system.
6. Gasoline pumps are not permitted.
7. Driveway entrances shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from the
right-of-way line of the intersection of any public street.
404.5 Cemetery
1. Required yards and setbacks shall be established as part of the
application review.
2. Buffer areas or other screening may be required along the facility's
boundaries in order to separate and screen adjacent properties.
3. A minimum of five (5) acres shall be required.
4. The owner/operator of the cemetery shall supply a long-term
maintenance plan to the Borough.
5. All maintenance equipment shall be stored in an enclosed building
when not in use.
404.6 Clinic, Drug Treatment
1. Any facility dispensing medical marijuana must be legally registered in
the Commonwealth and possess a current valid medical marijuana
permit from the DOH. Such a facility may only dispense medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, permanent and secure building and
shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular
unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
2. Any proposed methadone or suboxone treatment facility shall include
with its submission of a zoning permit application a development
72
narrative that accurately describes the nature of medical services to
be provided and the names of the medical practitioners providing
said services. A licensed physician shall be on duty at this type of
facility during its hours of operation.
3. A clinic that dispenses medical marijuana may not operate on the
same site as a facility used for growing and processing medical
marijuana.
4. Clinics shall have a single secure public entrance and shall implement
appropriate security measures to deter and prevent the theft of
controlled substance and unauthorized entrance into areas where
they are stored.
5. A clinic that dispenses medical marijuana shall be a maximum of
3,000 gross square feet, of which no more than 500 square feet shall
be used for secure storage of product, and shall have an interior
customer waiting area equal to a minimum of twenty-five (25)
percent of the gross floor area.
6. A clinic that dispenses medical marijuana shall:
a. Not have a drive-through service;
b. Not have outdoor seating areas;
c. Not have outdoor vending machines;
d. Prohibit the administering of, or the consumption of medical
marijuana on the premises; and
e. Not offer direct or home delivery service.
73
7. A clinic may dispense controlled substances only to certified patients
and caregivers and shall comply with all lawful, applicable health
regulations.
8. A clinic that dispenses medical marijuana shall not be located within
1,000 feet of the property line of a public, private or parochial school
or a day-care center. This distance shall be measured in a straight line
from the closest exterior wall of the building or portion thereof in
which the business is conducted or proposed to be conducted, to the
closest property line of the protected use, regardless of municipality
in which it is located.
9. A clinic that dispenses medical marijuana shall be a minimum
distance of 1,000 feet from the next nearest clinic. This does not
include complementing or supporting businesses covered by different
definitions. This distance shall be measured in a straight line from the
closest exterior walls of the buildings or portions thereof in which the
businesses are conducted or proposed to be conducted, regardless of
municipality in which it is located. This separation distance does not
apply to the distance between the grower/processor and the specific
dispensary they serve, or with which they partner.
10. Any clinic lawfully operating shall not be rendered in violation of
these provisions by the subsequent location of a public, private or
parochial school or a day care facility.
11. A buffer planting is required where a clinic adjoins a residential use or
district.
404.7 Commercial Recreation
1. All structures shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet from any
property line.
74
2. All facilities shall abut a public road and have a permanent access
thereto.
3. Alcoholic beverages without a state liquor control board license,
amplified music, and juke boxes shall be prohibited on the premises.
4. Operating hours for such facility shall be no earlier than 7 A.M. and no
later than 11 P.M., prevailing time.
5. All pools shall be surrounded by a fence at least six (6) feet in height,
the entrance to which shall be kept locked when attendant is not
present; and shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable
state requirements.
6. Tennis courts shall be protected by a permanent fence ten (10) feet in
height behind each base line extending ten (10) feet beyond the
playing area in each direction.
7. All waste disposal storage areas shall be located in the rear yard in
compliance with all setback requirements of the applicable zoning
district.
404.8 Community Center
1. A 10 feet minimum width buffer yard shall be provided along the side
and rear lot lines adjacent to any lot in a residential district. This
provision shall not apply to a community center that serves a single
residential development.
404.9 Community Garden
1. Hours of operation. Operation using machinery may begin at sunrise or 7:00
am, whichever is earlier, and must end at sunset or 9:00 pm, whichever is
later. Automatically functioning equipment, such as sprinklers, is not
considered operation.
2. Additional uses and structures. Community gardens may include any of the
following features: raised and/or accessible planting beds, compost bins,
75
picnic tables, garden art, rain barrel systems, rest room facilities or portable
toilets, signage, storage sheds, and children’s play areas.
3. Waste containers. All community gardens shall have suitable containers for
waste and recyclables that are regularly serviced.
4. Sales. A community garden may include a seasonal farm stand only for the
sale of items grown at the site; no other merchandise may be sold. Stands
shall be removed from the premises or stored inside a building on the
premises or off site when the garden is not in operation. Sales must occur
on-site and only between 7:00 am and 9:00 pm. A plan for off-street
parking must be provided to and approved by the Borough if items are to be
sold on site.
404.10 Conversion Apartment
1. In order to convert an existing single/two family dwelling to multiple
family dwelling the following requirements must be met:
a. The structure must comply with the minimum lot area per dwelling
unit for multifamily uses in the zoning district.
b. The required number of off street parking spaces per dwelling unit
must be provided. No off-street parking shall be permitted in a
front yard; parking may be provided in a side or rear yard, provided
it is visually screened from the street and adjacent properties.
c. No individual dwelling unit shall contain less than 700 square feet
of floor area and shall include kitchen and bath facilities.
d. All units shall comply with applicable requirements of the
International Property Maintenance Code and Pennsylvania Labor
and Industry regulations.
e. No dwelling shall be located in a basement or cellar and no separate
unit shall be located on the third floor of a wood frame building.
404.11 Day Care Center, Adult or Child
76
1. All day care centers must be licensed by the PA Department of Public
Welfare and must operate in accordance with the requirements of the
Department. This requirement is a condition of occupancy.
2. Any outdoor recreational areas on the property shall be no closer than
25 feet to an abutting street or 10 feet to any property lines. They shall
be fenced with a self-latching gate or otherwise secured and
landscaped as required by the Governing Body.
3. Safe vehicular access and off street areas for discharging and picking
up children or adults shall be provided.
4. One parking space shall be provided for each staff member plus one
for each six children or adults cared for at the center. Parking areas for
four or more vehicles shall be screened in accordance with section 5-
506 when abutting a residential use or district.
404.12 Drive Through
1. All businesses which propose drive through facilities, as defined by this
ordinance, as accessory uses shall meet all of the following
requirements:
a. General Regulations
i. A drive-through facility at or near an intersection may be
approved only if it is demonstrated that the drive-through will
not significantly increase traffic congestion.
ii. No more than one drive-through aisle may be approved for any
single drive-through facility.
iii. Entries to and exits from a drive-through facility shall be a
minimum of 150 feet from the street center line of any
intersection or from another drive-through facility on the same
side of the street.
iv. A drive-through facility including drive-through aisles shall
77
provide landscaping to buffer adjacent uses and provide
lighting which does not produce any objectionable direct or
reflected glare on any adjoining property or thoroughfares.
404.13 Dwelling, Manufactured Home
Any installation of a manufactured home shall be subject to the following
requirements.
1. Manufactured homes shall be placed on permanent footers (concrete
runners) at a depth no less than 18”. These permanent footers
(concrete runners) must be the same width as the manufactured home
with a top surface of 16” to 24” wide.
2. Manufactured homes shall have double concrete block piers,
8”x8”x16” (block size) under the frame at a distance no less than eight
(8’) feet and no more than twelve (12’) feet apart. The concrete block
piers must coincide with the permanent footers (concrete runners) as
listed above. These concrete block piers shall not be less than twelve
(12”) inches or more than forty-eight (48”) inches in height.
3. Manufactured homes shall be secured to the permanent footer
(concrete runner) with at least four (4) tie downs such as concrete
“dead-men”, screw augers, arrowhead anchors or other devices
suitable to withstand a tension of at least 2,800 pounds to prevent
rocking and wind overturning. The tie downs consist of
galvanized or rust resistant steel strapping (1-1/4” wide x 0.035” thick)
or cable (1/4” thick), which anchors the framing to the ground.
4. Manufactured homes shall be skirted with skirting that has been
approved by the Manufactured home industry. This Manufactured
home skirting must be installed prior to occupancy.
5. Manufactured homes shall be separated from each other by at least
78
thirty (30’) feet. Manufactured homes shall be separated from all other
buildings and structures by at least (20”) feet.
6. Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each
manufactured home. Each parking space shall be at least 10’x20’ or 200
square feet.
7. Manufactured homes may as an option be placed on a permanent
foundation. When manufactured homes are placed on a permanent
foundation, the tires, axles and tongue must be removed.
8. The following inspection schedule shall be required for all
manufactured homes:
a. Inspection #1 – Digging of the permanent footer (concrete runner)
prior to pouring.
b. Inspection #2 – Pouring of the concrete for the permanent footer
(concrete runner), the tie downs should be anchored within the
permanent footer (concrete runner).
c. **Inspection #1 and #2 must be completed prior to the
manufactured home being brought onto the property.
d. Inspection #3 – The placement of the concrete block piers along
with the securing of the tie downs.
e. Inspection #4 – The installation of the approved manufactured
home skirting.
f. Inspection #5 – When porches and decks are completed. These
must meet the B.O.C.A. Building Codes of HUD Codes.
g. Inspection #6 – The final electrical inspection by a certified
electrician. Proof of this inspection must be given to the Borough.
**Inspections #1-5 shall be conducted by the Borough’s
79
Zoning/Codes Enforcement Officer.
9. All new manufactured homes shall be installed according to the
Manufactured Installation Manual, which is provided by the
Manufactured Home Dealer.
10. When obtaining a Building Permit, provide the year, make, model and
proof that the manufactured home meets the most current standards
of the Federal & National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards (HUD).
404.14 Dwelling, Multi-Family
1. The dimensional requirements under the applicable zoning district
shall apply.
2. Developments consisting of multiple buildings shall adhere to the
following regulations:
a. The maximum length of a building shall be one hundred and
seventy five (175) feet.
b. Buildings are encouraged to be located in clusters which create
common areas, rather than situated parallel to one (1) another.
Where clustering is not feasible due to site conditions, there shall
be no more than three (3) abutting buildings parallel to each other
within the development.
c. Staggered setback of dwelling units and a variation in façade
design shall be encouraged to offer visual variety, individualism,
and some private yard area. It is recommended that no more than
two (2) contiguous units shall have the same façade setback within
a building. Changes in setbacks shall be a minimum of four (4)
feet.
d. Buildings within the development shall be designed to provide
80
individual dwelling units with views and direct access to required
open space areas.
e. Buildings shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from
common parking areas and shall be set back a minimum of twentyfive
(25) feet from common refuse areas.
f. Buildings must be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet
from property boundaries.
g. Sidewalks shall be provided to connect dwellings with parking
areas, recreational areas/open space and refuse facilities.
3. Required parking shall adhere to those standards set forth in Table 5.3
of this Ordinance. Parking areas shall be adequately landscaped to
provide shade, to screen vehicles from public streets, and to reduce
glare and noise within the development. Parking lots shall be setback
a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any right-of-way and shall be
screened with landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided around the
perimeter of all parking areas, except for access points and walkways.
404.15 Dwelling, Two Family
1. The minimum lot area shall be 8,000 square feet.
2. When the adjacent property is a single-family use, the side yard shall
be landscaped with a three (3) foot high compact hedge.
3. Each living unit shall contain two (2) parking spaces.
404.16 Financial Institution
1. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial
or collector street, as defined by this Ordinance.
2. Drive-through facilities, if proposed, shall be subject to 404.11 of this
ordinance.
81
404.17 Funeral Home
1. The minimum site area shall be 21,780 square feet.
2. All outdoor lighting shall be shielded and reflected away from adjacent
properties.
3. Parking areas adjoining existing residential property shall be screened
by a five (5) foot compact hedge, and/or privacy fences whose design
must be approved by the Zoning Board.
4. No crematorium facilities are permitted.
5. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial
or collector street.
6. Traffic circulation on the lot shall be designed to minimize congestion
and provide for the lining up of vehicles on the property without
obstructing the free flow of traffic on adjoining streets or alleys.
404.18 Gasoline Service Station
1. No gasoline service station shall be located within 1,000 feet of
another gasoline station or lawfully existing single family residential
structure.
2. Access driveways to the service station shall be at least 30 feet from
the intersection of any public streets.
3. Fuel pumps, air towers and water outlets may be located outside an
enclosed building, provided that no portion of these facilities shall be
closer than 10 feet of any property line.
4. All automobile parts and supplies shall be stored within a building,
except that automotive supplies may be displayed for sale at the fuel
pump and at a distance no greater than 5 feet from the pumps.
5. All refuse shall be stored in compliance with the International Property
82
Maintenance Code and other applicable ordinances.
6. Non-operable vehicle or vehicles awaiting repairs may be parked or
stored on the premises, provided they do not exceed the number of
available off-street parking spaces for the service station.
7. Rental of automobiles, vans (less than 20 feet long) or utility trailers is
an authorized accessory use, provided that no more than three
vehicles are visible on the premises at any time.
8. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with Section
5-506 of this Ordinance.
404.19 Group Care Facility
1. Group residences are allowed as special exception uses only in the
zoning districts listed in this Ordinance.
2. The maximum number of occupants for a group residence shall be as
follows:
a. R-l Districts: No more than 8 persons including staff.
b. R-2, B-1 districts: No more than 12 persons including staff.
3. In order to prevent the concentration of group residences in a
neighborhood and to avoid impacting existing residences, no group
residence may be located within the same block or within 2,500 feet,
whichever is more, of another group residence or personal care
boarding home.
4. One off-street parking space is required for each staff member (on a
peak shift), and one space per two residents where they are allowed
to own and operate a motor vehicle.
5. Minimum lot area, yard setback and structural heights shall be as
prescribed in the district where the property is located, unless
83
otherwise stated herein.
6. If licensed or certified by a governmental agency or an agent of
government, a current license/certificate from the appropriate
agency(s) is necessary for initial and continued approval. Suspension
and revocation of the license/certificate shall automatically revoke the
occupancy permit and the conditional or special exception use
approval.
7. The facility must comply with any and all applicable building, fire,
health and/or safety codes.
8. Signs for the group residence shall comply with applicable provisions
of Section 5-505, Signs, of this Ordinance.
9. Change of ownership or sponsorship or of any other condition
contained in the original approval of the group residence shall
constitute a new use, and the procedure for obtaining special
exception use approval of a new facility shall be executed.
10. The owner or sponsor shall file with the UCC Enforcement Officer on
June 1st of each year following the original approval information
indicating that the facility continues to satisfy the conditions of original
approval. If the facility is shown to be operating in compliance with the
terms of the original approval, then the Zoning Officer shall renew the
certificate of occupancy for another year. If the information indicates
that there is any change in operation, or any complaint has been
lodged against the facility, the Zoning Officer shall forward the
information to the Zoning Hearing Board who shall decide the renewal
of the approval and certificate of occupancy.
404.20 Home Occupation
1. A zoning certificate is required for a home occupation. However, all
84
such uses shall operate in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance and are subject to inspection by the Zoning Officer in order
to verify complaints.
2. There shall be no exterior evidence of such uses other than a small sign
placed in accordance with Section 5-505 of this Ordinance.
3. There shall be no retail sales directly to customers on the premises.
4. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the total floor area of the principal
dwelling shall be devoted to the conduct of the home occupation.
5. There shall be no exterior display of goods or interim display visible
from the outside.
6. Exterior lighting shall be residential in style, size, location and intensity.
7. Storage of materials or products directly associated with the home
occupation shall not be stored outside the dwelling.
8. The home occupation shall be carried on by a maximum of two
individuals, one of whom must reside in the dwelling unit.
9. Articles produced on the premises shall be sold off the premises only.
10. There shall be no greater traffic volume generated by such home
occupation than would normally be expected in the residential area in
which it is located.
11. No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference
detectible to normal senses off the property.
12. No equipment or processes shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television off the premises or
causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
13. The hours of public operation shall be determined by the Zoning
85
Hearing Board to be consistent with the character of the neighborhood
where the home occupation is located.
14. The use shall not cause a negative impact on property values in the
neighborhood.
15. The use shall not require internal or external alterations to the existing
structure.
16. Commercial vehicles shall not be parked on the premises.
17. The following uses shall not be considered home occupations and shall
be restricted to the districts in which they are specifically-identified:
beauty shops / barber shops, clinics, kennels, mortuaries, private club,
tea rooms, stables, bed and breakfast, vehicle repair garage.
18. If the dwelling unit is a rental, permission for the home occupation
must be obtained from the property owner.
404.21 Hotel/Motel
1. If the hotel/motel includes eating and drinking facilities to serve both
overnight guests of the hotel and the general public, then it must
provide off-street parking for such facilities in accordance with the
provisions of Section 5-506 of this Ordinance.
2. Areas not occupied with buildings and parking areas shall be
completely landscaped and planted with lawns, ornamental trees and
shrubs.
3. No buildings shall be set closer than 45 feet to the front, side and rear
lot lines.
4. There shall be not less than 1,000 square feet of lot area for each
sleeping unit. The minimum lot area for a hotel/motel shall be one
acre.
86
5. Sleeping units shall contain a bedroom and bath and have a floor area
of not less than 250 square feet.
6. If the lot upon which a hotel/motel is erected abuts a residential
district, it shall be screened by well-maintained landscaping not less
than 6 feet nor more than 10 feet high or an ornamental fence within
the same height limitations, the ratio of the solid portion to the open
portion of which shall not exceed three to one (3:1).
7. The facility shall have access from a public street of sufficient size and
capacity to accommodate the projected traffic. If any road
improvements or traffic signals are required to an existing public road,
as a result of the proposed hotel, the hotel owner or developer shall
bear the cost of any such improvements.
404.22 Kennel
1. The kennel shall be constructed on a lot greater than or equal to ten
(10) acres and shall be licensed under the Dog Law Act of 1982, P.L.
784-255.
2. Any exterior fenced area wherein animals exercise or are otherwise
exposed must be located a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet
from any principal structure on adjacent lots and all outdoor exercise
areas shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any property line.
3. The perimeter of the exterior exercise area must be fenced with a
weatherproof material, a minimum of five (5) feet in height,
accessible only through a self-latching gate.
4. Animals shall be permitted to exercise within the exercise areas daily
between the hours of 8 AM and 8 PM.
87
5. Any structure used to house animals shall be equipped with codeapproved
nontoxic noise-dampening material or acoustic tile.
6. Odors and noise causing annoyance or discomfort to the public
outside of the lot on which the kennel is located shall not be
permitted.
7. The applicant shall furnish evidence of effective means of animal
waste collection and disposal which shall be continuously
implemented.
8. The landowner and/or developer shall comply with any additional
standards, as defined by the Zoning Hearing Board, that are needed
to protect public health, safety and welfare or to address unique
characteristics of a site.
404.23 Laundromat
1. All laundromat establishments shall follow the rules and regulations
imposed by the Pennsylvania Dry Cleaning Law (No. 1990-214).
2. All materials and equipment shall be stored within a completely
enclosed building.
3. The manufacture of hazardous or potentially hazardous materials shall
not be permitted.
404.24 Light Industrial
1. This use is not permitted if there exists an existing residential use
within two hundred (200) feet of the property line of the industrial use.
2. A decorative shrub and/or fence is required around the entire
perimeter of the property. Additional landscape features may be
required as per the Zoning Board's recommendations.
3. Only visitor parking is permitted in the front yard area.
88
4. All outdoor lighting shall be shielded and reflected away from adjacent
properties.
404.25 Manufactured Home Parks
1. Refer to the Greene County Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance for requirements regarding Manufactured Home Parks.
404.26 Medical Marijuana Dispensary
1. Any facility dispensing medical marijuana must be legally registered in
the Commonwealth and possess a current valid medical marijuana
permit from the DOH. Such a facility may only dispense medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, permanent and secure building and
shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular
unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
2. Any proposed methadone or suboxone treatment facility shall include
with its submission of a zoning permit application a development
narrative that accurately describes the nature of medical services to
be provided and the names of the medical practitioners providing
said services. A licensed physician shall be on duty at this type of
facility during its hours of operation.
3. A clinic that dispenses medical marijuana may not operate on the
same site as a facility used for growing and processing medical
marijuana.
4. Clinics shall have a single secure public entrance and shall implement
appropriate security measures to deter and prevent the theft of
controlled substance and unauthorized entrance into areas where
they are stored.
5. A clinic that dispenses medical marijuana shall be a maximum of
3,000 gross square feet, of which no more than 500 square feet shall
89
be used for secure storage of product, and shall have an interior
customer waiting area equal to a minimum of twenty-five (25)
percent of the gross floor area.
6. A clinic that dispenses medical marijuana shall:
a. Not have a drive-through service;
b. Not have outdoor seating areas;
c. Not have outdoor vending machines;
d. Prohibit the administering of, or the consumption of medical
marijuana on the premises; and
e. Not offer direct or home delivery service.
7. A clinic may dispense controlled substances only to certified patients
and caregivers and shall comply with all lawful, applicable health
regulations.
8. A clinic that dispenses medical marijuana shall not be located within
1,000 feet of the property line of a public, private or parochial school
or a day-care center. This distance shall be measured in a straight line
from the closest exterior wall of the building or portion thereof in
which the business is conducted or proposed to be conducted, to the
closest property line of the protected use, regardless of municipality
in which it is located.
9. A clinic that dispenses medical marijuana shall shall be a minimum
distance of 1,000 feet from the next nearest clinic. This does not
include complementing or supporting businesses covered by different
definitions. This distance shall be measured in a straight line from the
closest exterior walls of the buildings or portions thereof in which the
businesses are conducted or proposed to be conducted, regardless of
municipality in which it is located. This separation distance does not
90
apply to the distance between the grower/processor and the specific
dispensary they serve, or with which they partner.
10. Any clinic lawfully operating shall not be rendered in violation of
these provisions by the subsequent location of a public, private or
parochial school or a day care facility.
11. A buffer planting is required where a clinic adjoins a residential use or
district.
404.27 Medical Marijuana Growing and Processing
1. A medical marijuana grower/processor may only grow medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, and secure building which includes
electronic locking systems, electronic surveillance and other features
required by the Pennsylvania Department of Health (DOH). The
grower/processor facility shall not be located in a trailer, cargo
container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle
or other motor vehicle.
2. The maximum floor area of a medical marijuana processing facility
shall be limited to 20,000 square feet, of which sufficient space must
be set aside for secure storage of marijuana seeds, related finished
product, and marijuana related materials used in production or for
required laboratory testing.
3. There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, odors, or waste
into the environment from any facility where medical marijuana
growing, processing or testing occurs.
4. Marijuana remnants and byproducts shall be secured and properly
disposed of in accordance with the DOH Policy and shall not be placed
within any unsecure exterior refuse containers.
91
5. The grower/processor shall provide only wholesale products to other
medical marijuana facilities. Retail sales and dispensing of medical
marijuana and related products is prohibited at medical marijuana
grower/processor facilities.
6. Grower/processors may not locate within 1,000 feet of the property
line of a public, private, or parochial school or day care facility.
7. A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana
grower/processor adjoins a residential use or district.
404.28 Mobile Home
1. Mobile Homes are no longer permitted to be established anywhere in
the Borough.
404.29 Multifamily Dwellings Accessory to Existing Commercial Structure
1. One off-street parking space per dwelling unit must be' provided. No
off-street parking shall be permitted in a front yard; parking may be
provided in a side or rear yard, provided it is visually screened from
the street and adjacent properties as determined by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
2. No individual dwelling unit shall contain less than 700 square feet of
floor area and shall include kitchen and bath facilities.
3. All units shall comply with applicable requirements of the Municipal
building code and Pennsylvania Labor and Industry regulations.
4. All such dwelling units shall be located on the second floor or above;
no dwelling unit, unless it is occupied by the owner of the building,
shall be located on the third floor of a wood frame building.
404.30 Nursery / Greenhouse
1. The raising, of plants, trees, flowers, and shrubs shall be clearly the
92
primary use of the property.
2. Impervious surface coverage shall not exceed 60%.
3. No greenhouse shall be located closer than 100 feet to the nearest
property line.
4. Hours of operation are limited to 5:30 a.m. until 12:00 midnight.
404.31 Nursing Home, Institutional Facility
1. The minimum lot area for a nursing home shall be 1,500 sq. ft. per
resident.
2. The facility shall be duly licensed by the Commonwealth and shall
operate in accordance with the regulations of the licensing agency.
3. The facility shall provide off street parking and loading spaces as
required in section 5-506 of this Ordinance.
4. The facility shall have its principal traffic access from a public street
with sufficient capacity to handle the traffic generated by the use. An
analysis of peak hour traffic and impact on surrounding streets and
intersections and methods to alleviate any potential problems may be
required.
5. Ambulance, delivery and service areas shall be obscured from the
view of all residential properties by fencing, screening or planting as
approved by the Municipality.
6. Buffer areas may be required alongside and rear yard where
necessary to provide visual and audible privacy for the nursing home
and/or adjacent uses. A landscaped area, at least 10 feet in depth shall
be provided along the entire front property line except for approved
entrances as determined by the Zoning Hearing Board.
404.32 Parking Lot
93
1. All parking surfaces must be paved with a bituminous or concrete as
specified by the Zoning Hearing Board.
2. All off-street parking shall be located at least ten (10) feet from all
property lines and be screened by a four (4) foot high compact hedge,
privacy fence or other landscape feature as may be required by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
3. Outdoor lighting shall be shielded and reflected away from adjoining
streets or properties.
4. Parking areas shall be designed so as to prevent surface water from
draining on to adjacent properties and public streets.
5. Parking areas for ten (10) or more cars shall be interspersed with land
forms and other appropriate landscape or planted areas as
determined by the Zoning Hearing Board.
404.33 Personal Care Home
1. A full or provisional license from the Commonwealth is necessary for
initial and continued approval. Suspension of the license
automatically revokes the occupancy permit and special exception
approval.
2. Change of ownership, sponsorship or any other condition contained
in the original approval of the home shall constitute a new use, and
the procedure for obtaining a special exception use approval of a new
facility shall be executed.
3. No personal care home shall be located within 2,000 feet of another
personal care home or group residence.
4. The facility shall comply with local, county and state building, fire,
health, or safety codes.
94
5. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each staff member,
operator or employee plus one for each four residents in the home.
6. Signs for the personal care home shall comply with applicable
provisions of Section 5-507, Signs, of this Ordinance.
7. The maximum number occupants for a personal care home shall be:
a. R-2 and R-3 Districts - 15 persons
b. B-1 and U-1 Districts - 20 persons
8. The owner or sponsor shall file with the Zoning Officer on June 1st of
each year following the original approval information indicating that
the facility continues to satisfy the conditions of original approval. If
the facility is shown to be operating in compliance with the terms of
the original approval, then the Zoning Officer shall renew the
certificate of occupancy for another year. If the information indicates
that there is any change in operation, or any complaint has been
lodged against the facility, the Zoning Officer shall forward the
information to the Zoning Hearing Board who shall decide the renewal
of the approval and certificate of occupancy.
404.34 Place of Worship
1. If a residential facility (e.g., a convent, monastery) is part of the
complex within a R-1, R-2, district, it shall not house more than ten
persons.
2. The place of worship shall have direct access to a public street of
sufficient capacity to handle the traffic generated by the proposed
use.
3. The facility shall provide the necessary off-street parking in
accordance with section 5-506 of this Ordinance.
95
404.35 Printing and Publishing Establishment
1. All activities shall take place indoors.
2. The facility shall be so designed and so constructed that there shall be
no danger to the health, safety or welfare of residents or persons on
adjoining properties.
3. All ventilation systems shall be so designed that any smoke, fumes or
odors shall not be directed towards abutting properties.
4. On-site pick up shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 AM to 7:00 PM.
404.36 Private Club
5. The clubhouse shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from
any property line adjoining any residential property.
6. Operations shall be discontinued between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m.
7. Swimming pools shall conform to section 5-505 of this Ordinance.
8. Where eating and/or drinking facilities are provided, parking
requirements for restaurants shall apply in addition to the parking
requirements for private clubs.
404.37 Public Parking Garage
1. A parking study shall be required that proves to the satisfaction of the
Borough that a parking structure is necessary to provide adequate
parking to support the businesses in the immediate neighborhood.
The person who conducted the parking study shall be present at the
conditional use hearing to testify that the study is accurate.
2. Pedestrian walkways shall be provided to connect the parking areas
to the public right-of-way.
3. Adequate lighting shall be provided for all parking areas and
96
pedestrian walkways.
404.38 Public Use or Building
1. Ingress and egress for police and fire stations shall be located so as to
maximize sight distance along adjacent public streets.
2. Fire and police stations shall be located so that vehicles and
equipment can be maneuvered without interrupting traffic flow or
blocking public streets.
3. Outside storage of materials is not permitted.
4. Outdoor lighting shall be shielded and reflected away from adjoining
streets or properties.
5. Outdoor play areas shall be enclosed by a six (6) foot security fence
and shall be screened by a six (6) foot compact hedge along all
property lines which adjoin single-family dwellings.
6. All off-street parking shall be located at least fifteen (15) feet from any
property line which adjoins residential property and be screened by a
four (4) foot high compact hedge or privacy fence.
404.39 Radio, Television or Satellite Dish Antenna
1. Radio or Television Antenna
a. A radio or television antenna structure is a permissible accessory
structure in any zoning district subject to the requirements of
this section.
b. Such structure may be mounted on a roof or installed in a rear
yard only, provided that no ground level structure shall be
located within 10 feet on any property line.
c. The maximum height for such structure shall not exceed by more
than 20 feet the otherwise allowable height in the zoning district
in which the antenna is located. If placed on a roof, any antenna
exceeding 8 feet in height shall be mounted with guide wires.
d. Any such structure shall comply with applicable Greene County
97
airport zoning and federal regulations.
e. Radio or television antenna structures located on the ground
shall be screened from adjacent properties by evergreen trees or
other suitable materials, as approved by the Planning
Commission.
2. Satellite Dish Antenna
a. A satellite dish antenna is a permissible accessory structure in any
zoning district subject to the requirements of this section.
b. Such antenna may be installed in a rear yard only, provided that
no such structure shall be located within 15 feet of any property
line.
c. When installed on the ground, the maximum height of a satellite
dish antenna shall not exceed 14 feet when positioned vertically
and shall have a maximum diameter of 10 feet.
d. A satellite dish antenna may be roof mounted in B-1 and M-1
districts, provided that the maximum height shall not exceed
fifteen (15) feet above the roof line, when positioned vertically
and the maximum diameter shall not exceed twelve (12) feet.
e. When installed on the ground, the satellite dish antenna shall be
screened from adjacent properties by evergreen trees or other
suitable materials. The Municipality shall not require screening
which obstructs the line of sight to the transmitting satellite.
3. Exceptions to Requirements
a. Any applicant may apply to the Zoning Hearing Board for a special
exception regarding the height, size or placement of a radio,
television, or satellite dish antenna when it can be demonstrated
that the requirements of this section effectively preclude
reception. Should the Zoning Hearing Board require expert
98
technical assistance in making such determination, the cost of
such assistance shall be borne by the applicant.
404.40 Restaurant
1. The hours of operation, for indoor facilities, shall be limited to
between 5:30 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. of the next day, prevailing time.
2. Buildings shall be limited as follows:
a. The total floor area, exclusive of any basement used solely for
storage, shall not exceed 10,000 square feet.
b. The preparation, serving and consumption of food and beverages
shall be restricted to the inside of the building. However the
serving and consumption, but not preparation, of food and
beverages may be permitted in a designated outdoor area.
c. Any designated outdoor area for service and consumption of food
and beverages shall strictly comply with the following
requirements:
i. The use of any outdoor dining area shall be limited to the
regular business hours of the restaurant.
ii. Lighting devices for the outdoor dining area shall not in any
way produce objectionable, direct or reflected glare on any
adjoining property or thoroughfare and, where necessary,
appropriate full shielding of the lighting devices servicing the
outdoor dining area may be required to achieve this goal.
iii. Any outdoor dining area shall be located to comply with any
and all regulations regarding rear and side yard requirements
set forth in the zoning district in which the principal use is
located.
iv. All outdoor dining areas must meet the minimal accessibility
99
requirements of the applicable building code.
v. An outdoor dining area shall only be located at the floor level
of the primary dining area of the principal restaurant to which
it is affiliated, but in no event shall any outdoor dining area
be located a distance greater than eight feet above grade.
404.41 Retail Store
1. Architectural style shall be coordinated to create visual cohesiveness.
Within the development collectively constituting the large retail
establishment, all buildings, the principal structure, accessory
structures, canopies, parking lots and other open spaces as well as
signs shall be of a unified design.
2. Façades greater than one hundred (100) feet in length shall
incorporate wall plan projections or recesses having a depth of at least
three percent of the length of the façade and extending at least
twenty (20) percent of the length of the façade. No uninterrupted
length of any façade shall exceed one hundred (100) horizontal feet.
3. Establishments furnishing shopping carts shall provide defined areas
on the site for the storage of such carts that shall be clearly marked
and designed for such use.
4. Trash receptacles for patron use shall be provided outside of any
establishment with take-out service or convenience shopping.
5. All waste disposal storage areas shall be located in the rear of the
building in compliance with the setback requirements of the
applicable zoning district and shall be screened.
404.42 Salvage Yards
1. The minimum lot area for a salvage yard shall be two acres. All
structures for the salvage yard shall comply with the applicable
100
provisions of the zoning district in which it is located.
2. There shall be no exterior storage of any materials or equipment
within 25 feet of any front lot line or within 15 feet of any side or rear
lot line.
3. The entire perimeter of the salvage yard shall be fenced with a solid
fence, a planted screen, or a combination of both, 8 feet in height,
which complies with the provisions of section 5-504 of this Ordinance.
The owner or operator of the salvage yard shall be responsible for
maintaining the fence or screen in good repair and condition.
4. A lot shall be deemed a salvage yard if two or more motor vehicles not
having valid state inspection stickers are deposited or stored on the
lot; or when two or more wrecked vehicles (or the major parts of two
or more vehicles) are deposited or stored on a lot, other than that of
a duly authorized vehicular repair garage complying, with the
parking/storage requirements of section 404.14.4.
404.43 School (includes public or private, elementary or secondary)
1. Minimum lot area – 20,000 square feet.
2. No outdoor play areas or facilities shall be within 15 feet of a
residential lot line.
3. The use shall not include a dormitory unless specifically permitted in
that District.
404.44 Self Service Storage Units
1. Storage shall be within a completed enclosed building or buildings.
2. A minimum spacing of twenty-five (25) feet between the buildings for
traffic circulation, parking and fire lane purposes.
3. All outside lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties.
101
404.45 Shopping Centers
1. A shopping center shall only contain those uses authorized in the
zoning district in which the center is located.
2. A shopping center shall provide all off-street parking on the same lot
as the center according to the following:
Size Parking Spaces Required
0-100,000 Sq.Ft. GLA 1 per 250 Sq.Ft. GLA
100,001-400,000 Sq.Ft. GLA 4 per 1,000 Sq.Ft. GLA
400,001-600,000 Sq.Ft. GLA 4.5 per 1,000 Sq.Ft. GLA
600,001 Sq.Ft. GLA and over 5 per 1,000 Sq.Ft. GLA
404.45 Solar Energy System (Small)
1. All solar energy equipment shall be located on the parcel or plot of
land of record in which the principal use is located, with the exception
that power lines or any related equipment to the solar energy system
may be located on an adjoining parcel or plot of land of record
provided it will comply with all applicable virtual net metering laws of
the public utility provider.
2. Power generated by the solar energy system shall provide power only
for the principal use in which it services; any excess power generated
by the solar energy system shall only be sold or acquired by a public
utility in accordance with law or other governmental regulations.
3. All mechanical equipment associated with and necessary for the
operation of the solar energy system, which is ground-mounted,
including any structure for batteries or storage cells, shall be enclosed
within a six-foot-high fence or evergreen plantings of equal height.
Evergreen plantings shall be of a type that is to be approved by the
Township. The fence shall be made of wood, masonry, durable plastic
102
or other decorative material approved by the municipality. Chain link
fences shall not be permitted unless they are fully screened from view
by evergreen plantings.
4. Solar Access Easements. A Solar Energy System shall be located to
ensure solar access without reliance on adjacent properties. Where
any applicant desires to ensure that solar access to a Solar Energy
System shall not be obstructed over time by permissible uses or
activities on any adjacent property (i.e. by planting or growth of
vegetation, new construction, etc.), it shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the Solar Energy System to obtain appropriate solar access
easement(s) from neighboring property owner(s). All solar access
easements shall be recorded in the office of the Washington County
Recorder of Deeds.
5. Solar collectors shall be installed so as to prevent glare or
concentrated solar radiation as may otherwise be directed onto other
properties or onto roadways such that a nuisance situation is created.
Antireflective surface materials or coatings shall be used to preclude
glare to the extent feasible. Should any glare or concentrated solar
radiation prove to be visible beyond the property line at any time
subsequent to the installation of the system such that, in the opinion
of the Zoning Officer, a nuisance situation or safety hazard arises for
another property owner or the traveling public, the Township may at
its discretion require mitigating action or the removal of the system
or portion thereof generating the glare or reflected solar radiation.
Should any mitigation or removal deemed necessary by the Township
fail to be dealt with in accordance with the Township’s determination
within six months of notification of the landowner, the Township may
implement such mitigation or removal as it deems necessary, cost
therefore to be reimbursed within 90 days and, if not, a
103
commensurate lien shall be placed upon the property.
6. The solar energy system shall be kept in good repair and sound
condition. Upon abandonment of the use, the solar panels and any
related structures and equipment shall be dismantled and removed
from the lot within 60 days.
7. Ground-Mounted Systems.
a. No part of a ground-mounted solar energy system shall be located
any closer than 15 feet from any side or rear property lines. No
part of a ground-mounted solar energy system shall be located
between the principal structure on the property and the public
street right-of-way; notwithstanding the aforesaid requirement.
b. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not be placed within
any legal easement or right-of-way location, or be placed within
any storm water conveyance system or in any other manner that
would alter or impede storm water runoff from collecting in a
constructed storm water conveyance system.
c. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not be placed in a
manner that would cause a violation of any other section of the
zoning ordinance, such as minimum parking requirements,
required buffer yards or other landscaping requirements,
maximum impervious coverage limitations or any other applicable
standards.
d. Ground-mounted panels of a solar energy system shall be counted
toward a given property maximum impervious coverage
requirements unless the applicant can demonstrate that storm
water will infiltrate into the ground beneath the solar panels at a
rate equal to that of the infiltration rate prior to placement of the
panels.
e. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed a height
104
of 20 feet.
8. Roof-Mounted Systems.
a. Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall not extend beyond the
peak elevation of the top of the roof on which the panels are to
be constructed.
b. If the solar panels are to be constructed on a flat roof, no part of
the solar energy system shall exceed beyond the maximum height
requirements for the zoning district in which the building is
located.
c. Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall not be counted as
adding to any impervious coverage calculation.
404.46 Swimming Pools (Residential)
1. Placement: As an accessory structure, a pool and accessory deck area
shall be erected only in a rear yard provided it is no closer than 5 feet
of any lot line, or the distance of the required side yard for the zoning
district in which it is located, whichever is greater.
2. Fencing:
a. In-ground pools, in all zoning districts, shall be enclosed by a
fence, constituting a barrier to small children, at least 4 feet in
height and equipped with a gate and lock. Fencing for a pool shall
comply with the applicable requirements of Section 5-504 of this
Ordinance.
b. Above-ground pools in all zoning districts having vertical walls 4
feet or more above ground level and removable steps are not
required to be fenced, but the owner shall remove the steps
when the pool is not in use to prevent access by small children.
404.47 Vehicular Repair Garages
105
1. All repair services shall be conducted within an enclosed building
which complies with state and Municipality's regulations for such
uses.
2. All automotive parts and supplies shall be stored within an enclosed
building.
3. All debris, used parts and other refuse must be stored in compliance
with the International Property Maintenance Code and other
applicable ordinances and in such a manner that it is not visible from
adjacent properties or a public street.
4. No vehicle shall be parked stored on a public right-of-way or property
at any time. No more than four vehicles awaiting repairs shall be
parked or stored outdoors at any one time. All others must be stored
within a building or totally screened from view by a solid fence.
5. Off street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with Section
5-506 of this Ordinance.
6. If a vehicular repair garage includes gasoline and/or other petroleum
sales, all requirements for a gasoline service station shall be met.
7. No vehicular repair garage may be located within 1,000 feet of
another vehicular repair garage.
404.48 Vehicular Sales and/or Services
1. The business shall include a permanent building on site for offices,
display and/or repair. A trailer shall not meet this re-requirement.
2. Areas for vehicular display and customer parking shall be paved or
otherwise improved and shall maintain at least a five-foot landscaped
setback from all property lines.
3. If a gasoline service station is an accessory use, all conditions required
106
herein for said use shall be met.
4. If a vehicular repair garage is an accessory use, all conditions required
herein for said use shall be met.
5. No strings of lights, flags, flashers or any other display paraphernalia
shall be permitted. Lighting from spot or flood lights shall be oriented
away from adjacent highways and properties.
6. No vehicle shall be displayed or offered for sale outdoors which does
not have all mechanical and body components necessary for safe and
lawful operation in this state.
404.49 Veterinary Office (Clinic or Hospital)
1. If the property operates a kennel, it shall be constructed on a lot
greater than or equal to ten (10) acres and shall be licensed under
the Dog Law Act of 1982, P.L. 784-255.
2. Any exterior fenced area wherein animals exercise or are otherwise
exposed must be located a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet
from any principal structure on adjacent lots and all outdoor
exercise areas shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any
property line.
3. The perimeter of the exterior exercise area must be fenced with a
weatherproof material, a minimum of five (5) feet in height,
accessible only through a self-latching gate.
4. Animals shall be permitted to exercise within the exercise areas daily
between the hours of 8 AM and 8 PM.
5. Any structure used to house animals shall be equipped with codeapproved
nontoxic noise-dampening material or acoustic tile.
107
6. Odors and noise causing annoyance or discomfort to the public
outside of the lot on which the kennel is located shall not be
permitted.
7. The applicant shall furnish evidence of effective means of animal
waste collection and disposal which shall be continuously
implemented.
8. The landowner and/or developer shall comply with any additional
standards, as defined by the Zoning Hearing Board, that are needed
to protect public health, safety and welfare or to address unique
characteristics of a site.
404.50 Wholesale, Warehousing Businesses Handling Hazardous or Toxic
Substances
1. The property shall have direct access to a public street with sufficient
capacity to handle the amount and type traffic generated by the
proposed use.
2. Access driveways shall be adequate design to accommodate
anticipated truck traffic safely without causing congestion on public
streets.
3. The facility shall comply with all applicable federal, state, county and
local laws and regulations regarding the handling of hazardous or toxic
substances, where applicable.
4. A written description of all materials stored or distributed by the
proposed facility shall be submitted with the application. The Borough
and the County Fire Marshall be notified of the types of substances
typically stored or transported at the facility. This information shall be
updated every six months and resubmitted to all parties; failure to do
so may result in the certificate of occupancy being revoked.
108
404.51 Wind Energy System (Small)
1. The turbine shall be located on the same parcel or plot of land of
record in which the principal use is located, with the exception that,
power lines or related equipment may be located on a neighboring
parcel or plot of land of record provided it will comply with all
applicable virtual net metering laws of the public utility provider.
2. The height of the turbine shall include the tower and the rotor at its
point where a blade is directly perpendicular to the ground. The
maximum height of the turbine shall be 60 feet from the finished
grade.
3. Turbines must meet the setback requirements for accessory
structures for the underlying zoning district. In addition, turbines
shall be set back a horizontal distance equal to their height from any
property line or residential dwelling, excluding any dwelling on the
lot on which the turbine is located. No turbine shall be located
between the principal structure on the property and the public
street right-of-way. Additionally, all turbines must be set back
sufficiently from any above-ground utility lines, radio, television, or
telecommunication towers so as to present no danger to those lines
or structures, as certified by the applicant’s engineer. No portion of
any accessory turbine shall extend over parking areas, access drives,
driveways or sidewalks.
4. The minimum clearance between the lowest arc of the turbine
blades and the ground shall be 15 feet. If the turbine model that is
proposed is a vertical axis wind turbine (also referred to as a helixtype
windmill or VAT), the height between the lowest point of the
turbine and the ground may be reduced to eight feet.
109
5. If guy wire anchors are required, they shall be set back a minimum of
10 feet from any side and rear property lines.
6. All electric and utility lines associated with the turbine shall be
buried underground.
7. All mechanical equipment associated with and necessary for the
operation of the turbine, including any structure for batteries or
storage cells, shall be screened from view with an enclosed six-foothigh
fence or evergreen plantings of equal height. The evergreen
plantings shall be of a type approved by the municipality and shall be
planted to provide a full screen of the mechanical equipment. No
noxious trees, plants or weeds shall be permitted to fulfill the
screening requirements. The turbine tower shall also be enclosed
within a six-foot-high fence unless the base of the turbine tower is
not climbable for a distance of 12 feet. Any required fencing shall be
made of wood, masonry, durable plastic or other decorative material
approved by the Township. Chain link fences shall not be permitted
unless they are fully screened from view by evergreen plantings of
equal or greater height than the fence.
8. The turbine shall not generate noise which exceeds 60 decibels at
any property line.
9. The turbine shall be kept in good repair and sound condition. Upon
abandonment of use, the turbine and all related structures shall be
dismantled and removed from the lot within 60 days.
10. The co-location of wireless communication antennae on a turbine
tower shall not be permitted.
11. Power generated by the turbine shall provide power only for the
principal use in which it services; any excess power generated by the
110
turbine shall only be sold or acquired by a public utility in accordance
with law or other governmental regulations.
12. The installation of the turbine shall meet all applicable requirements
of the Uniform Construction Code.
13. No signage or advertising of any kind shall be utilized or attached to
the turbine. This requirement shall not include the make and model
description of the turbine, manufacturers required hangtags or
warning signs or other signage that is required by law.
14. No lighting, unless required by any FAA requirements, shall be
utilized or attached to the turbine.
15. Turbines shall be a neutral, nonobtrusive color such as white, offwhite,
gray, brown, black or other approved earth tone shade,
unless a specific color or color pattern is required by the FAA or
other regulatory agency.
404.52 Wireless Communications Facilities (WCF)
1. Design, Construction and Operations
a. All WCFs shall be sited, designed, constructed, operated,
inspected maintained, repaired, modified, removed and
Replaced in strict compliance with all current applicable federal
and state technical and safety codes.
b. All WCFs shall be operated in accordance with all applicable FCC
rules regarding interference with public safety communications
or the reception of broadband, television, radio or other
communications services.
c. Collocation. All Tower-Based WCFs where the Tower is more
than 40 feet in height, located outside of the Right-of-Way, shall
111
be designed to accommodate both the applicant’s Antennas and
comparable Antennas for future users. As a condition of
approval for all Tower-Based WCFs where the Tower is more
than 40' in height, the applicant shall agree to allow other
service providers to collocate Antennas on the Tower where
technically and economically feasible.
d. Signage. All WCFs shall include a posted sign at the location.
Such signage shall include the ownership, contact name and
phone number in the event of an emergency and Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) registration number (if
applicable). Such signage shall not include commercial
advertising and is subject to approval by the municipality.
e. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted beyond what is
required by law.
f. Noise. All WCFs shall be operated and maintained so as not to
produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards
established by the municipality. The use of a backup generator
in emergency situations and periodic maintenance and testing
by the wireless communications provider's technicians shall be
permitted, where such noise standards may be exceeded on a
temporary basis.
g. Vehicular Access.
i) An access driveway and one off-street parking space shall
be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service
access to all Tower-Based WCFs located outside of the
Right-of-Way.
ii) Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private,
shall be made to the extent practicable.
112
iii) Where possible, access driveway construction shall at all
times minimize ground disturbance and the cutting of
vegetation.
iv) Access driveway grades shall closely follow natural
contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and
minimize soil erosion.
v) An applicant shall present documentation to the Borough
that the property owner has granted an access easement
for the proposed WCF, if located on a lot or property.
vi) Any required access easement shall be a minimum of 20
feet in width and the access driveway shall be improved
with a dust-free, all weather surface, including gravel, to a
width of at least 10 feet throughout its entire length.
vii) Vehicular access to all WCFs shall not interfere with the
parking or vehicular circulations for a principal use, if
located on the lot or property. However, where
appropriate and available, existing parking for the
principal or other uses on the lot or property may be
utilized.
h. Fencing. A security fence, which may include barbed wire, with
a minimum height of eight (8’) feet may be required to surround
any Tower-Based WCF located outside the Right-of-Way, where
the Tower is more than 40 feet in height, including guy wires,
associated equipment, and buildings. The requirement for a
security fence may be waived by the Borough when the fence
would not be appropriate or feasible.
i. Safety in Rights-of-Way.
i) Schedule of operations. The Borough shall determine the
time, place and manner of siting, design, construction,
maintenance, repair, Modification, removal and/or
113
Replacement of all WCFs located in the Right-of-Way,
based on public safety, traffic management, physical
burden on the Right-of-Way and related considerations. For
public utilities, the time, place and manner requirements
shall be consistent with the police powers of the Borough
and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
ii) Alteration of a WCF. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Borough, or such longer period as the
municipality determines is reasonably necessary or such
shorter period in the case of an emergency, an owner of a
WCF located in the Right-of-Way shall, at its own expense,
temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or
alter the position of any WCF when the Borough, consistent
with its police powers and applicable Public Utility
Commission regulations, shall have determined that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably
necessary under any one of the following circumstances:
a) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of
any municipal or other public improvement located in
the Right-of-Way.
b) The operations of the Borough or other governmental
entity in the Right-of-Way.
c) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement.
d) An emergency as determined by the Borough.
e) No permit is required for such removal, relocation,
change or alteration ordered by the Borough.
iii) Visual obstruction. All WCFs and Accessory Equipment shall
be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
114
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to
otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or
motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the
Right-of-Way as determined by the Borough. In no case
shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, screening or
landscaping be located within (18) inches of the face of the
curb, or in an area in which there are no curbs, within (3)
feet of the edge of cartway.
j. Maintenance. An applicant for a WCF shall describe anticipated
maintenance needs, including frequency of service, personnel
needs and equipment needs, and the traffic, safety and noise
impacts of such maintenance.
k. Soil report. An applicant for a Tower-Based WCF where the new
Tower is more than 40 feet in height, shall submit a soil report
complying with the standards of geotechnical investigations,
ANSI/EIA-222-G, as amended, shall be submitted to the Borough
Engineer prior to construction to document and verify the
design specifications of the foundation for the Wireless Support
Structure and anchors for the guy wires, if used.
l. Aviation safety. All WCFs shall comply with federal and state
laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
m. Inspections for all WCFs where the new Tower is more than 40
feet in height.
i) A copy of any required inspection report shall be provided
to the Borough following the inspection. Any repairs
advised by report shall be completed by the WCF owner
within 60 calendar days after the report is filed with the
Borough.
115
n. Equipment Storage. The storage of unused equipment or
supplies is prohibited on any WCF site.
2. Aesthetics, Landscaping and Screening
a. Stealth Technology. All WCFs shall employ the most current
Stealth Technology available, where appropriate, in an effort to
appropriately blend the proposed WCF into the surrounding
environment and minimize aesthetic impact. Equipment
buildings and cabinets shall be designed to blend into the
environment in which they are situated, to the extent
practicable.
b. Landscaping and Screening. An applicant for Tower-Based WCF
where the new Tower is more than 40 feet in height, located
outside of the Right-of-Way, shall submit a landscaping and
screening design including the following:
i) The applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation,
trees and shrubs located within proximity to the WCF
support structure shall be preserved to the extent
practicable.
ii) Ground mounted equipment may be screened from public
view using an evergreen screen, artificial screen, or fencing,
as directed by the Borough.
3. Replacement, Collocation, or Modification
a. Notwithstanding the requirements for all Tower-Based WCFs
and WCFs on Existing Structures, as set forth in this sub-section,
an application for Replacement, Collocation or Modification of
a previously approved Wireless Support Structure or WCF shall
be reviewed for conformance with the Borough building permit
116
requirements, including requirements applicable to the added
structural loading of the proposed Antennas and Accessory
Equipment. These previously approved facilities shall not be
subject to the issuance of new zoning or land use approvals,
provided that there is no Substantial Change.
b. Replacement of WCFs on existing Wireless Support Structures
or within existing Equipment Compounds may be performed by
the applicant without obtaining building or zoning permits from
the Borough.
c. Any Substantial Change to an existing Tower-Based WCF shall
require approval of the Borough in accordance with the terms
of this Section.
d. Mounting. An applicant proposing a WCF on Existing Structure
to be mounted on a building or any other structure shall submit
detailed construction and elevation drawings indicating how the
WCF on Existing Structure will be mounted on the existing
structure for review by the Borough building code official for
compliance with the building code.
4. Permit Requirements
a. Collocation Analysis. An application for a new Tower-Based WCF
where the new Tower is more than 40 feet in height and located
outside of the Right-of-Way, shall not be approved unless the
applicant demonstrates that the Wireless communications
equipment planned for the proposed Tower-Based WCF cannot
be collocated on an existing structure or building within a [1/4
or 1/2] mile radius of the proposed Tower- Based WCF location
to achieve the coverage or capacity objectives of the applicant.
117
b. Gap in Coverage or Lack of Adequate Capacity. An applicant for
a Tower-Based WCF where the new Tower that is more than 40
feet in height, located outside of the Right- of-Way, must
demonstrate that a significant gap in Wireless coverage exists or
lack of adequate capacity is likely to exist within one (1) year of
the filing of its application with respect to the applicant in the
area.
c. Authorization. An applicant for a WCF shall submit a copy of the
lease or other form of written authorization with the property
owner confirming that the applicant has standing to file the
application and maintain the proposed WCF on the subject lot
or property.
d. Licensing and applicable regulations. If the applicant is a
commercial wireless communications provider, it must
demonstrate that it is licensed by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) and submit with its application copies of all
FCC permits and licenses.
e. Emissions. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
WCF will comply with all applicable standards established by the
Federal Communications Commission governing human
exposure to electromagnetic emissions.
f. Insurance. The applicant shall provide a certificate of insurance
issued to the owner/operators of the WCF, evidencing that
there is or will be adequate current liability insurance in effect.
g. Review Timeframes. Review timeframes are noted in Table 4.1
118
Table 4.1 WCF Review Timeframes
Municipality shall notify the
applicant in writing of any
information that may be
required to complete
application.
Municipality shall approve or
deny the application unless a
shorter time period is applicable
under the PA MPC.
A New Tower Based WCFs Within 30 calendar days of the
date the application was filed
with the Borough.
Within 150 days* of submission
of a complete application for a
WCF.
B WCF on Existing
Structures
Within 30 calendar days of the
date the application was filed
with the Borough.
Within 90 days* of submission of
a complete application for a WCF.
C Eligible Facilities
Requests ** (as defined)
Within 30 calendar days of the
date the application was filed
with the Borough.
Within 60 days* of submission of a
complete application for a WCF.
*The time period may be tolled by mutual agreement or in cases where the Municipality informs the
applicant in a timely manner that the application is incomplete. If an application is considered
incomplete, the time period begins running again as soon as the applicant makes a supplemental
submission, but may be tolled again if the Municipality provides written notice to the applicant within
10 days that the application remains incomplete and specifically delineates which of the deficiencies
specified in the original notice of incompleteness have not been addressed.
**The Municipality shall only require the applicant to provide documentation that is reasonably related
to determining whether the request is for an Eligible Facility.
h. Permit Fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a WCF.
The amount of this fee may not be in excess of the actual
reasonable cost to review and process the application.
5. Discontinuation, Abandonment and Removal
a. Discontinuation. The Borough may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a WCF.
The amount of this fee may not be in excess of the actual
reasonable cost to review and process the application.
i) All unused or abandoned WCFs and accessory facilities shall
be removed within (6-12) months of the cessation of
119
operations at the Site unless a time extension is approved by
the Borough.
ii) If the WCF and/or accessory facility is not removed within
(6-12) months of the cessation of operations at a site, or
within any longer period approved by the Borough, the WCF
and accessory facilities and equipment may be removed by
the Borough and the cost of removal assessed against the
owner of the WCF.
iii) Any unused portions of WCFs, including antennas, shall be
removed within (6-12) months of the time of cessation of
operations.
120
ARTICLE V
GENERAL REGULATIONS
5-501 GENERAL INTENT
The regulations contained in this Article are intended to apply to all zoning districts,
uses, structures or lots except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
5-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
502.1 Mixed Uses: Land, buildings and structures shall be designed and used only
for authorized uses within respective zoning districts. Except where
specifically authorized by this Ordinance, multiple uses of land, buildings or
structures are prohibited in residential districts.
502.2 Dwelling in a Basement: No dwelling unit or units shall be contained in a
basement or cellar which does not have 50 % or more of its average height
above grade level.
502.3 Clear Sight Distances at Intersections: A clear sight triangle, as defined by
this Ordinance, must be maintained at all intersections of public and/or
private streets and driveways in all zoning districts. Required sight
distances along intersecting streets/driveways shall be in accordance with
the current applicable PennDOT standards.
502.4 Exotic Animals: Exotic animals such as lions, tigers, bears, large or
poisonous snakes, alligators and similar animals shall not be permitted in
any zoning district.
5-503 ACCESSORY USES
503.1 Permit and Maintenance Requirements: A zoning certificate must be
obtained from the Zoning Officer for any new, expanded or altered
accessory use or structure. The owner is responsible for maintaining the
accessory use/structure in safe condition in accordance with all applicable
121
regulations. If the Zoning Officer finds that an accessory structure is not
being used for its intended purpose or not being maintained, the Zoning
Officer shall give written notice to the owner, in accordance with section
908.1, to repair or remove it.
503.2 Permitted Accessory Uses: A permitted accessory use must comply with
the definition of “accessory use” contained in Article 2 of this Ordinance.
Examples of permitted uses are:
1. Garage, carport, shed or building for domestic storage, but not
exterior storage of a boat, trailer, camper or similar recreational
vehicle.
2. Child's playhouse, garden house, gazebo and private greenhouse.
3. Swimming pool (residential), tennis court or similar private
recreational facility.
4. Civil defense shelter for not more than two families.
5. Home occupations, as regulated herein.
6. Fences, as regulated herein.
7. Off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated herein.
8. Signs, as regulated herein.
9. Radio, television or satellite dish antenna, as regulated herein.
10. Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot with
a permitted retail, service or office use, unless such storage is
excluded by the district regulations.
11. Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities, on
the same lot or parcel of ground with such activities unless such
storage is excluded by the district regulations.
122
12. Employee restaurants and cafeterias when located in a permitted
business or manufacturing building.
503.3 Use Limitations
1. All accessory structures and uses shall comply with the use limitations
applicable in the zoning district in which they are located.
2. No accessory structure shall be used for dwelling purposes.
3. No accessory structure shall be constructed and occupied on any lot
prior to the time of the completion of the construction of the principal
structure to which it is accessory.
4. None of the following shall be permitted as an accessory use:
a. Outdoor storage or overnight parking in a residential district of
trucks, buses or other vehicles exceeding 7,000 pounds in gross
vehicle weight or designated as Class III or above by the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, excluding a recreational
vehicle as defined by this ordinance.
b. Outdoor storage of equipment, supplies or other materials in all
zoning districts, except as specifically permitted by the applicable
zoning district regulations.
5. No accessory structure shall exceed 15 feet in height unless another
height is specified by this Ordinance.
503.4 Location of Accessory Uses: Unless otherwise stipulated by this Ordinance,
the following standards shall apply:
1. Residential Districts
a. Front Yard: Accessory uses, with the exception of permitted signs
and fences, shall not be located in the required front yard of any
zoning lot.
123
b. Side and Rear Yards: Accessory uses are permitted, provided they
are no closer than 5 feet of any lot line.
2. Business & Manufacturing Districts
a. Front Yard: In addition to permitted signs and fences, off-street
parking (but not loading) areas are permitted in a required front
yard. The minimum parking area in a M-1 district must maintain
a minimum five foot, landscaped setback from the street rightof-
way or sidewalk line.
b. Side and Rear Yards: Accessory uses are permitted. If the yard
abuts a residential district, the accessory use must maintain a
minimum three-foot setback, screened in accordance with
section 504.4 of this Ordinance.
3. All Zoning Districts
a. No part of any accessory structure shall be located closer than 10
feet to any principal structure, unless it is attached to or forms a
part of such principal structure. No accessory structure shall be
located closer than 3 feet to another accessory structure on an
abutting property.
b. Accessory structure and uses shall otherwise comply with the
bulk regulations applicable in the district in which they are
located.
5-504 FENCING, SCREENING, AND RETAINING WALLS
Unless otherwise stipulated, the following standards shall apply.
504.1 Permit and Maintenance Requirements: A zoning certificate must be
obtained from the Zoning Officer for the erection of any fence, wall or
screen. The property owner shall be responsible for the continuing
maintenance of any fence wall or screen.
124
If a fence, wall or screen is not maintained in a safe condition and in
accordance with local regulations, the Zoning Officer shall give written
notice to owner, in accordance with Section 908.1, to repair, replace or
remove it.
504.2 Placement, Materials, Height
1. Fences, walls, hedges or other planted screens may be erected in any
yard subject to following height restrictions:
a. Located in a front yard: four (4) foot maximum.
b. Located in a side yard: eight (8) foot maximum.
c. Located in a rear yard: eight (8) foot maximum, except that there
shall be no maximum applied to hedges or planted screens (e.g.,
trees) located along the rear property line.
d. Located in any yard in an M-1 district; 12 foot maximum.
2. Fences, screens or walls up to 10 feet in height may be erected in any
yard of a public school, public recreational facility or public building
provided that they are constructed of a chain link material and
approved by the Planning Commission.
3. A retaining wall may be erected along any property line or in any yard
where it is required to prevent a landslide or other hazardous
conditions.
4. A fence or screen cannot be erected in a public or dedicated right-ofway.
5. Fences located along a property boundary shall be set back at least 6
inches from the property line except by written agreement of the
property owners filed with the zoning hearing board.
504.3 General Requirements
125
1. Authorized fences and screens whether publicly or privately owned,
shall not obstruct the clear sight distances at street intersections; a
clear sight triangle, in accordance with Section 502.3, shall be
maintained.
2. Fences shall not contain barbs or similar types of injurious materials,
unless specifically approved by the Greene County Planning
Commission for security reasons.
3. The finished side of the fence or wall shall always face the abutting
properties or street.
504.4 Screening for Business, Manufacturing, Industrial Uses:
Wherever this Ordinance requires screening of a commercial or industrial
use, or portion thereof, the following standards shall apply:
1. A planted screen shall be of sufficient density and type of planting
material to provide a year-round visual barrier, within two growing
seasons of planting. The minimum height shall be five (5) feet, but
additional height may be required where it is necessary to achieve
adequate visual screening of the use.
2. Screening of off-street parking and loading areas shall be in
accordance with section 5-506 of this Ordinance.
3. Water towers, storage tanks, processing equipment, fans, cooling
towers, vents, and other structures or equipment that rise above the
roof line, other than a radio, television or satellite dish antenna, shall
be effectively shielded from view of any abutting public or private
street by an architecturally sound method.
5-505 SIGNS
505.1 General Design and Construction Standards
126
All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance
with the following standards:
1. All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code.
2. Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs
conforming in all respects with the requirements of this Ordinance,
all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be
permanently attached to the ground, a building, or another
structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure.
3. All signs shall be maintained in good structural conditions, in
compliance with all building and electrical codes, and in
conformance with this code, at all times.
505.2 Signs Permitted
Upon the adoption of this Ordinance, it shall be unlawful and a violation
of this Ordinance for any person to erect, construct, paint, alter, relocate,
reconstruct, display, or maintain or cause to be erected, constructed,
displayed or maintained within the Borough any sign (except as defined
in Section 505.4) without first having obtained a permit from the Zoning
Officer.
1. Residential Districts (R-1, R-2, and R-3)
a. For home occupations: one (1) non-illuminated wall sign not
exceeding three (3) square feet in size.
b. For single-family subdivisions and multi-family complexes,
including mobile home parks, one (1) monument sign per
street frontage, not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in sign
area per sign or six (6) feet in height.
127
c. For permitted nonresidential, including churches and
synagogues, one (1) free-standing monument sign not to
exceed twenty (20) square feet in sign area or five (5) feet in
height and one (1) wall sign (with or without border) not larger
than six (6) square feet.
2. Non-Residential Districts (B-1, M-1, U-1 and U-2)
Within this district the intent of sign regulation is to ensure the
visual compatibility with the scale and character of the surrounding
architecture. The signage must also be readable by pedestrians and
people in slow-moving vehicles.
a. Types of Signs:
(i) Wall Signs (with or without border) as large as one (1) sq. ft.
per two (2) linear ft. of building frontage or a maximum of
twenty-five (25) sq. ft., whichever is less.
(ii) Free-Standing Signs only for establishments that are set back
from the property line by twenty-five (25) feet or more,
except as noted below.
(a) Monument Signs as large as fifteen (15) sq. ft. in sign
area with a height maximum of five (5) feet from the
ground (including the base) to the top of the sign. The
sign must be set back ten (10) feet or more from the
property line.
(b) Pole Signs as large as ten (10) sq. ft. in sign area, with a
height maximum of ten (10) ft. from the ground to the
top of the sign. The sign must be set back ten (10) feet
or more from the property line.
128
(iii) Projecting Signs shall be two (2) foot by three (3) foot in
size.
(iv) Window Signs no more than seventy-five (75%) percent
of the total window area of the principal facade.
Lettering can be up to eight (8) inches high and must be
see through.
(v) Windsign consisting of one or more banners, flags,
pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers, or captive
balloons, or other objects or material fastened in such a
manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by
wind affixed to structure or supported so as not to
compromise pedestrians, vehicles, or other traffic.
(vi) Digital Signs and Electronically Changing Message Signs
meeting the following requirements:
(a) Location.
(1). Only one digital or electronic sign shall be
permitted on any one property, and no digital or
electronic sign shall be permitted on a property
that already has an existing or proposed manual
or mechanical changeable-copy sign.
(2). All digital/electronic signs shall have a minimum
thirty-foot setback from residential property
lines.
(b) Messages.
129
(1). All messages, images, or displays on a digital
sign or electronically changing message sign
shall remain unchanged for a minimum of 10
seconds; except signs with a changeable sign
area of less than 30 square feet in a commercial
district may change a minimum interval of every
six seconds.
(2). The time interval used to change from one
complete message, image or display to the next
complete message, image or display shall be a
maximum of one second.
(3). There shall be no appearance of a visual dissolve
or fading, in which any part of one message,
image or display appears simultaneously with
any part of a second message, image or display.
(4). There shall be no appearance of flashing or
sudden bursts of light and no appearance of
video motion, animation, movement or flow of
the message, image or display.
(5). The intensity and contrast of light levels shall
remain constant throughout the sign face.
(6). Each digital sign or electronically changing
message sign shall be equipped with automatic
day/night dimming software, to reduce the
illumination intensity of the sign from the time
of the business closing to 7:00 AM.
130
(7). Public Service Announcements: The owner of
every message center sign shall coordinate with
the local authorities to display, when
appropriate, emergency information important
to the traveling public, including, but not limited
to AMBER Alerts™ or alerts concerning terrorist
attacks or natural disasters. Emergency
information messages shall remain in the
advertising rotation according to the protocols
of the agency that issues the information.
b. Number: Each property may not display more than three (3)
signs. Each business site may display only one (1) free-standing
sign, which is included in the three permitted signs.
c. Materials: Signs (except awnings) shall be made of wood or
metal. If plywood is to be used, it must have exceptionally
smooth and weather resistant surfaces.
3. Temporary Signs
a. Construction
(1) One (1) non-illuminated temporary Construction Sign
announcing the names of contractors, mechanics or artisans
engaged in performing work on the premises shall be
permitted on a lot, provided the sign shall not exceed twelve
(12) square feet. Such sign shall be removed immediately
upon completion of the work.
b. Portable Sign
(1) The sign must be within fifteen (15) feet of the front door of
the place of business.
131
(2) Each storefront is allowed one sign and in no case shall a
storefront be allowed more than one sign.
(3) The location of the sign must not block or restrict passageway
along the sidewalk to less than four feet in width, block the
ingress/egress to any building, interfere with vehicular traffic
flow, or block required parking spaces.
(4) The sign is limited to a maximum area of ten (10) square feet
and a maximum height of four (4) feet.
(5) The sign must be adequately weighted and shall not be
illuminated, animated, or electrically powered in any way.
Signs must be made of durable materials designed to
withstand exterior conditions.
(6) The sign is allowed only during the sign owner’s business
hours and must be moved inside when the business is not
open.
(7) All signs must be located on an adjacent sidewalk.
c. Real Estate Sign
(1) One (1) non-illuminated temporary Real Estate Sign shall be
permitted on each lot provided the sign shall not exceed six
(6) square feet when located in any Residential Zoning District
and shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in any other
Zoning District. Such sign shall be removed within thirty (30)
days of the sale or rental of the property on which it is located.
(2) One (1) non-illuminated temporary real estate open house
sign shall be permitted on each lot provided the sign shall not
exceed four (4) square feet and shall not be displayed more
than two (2) hours prior to the open house and shall be
removed within two (2) hours after the open house concludes.
d. Special Event Display
(1) One (1) non-illuminated Special Event Display Sign, as
defined by this Ordinance, shall be permitted to be erected
provided that the area of the sign shall not exceed fifteen
132
(15) square feet and provided the sign is displayed for a
period no longer than fifteen (15) days prior to the event and
is removed immediately following the event.
4. Illumination Requirements Applicable to All Districts
a. The illumination from any sign may not cause any reflection or
glare upon a public street, highway, sidewalk, or adjacent
property.
b. Directly illuminated signs of any nature in R-1, R-2, R-3, U-1,
and U-2 Districts are prohibited.
c. Exposed lighting sources such as bulbs, tubes, and the like are
prohibited. All external sources of illumination must be hidden
from view by shrubbery or some other permitted material.
d. With the exception of B-1 and B-2 Districts, no exterior signs on
any building or premises shall be illuminated after 12:00
midnight, except on those places of business which shall
remain open after midnight, and they shall be extinguished at
the time of closing such business.
505.3 Sign Classifications: Prohibited
1. All signs not expressly permitted under this Ordinance or exempt from
regulation hereunder in accordance with this Ordinance are prohibited
in the Borough. Such signs include, but are not limited to:
a. Any sign attached to any tree, utility pole or painted upon or
otherwise directly affixed to any rock, ledge or other natural
feature.
b. No sign shall be erected:
133
(1) In the public right-of-way, except for those placed by an
authorized governmental agency;
(2) At any location where, by reason os position, shape,
wording or color, it interferes with or obstructs the view
of pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
(3) Which may be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal or device;
(4) Above the roof line;
(5) Which is closer than twenty (20) feet to a side lot line
except in the case of (1) a wall sign or (2) a corner lot
where a set back may be reduced to ten (10) feet from
public ways;
(6) Which projects from a building over a public way with
the bottom of the sign less than eight (8) feet vertically
above the ground. The sign owner must provide to the
municipality proof of liability insurance naming the
municipality as the insured party for any sign projecting
over a public way;
(7) Any outdoor sign which advertises, identifies or
pertains to any activity no longer in existence shall be
removed by its owner or persons otherwise responsible
within thirty (30) days from the time the activity ceases.
Political signs must be removed within three (3) days
after the election advertised. This provision does not
apply to seasonal activities during the periods in which
such businesses are closed.
134
(8) Signs employing neon, mercury vapor, low pressure and
high pressure sodium, and metal halide lighting, except
those handed out by Waynesburg Prosperous and
Beautiful.
(9) Signs on a vehicle not regularly used in the conduct of
the business advertised on the vehicle.
(10) Signs placed on bus shelters, bus benches, or waste
receptacles.
(11) Signs posted or painted on roofs, dormers, and
balconies.
(12) Off-premise signs.
505.4 Sign Classifications: Exempted
1. The following signs do not require permits or fee payment but must
meet the other requirements of the Ordinance:
a. Traffic control signs;
b. Traffic flow informational signs to non-profit and first
responder facility.
c. Building addresses, family name signs, decorative flags, no
trespassing and similar signs;
d. Signs on vehicles regularly and customarily used to transport
persons or property for the business;
e. Directional signs set by governmental bodies;
f. Political signs (4 sq. ft. or less);
g. The flags of any nation, state, town, military or service
organization (15 sq. ft. or less);
h. Temporary signs;
135
I. Safety control signs.
5-506 OFF-STREET PARKING
506.1 General Provisions: Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the specifications in this Section in any Zoning District
whenever any new use is established, or for the new portion whenever any
existing use is enlarged.
1. An off-street parking space shall have minimum rectangular
dimensions of not less than nine feet (9') in width and eighteen (18)
feet in length, exclusive of driveways, aisles and other circulation
areas.
2. Driveways and traffic aisles between two (2) rows of off-street
parking spaces shall be of a width not less than twenty-four (24)
feet, except for one-way aisles for angle parking which shall be no
less than twenty (20) feet in width.
3. Off-street parking areas for more than five (5) vehicles and access
drives leading to the parking area shall be graded for proper
drainage and paved with concrete, bituminous asphalt or
bituminous seal coat. The developer/property owner shall provide
assurance that in the event that development occurs at a time of
year which makes it impossible to pave, paving will occur as soon as
weather permits.
a. Off-street parking areas which are used for the storage of
vehicles and are not accessible to the general public shall
be graded for proper drainage and finished with an allweather
surface such as gravel or slag which has been
properly graded, choked and compacted.
4. Any lighting devices used to illuminate any off-street parking lot
136
shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from all adjoining
properties.
5. Off-street parking spaces shall not be located any closer than five (5)
feet to the right of way line of a public or private roadway. The area
between the right of way and off-street parking spaces shall be
seeded and planted with shrubbery, and trees, or other landscaped
barrier which will prevent the shining of lights from the parking area
onto the roadway.
a. When the setback requirement in this Subsection is in
conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance or any other
ordinance regulating land development, the greater
distance shall apply.
6. When two (2) or more uses are located within the same building or
structure, or when two (2) or more uses are located in more than
one (1) building on one property, off-street parking spaces equal in
number to the sum of the separate requirements for each use shall
be provided.
7. Handicapped parking shall be provided at a ratio as determined by
the latest version of the ADA Accessibility Guidelines. Handicapped
spaces shall have minimum dimensions of twelve (12) feet in width
and nineteen (19) feet in length and shall be located the shortest
possible distance to an accessible entrance to the building. These
spaces shall be conspicuously posted.
8. When the determination of parking spaces required for a use results
in a fraction of a space, any fraction shall be counted as one (1)
space.
9. Off-street parking for more than five vehicles shall include interior
137
landscaping of at least ten square feet per car and one tree (min. 4
feet high) per five vehicles. It is the responsibility of the
owner/applicant to assure the continued growth of all required
landscaping and replace all dead growth.
10. Buffer yards, when required, shall contain a row of planting
comprised of a mixture of deciduous (30%) and evergreen (70%)
trees spaced ten feet apart measured from the center line of the
tree.
11. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the ratios
specified in Table 5.3: Parking Requirements for the various
categories of uses. Properties located in the Downtown Parking
Overlay District shall not be subject to the parking requirements in
Table 5.3 (see section 3-315).
a. If the property owner cannot provide the required
number of spaces onsite, the owner may be allowed to
use adjacent or nearby lots if proof is shown of a cross
agreement, lease of dedicated parking, staggered hours
of usage or another suitable agreement.
Table 5.3: Parking Requirements
Use Minimum number of parking spaces required
Residential
Dwelling, Multi-Family 1.5 per dwelling unit
Dwelling: Single and Two Family Two per dwelling unit
Group Care Facility 1 per each 2 full time staff plus 1 for each 2
residents who are authorized to operate a
vehicle
Nursing Home / Personal Care Home 1 per staff plus 1 for each 3 beds of residents
Institutional
Clinic, Drug Treatment or Medical 1 for 350 sq.ft. of GFA
Community Center 1 for each 100 sq.ft. of GFA
138
Day Care Center, Adult or Child 1 for each teacher and employee on the peak
shift plus 1 per 8 students
Funeral Home 25 for first parlor plus 10 for each additional
parlor
Library 1 for each 300 sq.ft. of GFA
Place of Worship 1 for every 4 fixed seats or if no fixed seats, 1
per every 40 sq.ft. in main auditorium or
sanctuary
Private Club 1 for each 4 members plus the number of
spaces for restaurants if a restaurant is
included
Public Parks / Recreation 1 per 4 persons of maximum design capacity
for the facility
School, Elementary / Junior 1 for each employee plus a minimum of 4
visitor spaces
School, High School 1 for each employee and 1 for each 7 students
Commercial
Bars and Nightclubs 1 for each 125 sq.ft. of GFA devoted to seating
Business Service 1 for every 300 sq.ft. of GFA
Financial Institution 1 for every 200 sq.ft. of GFA
Gasoline Service Station or Vehicular
Repair Garage
1 for each employee on the peak shift plus 3
for each repair bay
Hotel / Motel 1 for each sleeping room plus additional
spaces as required by this ordinance for
restaurants, bars, conference rooms or other
accessory uses which are open to the public
Commercial Recreation 1 for each 300 sf.ft. of GFA
Office, Business or Professional 1 for every 200 sq.ft. of GFA
Professional Service 1 for every 300 sq.ft. of GFA
Restaurants 1 for every 3 seats and 1 per 2 employees
Retail Store 1 for every 200 sq.ft. of GFA
Shopping Center 1 for every 200 sq.ft. of GFA
Vehicle Sales / Services 1 for every 180 sq.ft. of GFA
Veterinary Office, Animal Hospital or
Kennel
1 per 150 sq.ft of GFA plus 1 per staff member
on the peak shift
Industrial
Railroad or Truck Terminal 1 per 2 employees on the peak shift
Wholesale Distribution and Warehousing 1 per 2 employees on the peak shift
12. The Greene County Planning Commission may approve a plan for
139
providing all or some of the required off street parking spaces on a
lot within the any District if the proposed use complies with Table
5.4: Parking Exemptions or provides a plan for providing all or some
of the required off-street parking spaces, that cannot be provided
on site, through cross agreements, leasing of dedicated parking,
staggered hours of usage or another suitable arrangement.
Table 5.4: Parking Exemptions
Gross Floor Area
Amount of Requirement
Exempted
5,000 sq. ft. or less 100%
5,001-10,000 sq. ft. 50%
10,001 sq. ft. or greater 25%
506.2 Required Parking for Multiple Use: In the event a number of different uses
are proposed within the same structure, the applicant may present to the
Greene County Planning Commission a written analysis prepared by a
professional traffic engineer or consultant. The contemplated use will not
necessitate the total cumulative parking spaces authorized by this chapter.
Upon review of such a written document, the required number of parking
spaces may be adjusted.
506.3 Off-street Loading: Off-street loading shall be provided in accordance with
the specifications in this section in any non-residential Zoning District
wherever any new use is established, or as to the new portion, wherever
any existing use is enlarged. The phrase “off-street loading” shall include
both “loading” and “unloading”.
506.4 Off-street loading spaces in conjunction with warehousing or other
industrial uses shall have minimum rectangular dimensions of twelve (12)
feet in width and fifty-five (55) feet in length.
140
Off-street loading spaces in conjunction with offices, retail or service uses
shall have minimum rectangular dimensions of twelve (12) feet in width
and thirty (30) feet in length.
506.5 Loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with Table 5.5: Loading
Spaces.
Table 5.5: Loading Spaces
Use Spaces Required
Warehousing or other Industrial Use
Net Floor Area: 0-5,000 sq.ft. 1
Net Floor Area: 5,001-20,000 sq.ft. 2
Each additional 20,000 sq.ft. or fraction
thereof
1
Offices, Retail or Service
Net Floor Area: 0-20,000 sq.ft. 0
Net Floor Area: 20,001-60,000 sq.ft. 1
Each additional 60,000 sq.ft. or fraction
thereof
1
*Service shall include hotels, motels, restaurants, eating and drinking establishments.
506.6 Off-street loading spaces shall be located in areas which will not impede
traffic on public streets. At no time may loading vehicles obstruct traffic on
a public thoroughfare.
506.7 Performance Standards: All uses shall comply with the requirements of this
Section. Compliance shall be determined by the Zoning Officer with respect
to Permitted Uses and by the Zoning Hearing Board with respect to Special
Exceptions. In order to determine whether a proposed use will conform to
the requirements of this Ordinance, the Borough may obtain a qualified
consultant's report, whose cost for services shall be borne by the applicant.
5-507 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES OR USE
507.1 A permit may be issued for a temporary building which is incidental to the
141
development and erection of buildings or structures provided that the
permit shall not allow the use of such a temporary building for a period
of more than 12 months from the date of such permit.
507.2 A permit may be issued for temporary tents or shelters that are erected
for special events provided that the permit shall not allow the use of such
a temporary tent or shelter for a period of more than ten days from the
date of such permit.
507.3 Temporary outdoor storage of merchandise of a seasonal nature shall be
permitted by permit if the following are met:
1. It does not occupy buffer areas, parking spaces, driveways, or
interferes with traffic flow;
2. It does not damage or obscure landscaping;
3. It leaves a clear pedestrian path of six (6) feet;
4. It does not obstruct visibility;
5. It does not constitute a structure.
6. No display of cars for sale (excluding auto dealers) shall occur on
commercial property.
5-508 OUTDOOR STORAGE
508.1 Outdoor storage shall be an accessory use to commercial or industrial
properties and shall be subject to the following:
1. Outdoor storage of man-made products shall be screened from
view of public rights-of-way and adjacent residential uses.
2. Outdoor storage facilities for fuel (with the exception of firewood)
and raw materials shall be enclosed with an approved safety fence
compatible with the architectural and landscaping style employed
on the lot. In addition to a fence, bulk storage tanks shall be
enclosed by a moat or berm to contain potential spillage.
3. All organic refuse or garbage shall be stored in tight, vermin-proof
containers.
142
4. No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases shall be
stored in bulk above ground, except the following:
a. Tanks or drums of fuel connected directly with and located and
operated on the same lot as the energy devices or heating
appliances they serve.
b. Tanks or drums for storage of not more than three hundred
(300) gallons of fuel oil (other than that used for home
heating) or gasoline or diesel fuel, provided such tanks are
located no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any building or
lot line of fifty (50) feet from any right-of-way line.
5. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form
or manner that they may be transported off the lot by natural
causes or forces, nor shall any substance which can contaminate a
stream or watercourse, or otherwise render such a stream or
watercourse undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation,
or which will destroy aquatic life, be allowed to enter any stream
or watercourse.
143
ARTICLE VI
ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
6-601 GENERAL STANDARDS
All uses hereafter established in any zoning district shall comply with the
performance standards contained in this section. The performance standards shall
apply to an existing use or structure, or portion thereof, when it is extended,
enlarged, moved, structurally altered, or reconstructed.
601.1 Fire and Explosive Hazards: All activities and all storage of flammable and
explosive material at any point shall be provided with adequate safety
devices against the hazards of fire and explosion and adequate fire-fighting
equipment as specified by the Department of Labor and Industry, the laws of
the Commonwealth and the Municipality fire code. All buildings and
structures and activities within such buildings and structures shall conform
to the Municipality building and fire codes and other applicable ordinances.
601.2 Radioactivity or Electrical Disturbances: There shall be no activities which
emit radioactivity at any point above the most recent background limits set
by state and/or federal regulations. There shall be no radio or electrical
disturbance adversely affecting the operation of equipment belonging to
someone other than the creator of the disturbance.
601.3 Smoke, Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors and Gases: There shall be no emission of
smoke, ash, dust, fumes, vapors, or gases which violates applicable federal,
state, county or Municipality laws and regulations.
601.4 Liquid and Solid Wastes: There shall be no discharge at any point into any
public or private sewerage system, watercourse or into the ground of any
materials in such a way or of such a nature, as will contaminate or otherwise
cause the emission of hazardous materials in violation of any federal, state,
county or Municipality laws and regulations. All required discharge and
144
disposal permits shall be obtained.
601.5 Glare: No direct reflected glare whether from any lighting source or
production operation shall be visible from adjoining public streets or
adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing on ground level. Glare shall
be defined as-direct or indirect light from such activities of greater than onehalf
(0.5) foot candle at habitable levels.
601.6 Odor: There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other matter in such
quantities as to be offensive on adjoining streets or adjacent lots. Odor
thresholds shall be measured in accordance with ASTM D-1391-57 “Standard
Method for Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres (Dilution Method).”
601.7 Noise: No operation or activity shall cause or create noise in excess of the
sound levels prescribed below. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the noise
level will be measured in decibels (dBA) which indicate the sound pressure
level obtained from a frequency weighing network corresponding to the Ascale
on a standard sound level meter.
1. Residential- At no point on or beyond the boundary of any lot within
these districts shall the exterior noise level resulting from any use or
activity located on such lot exceed a maximum of 60 dBA for more than
one (1) hour per 24 hours.
2. Business- At no point on or beyond the boundary of any lot within these
districts shall the exterior noise level resulting from any use or activity
located on such lot exceed a maximum of 65 dBa for more than eight (8)
hours per 24 hours.
3. Industrial Districts- At no point on or beyond the boundary of any lot
within these districts shall the exterior noise level resulting from any use
or activity located on such lot exceed a maximum of 75 dBA.
4. Where two zoning districts in which different noise levels are
145
prescribed, share a common boundary, the most restrictive of the noise
level standards shall govern.
The following uses or activities shall be exempted from the noise
regulations: (1) noises emanating from construction and/or
maintenance activities between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.; and (2)
noises caused by safety signals, warning devices and other
emergency-related activities or uses. In addition to these
regulations, all uses or activities within the Municipality shall
conform to any applicable city, county, state or federal noise
regulations.
601.8 Storage: All garbage, trash and rubbish shall be stored in covered, verminresistant
containers and shall be stored beyond public view.
601.9 Determination of Compliance
1. If during the review of a zoning application it appears that the proposed
use or development may violate the performance standards contained
in this section, the Municipality may initiate an investigation and may
require the applicant to submit such data and evidence as is needed to
make an objective determination. The evidence may include, but shall
not be limited, to such items as:
a. Plans of the existing or proposed constructions and development;
b. A description of the existing or proposed machinery, processes
and products;
c. Specifications for the mechanisms and techniques used or
proposed to be used in restricting the possible emission of any of
the dangerous and objectionable elements as set forth in this
Article; and/or
d. Measurements of the amount or rate of emission of said
146
dangerous and objectionable elements.
2. In order to determine compliance, the Municipality may seek
assistance from any governmental agency having interest in or
jurisdiction for the particular environmental issue. The Municipality
may also require the applicant to submit a report from a qualified
technical expert certifying that the proposed use does comply with the
performance standard(s). The technical expert(s) shall be person(s) or
firm(s) mutually acceptable to the Municipality and applicant; in the
event agreement cannot be reached on the technical expert, the
Municipality shall make the selection. The cost of the expert's study
and report shall be borne by the applicant. A negative report by the
technical expert as to the proposed use's compliance with the
performance standard(s), and the applicant's refusal or inability to
make alterations to ensure compliance, shall be a basis for denying
approval of the zoning application.
601.10 Continuing Enforcement: The zoning Officer shall investigate any reported
violation of the performance standards and, if necessary request that Council
employ qualified experts to assist in the determination of a violation. The
costs for the services of such experts shall be paid by the owner if the factory
is found to be in violation.
If the facility is found to be in violation, the owner or operator shall be given
a reasonable length of time to correct the violation If at the conclusion of this
time period the violation still exists, and the Governing Body has agreed to
no time extension, the owner or operator shall be in violation of this
Ordinance and subject to the legal penalties and remedies contained herein.
6-602 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
602.1 Performance Standard
147
Any landowner or person engaged in the alteration or development of land
which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such
measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health or
property. Such measures shall include such actions as are required to:
1. Assure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is no greater after
development than prior to development activities; or
2. Manage the quantity, velocity and direction of resulting stormwater
runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health and
property from possible injury.
602.2 Stormwater Plan Requirements
1. When required by this ordinance, the applicant shall submit a
stormwater management plan for the development site prepared and
sealed by a registered professional engineer or landscape architect of
demonstrated qualifications in stormwater management, along with all
calculations and analyses used to prepare the plan. All calculations of
pre- and post- development runoff and storage requirements for sites
exceeding one acre shall be completed using the U.S. Soil Conservation
service (SCS) Soil Cover Complex Method (as contained in SCS Technical
Release TR-55). The rational method may be used for development
sites less than one acre.
2. If the development site is located within a watershed for which a
stormwater management plan has been adopted, pursuant to the
state Storm Water Management Act (167 of 1978), then any proposed
stormwater control measures shall be consistent with the watershed
plan.
3. If the development is proposing to connect with existing storm sewers,
the applicant shall demonstrate that the system has the capacity to
148
handle the additional stormwater flow. All connections shall be
approved by the Municipality Engineer.
602.3 Plan Approval
The stormwater management plan for the development site and all
proposed control measures shall be reviewed and approved by the
Municipality Engineer and Conservation District.
6-603 EROSION/SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
603.1 Applicability: Where any excavation, grading or earthmoving activity,
including removal of topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of land, is
proposed, a plan for minimizing soil erosion and sedimentation, both during
and after construction is required.
603.2 Erosion/Sedimentation Plan: The erosion/sedimentation plan shall be
prepared in accordance with the PA Erosion and Sedimentation Regulations
(25 PA Code, Chapter 102) and the standards and specifications of the
Greene County Conservation District.
603.3 Plan Review: The Municipality may submit the erosion/ sedimentation plan
to the County Conservation District for review and comment.
149
ARTICLE VII
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
7-701 See Waynesburg Borough Floodplain Ordinance No. 3 of 2015
150
ARTICLE VIII
NONCONFORMITIES
8-801 CONTINUATION
Subject to the provisions of this section, a use of building or land existing at the time
of the enactment of this Ordinance may be continued even though such does not
conform with the provisions of these regulations for the district in which it is located.
8-802 UNLAWFUL USE NOT AUTHORIZED
Nothing in this Article shall be interpreted as authorization for or approval of the
continuance of the use of structure or premises in violation of local, state or federal
laws in effect at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance.
8-803 ALTERATIONS, REPAIR, ENLARGEMENT OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
803.1 Nothing in this article shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe
condition of any portion of a building or structure declared unsafe by a
proper authority.
803.2 A nonconforming building or structure (excluding signs) may be altered,
enlarged or reconstructed provided the alteration, enlargement or
reconstruction complies with the requirements of this Ordinance.
803.3 If a nonconforming structure, or use thereof, is totally destroyed by fire,
collapse, or any act of God; it may not be reconstructed. If a nonconforming
structure, or use thereof, is partially destroyed by fire, collapsed, or any act
of God; it may be repaired at the discretion of the Zoning Officer if work
commences within thirty (30) days of the date of destruction and is
completed within ninety (90) days of issuance of the building permit.
However, said repair shall not make the building or structure more
nonconforming, in an aspect, than it was prior to destruction. Repair must
151
comply with applicable state and local building codes.
803.4 A lawful use in a nonconforming building or structure may expand within the
existing building.
803.5 Zoning Hearing Board may approve repair of a nonconforming structure to
correct a hazard or unsafe condition and the repair and/or reconstruction is
not materially detrimental to the surrounding properties or in the interest
of the municipality.
8-804 ALTERATION, ENLARGEMENT OR EXPANSION OF A NONCONFORMING USE
804.1 In order to allow for reasonable economic growth, a nonconforming use may
expand in terms of gross floor area, or lot coverage (measured in square feet)
if there is no building, up to 30 percent.
804.2 Such expansion shall: (1) comply with applicable area and dimensional
requirements for the zoning district in which it is located; (2) not result in
making an existing conforming building or structure nonconforming; (3) not
involve the extension of the nonconforming use onto any zoning lot other
than that which it presently occupies; and (4) not reduce or eliminate
required off-street parking and/or loading areas.
804.3 The Zoning Hearing Board shall approve all extensions or enlargements of
nonconforming uses. The Board may authorize an expansion or enlargement
exceeding the otherwise allowable percentages where the expansion is to
provide required off-street parking or loading space or to correct a hazardous
or unsafe condition in violation of a local, county, state or federal law, and
the expansion is not materially detrimental to surrounding properties or the
interests of the municipality.
804.4 In order to enhance the purposes of the Zoning Districts, reconstruction of a
nonconforming use is not permitted. A structure with a nonconforming use,
may be repaired. If a structure, with a nonconforming use, is partially
152
destroyed by fire, collapsed, or any act of God; it may be repaired at the
discretion of the Zoning Officer if work commences within thirty (30) days of
the date of destruction and is completed within ninety (90) days of issuance
of the building permit. However, said repair shall not make the building or
structure more nonconforming, in any aspect, than it was prior to
destruction. Repair must comply with applicable state and local building
codes.
8-805 CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING USE
When a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming or more conforming use, it
shall not be subsequently changed to a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use
may be changed to a similar nonconforming use or one which more closely conforms
to the uses authorized in the zoning district. A change of one nonconforming use to
another nonconforming use requires review and approval by the Zoning Hearing
Board, in accordance with the following:
805.1. The proposed use shall be within the same type of use category as the
original nonconforming use, such as one personal service business to
another, or is a use that more closely conforms to the current district
regulations.
805.2. The proposed use will not be any more objectionable than the original
nonconforming use in terms of congestion; traffic generation and
requirements for off-street parking and loading; outdoor storage of wastes,
materials, supplies and equipment; height, area and bulk of all structures.
805.3. The proposed use shall comply with the applicable district regulations and
the environmental performance standards which are contained in Article 6
of this Ordinance.
8-806 ABANDONMENT OF NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE
A nonconforming use of a building or land which has been abandoned shall not
153
thereafter be returned to such nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall be
considered abandoned when one or more of the following conditions apply:
806.1. A nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive
months.
806.2. It has been replaced by a conforming use.
806.3. When the discontinuance is beyond the control of the owner or tenant and
was without intent to abandon the use, the Zoning Officer may permit the
nonconforming use to continue indefinitely until such a time when intent to
abandon is established.
8-807 MANUFACTURED HOMES
807.1. Manufactured homes located in all zoning districts except R-3 High Density
Residential, are a nonconforming use and shall not be replaced by another
manufactured or mobile home.
8-808 NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD
808.1 In any district, notwithstanding the regulations imposed by any other
provision of this Ordinance, a building which complies with applicable zoning
requirements except for lot area may be erected, provided that the following
requirements are met:
1. The lot is shown by a recorded plat or deed to have been owned
separately and individually from adjoining tracts of land at a time when
the creation of a lot of such size, at such location, was not prohibited by
any zoning ordinance, then in effect.
2. The lot has remained in separate and individual ownership from
adjoining tracts of land continuously during the entire time that the
creation of such lot has been prohibited by the applicable zoning
ordinance or ordinances.
808.2 Construction permitted by the above shall comply with all otherwise
154
applicable regulations, except lot area and lot width.
8-809 STATUS OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
Any use for which a special exception use approval has been granted as provided by
this Ordinance, shall not be deemed to be a nonconforming use, but it shall be
deemed a lawful conforming use.
8-810 HISTORICAL LANDMARKS
The applicable provisions for nonconformities shall not apply to any structure
designated as a historic landmark by the Pennsylvania Historical Commission or
placed on the National Register of Historic Places.
8-811 DISTRICT CHANGES
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an area from
one district to a district of a different classification, the foregoing provisions shall
apply to any nonconforming use, structure or lot of record existing therein.
155
ARTICLE IX
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
9-901 ZONING OFFICER
901.1 Appointment: The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the governing body
and shall administer and enforce this Ordinance.
901.2 Duties of the Zoning Officer: In order to administer and enforce this
ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall:
1. Receive all applications for zoning certificates and occupancy
certificates and maintain records thereof.
2. Issue zoning and occupancy certificates for all applications that comply
with the literal terms of this Ordinance and other applicable ordinances,
except where approvals are required by this Ordinance from the
Governing Body, the Planning Commission, Zoning Hearing Board, or
other board or agency.
3. Receive, file and forward to the Planning Commission and the Governing
Body all applications for conditional uses; maintain records thereof; and
issue a zoning certificate when authorized by the Governing Body.
4. Receive, file and forward to the Zoning Hearing Board the records in all
appeals, and all applications for special exception uses, variances and
changes of nonconforming uses; maintain records thereof; and issue a
zoning certificate when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board.
5. Inspect buildings, structures and uses of land to determine compliance
with the provisions of this Ordinance.
6. Issue stop, cease and desist orders, and issue written correction orders
for any condition found to be in violation of this Ordinance and other
applicable ordinances.
156
7. Institute, with approval of or at direction of the governing body
appropriate legal action to prevent, restrain, abate, or correct any
violation of this Ordinance.
8. Revoke any order, zoning or occupancy certificate or occupancy permit
issued under a mistake of fact or contrary to the provisions of this
Ordinance.
9. Make and maintain accurate and current records of all legal
nonconformities under this Ordinance.
9-902 REQUIRED ZONING PERMITS
902.1 Zoning Certificates: A Zoning Certificate shall be obtained from the Zoning
Officer before any person may:
1. Occupy or use any vacant land or structure; or
2. Change the use of a structure or land to a different use; or
3. Construct, reconstruct, move, alter, or enlarge any structure or building;
or
4. Change a nonconforming use.
Improvements to land, preliminary to any use of such land, shall not
commence prior to the issuance of the zoning certificate.
902.2 Procedure for Obtaining a Zoning Certificate
1. Whenever the proposed activity requires a building permit under the
Municipality Building Code, the, application for the zoning certificate
shall be made prior to or simultaneously with the application for the
building permit. However, the building permit shall not be issued until
the zoning certificate has been approved.
2. When no building permit is required, the application for the zoning
certificate and certificate of occupancy may be made at any time prior
157
to the use or occupancy of the structure or land.
3. Applications for a zoning certificate shall be submitted in writing on
such forms provided by the Municipality along with payment of the
required fees in accordance with the Schedule of Fees. The application
shall be accompanied by a plot plan showing accurately and completely
the location, dimensions and nature of any lot and/or structure involved
in the application. The Zoning Officer may request any information
necessary to determine the application's compliance with this
ordinance.
4. The Zoning Officer shall not issue the zoning certificate until all other
required approvals and/or permits have been obtained from municipal,
county, state and federal agencies. The applicant shall submit copies of
such approvals/permits to the Zoning Officer.
902.3 Changes
After issuance of the zoning certificate, no changes of any kind shall be
made to the approved applications, plans and certificate without written
approval of the Zoning Officer, or in the case of a conditional or special
exception use approval, the Governing Body or the Zoning Hearing Board,
as appropriate. Requests for any such change shall be in writing and shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer.
902.4 Duration of Zoning Certificate
A zoning certificate shall expire within 6 months from the date of issuance
if the subject use is not commenced or construction has not begun. All work
must be completed no later than two years from the date of issuance of the
zoning certificate. For purposes of this ordinance, construction shall be
considered to have started with the preparation of land, land clearing,
grading, filling, excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations
158
erection of temporary forms, the installation of piling under proposed
subsurface footings, of the installation of sewer, gas and water lines, or
electrical or other service lines from the street.
902.5 Inspections
1. In order to perform the functions of this Ordinance, the Zoning Officer
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises,
property or development in the Municipality upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this Ordinance.
2. During the construction/development period, the Zoning officer or
other authorized official may inspect the premises to determine that the
work is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
zoning application and with all applicable Municipality ordinances.
902.6 Revocation of Zoning Certificate
In the event the Zoning Officer discovers that the work does not comply with
the approved application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that
there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the
Zoning Officer shall revoke the zoning certificate and proceed with
whatever legal action is necessary to correct the violation.
902.7 Certificate of Occupancy
1. A certificate of occupancy shall be obtained before any person may
occupy or use any structure or lot. An application for a zoning certificate
does not permit occupancy; a certificate of occupancy is also required.
2. Upon completion of the work covered by any zoning certificate or
before the occupancy of any land or structure, the applicant shall notify
the Zoning Officer who shall examine the such building, structure or use
of land within 10 days after notification. If the Zoning Officer shall find
159
that such construction, erection, structural alteration, or use of building
and/or land is in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, other
applicable ordinances, and the approved plans, the certificate of
occupancy shall be issued.
902.8 Temporary Occupancy Permits:
The Zoning Officer may issue a temporary occupancy permit which may
allow the use or occupancy of a building or structure during structural
alteration thereof or may permit the partial use or occupancy of a building
or structure during its construction or erection, provided, however, that
such a temporary permit shall be valid only for a period not exceeding three
months from its issuance, and shall be subject to such restrictions and
provisions as may be deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer to ensure the
safety of persons using or occupying the building, structure or land involved.
902.9 Permits Issued in Error:
Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
null and void.
9-903 SCHEDULE OF FEES
The Borough may establish from time to time, fees and charges for the various
permits, reviews and other actions required by this ordinance. This schedule, along
with an explanation of the collection procedure, shall be posted in the offices of the
Zoning Officer. All fees and charges shall be adopted by ordinance by the Governing
Body at any regular or special meeting.
9-904 ZONING HEARING BOARD
904.1 Membership of the Board:
The membership of the Board shall be 3 or 5 residents of the Municipality
160
who are appointed by the Governing Body. Their terms of office shall be
three years for three members and five years for five members, so fixed that
the term of office of one member shall expire each year. The Board shall
promptly notify the Municipality of any vacancies which occur.
Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the
term. Members of the Board shall hold no other office in the Municipality.
904.2 Removal of Members:
Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council,
taken after the member has received 15 days’ advance notice of the intent
to take such a vote. A public hearing shall be held prior to the vote if the
member shall request it in writing.
904.3 Organization of the Board:
The Board shall elect its officers from its own membership, who shall serve
annual terms and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing
and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be a majority of all the members
of the Board. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure consistent with the ordinances of the Municipality and laws of
the Commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business
and submit an annual report of its activities to the Governing Body.
904.4 Expenditures for Services:
Within the limits of funds appropriated by Governing Body, the Zoning
Hearing Board may employ or contract secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants, and technical services. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board
may receive compensation for the performance of their duties, as may be
fixed by the Governing Body.
904.5 Functions of the Board
161
1. Appeals from the Zoning Officer
a. The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellant that the Zoning Officer has failed to follow prescribed
procedures or has misinterpreted or misapplied any provision of
the valid ordinance or Map or any valid rule or regulation governing
the action of the Zoning Officer.
b. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny the right to
proceed directly in court where appropriate.
2. Challenges to Validity of the Ordinance or Map
a. The Board shall hear challenges to the validity of the Zoning
Ordinance or Map, with two exceptions:
(1) Questions of an alleged defect in the process of enactment or
adoption of the Ordinance or Map shall be raised by an appeal
taken directly to the court.
(2) Challenges which are accompanied by a request for a curative
amendment shall go directly to the Governing Body.
b. In all challenges, the Zoning Hearing Board shall take evidence and
shall make a record thereon. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
Board shall decide all contested questions and shall make findings
on all relevant issues of fact, which shall become part of the record
on appeal to court.
3. Variances
a. The Board shall hear a request for a variance where it is alleged that
the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance inflicts
unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. Application for a
variance shall be made on the prescribed form obtained from the
Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall forward the application to
162
the Board, which shall determine a time and place of the hearing.
b. The Board may grant a variance, provided the following findings are
made where relevant in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not to be
circumstances generally created by the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance.
(2) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance;
and the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to
enable the reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship had not been created by the
appellant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance which will afford relief and represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
c. A request for variance in any floodplain district, shall be decided in
accordance with the provisions of Section 7-708 of this Ordinance.
163
d. The Board shall request the review and comments of the Planning
Commission on any variance application, which shall be made part
of the public record. The Board may attach to any variance such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of this zoning Ordinance.
4. Special Exceptions
a. Where this Ordinance states that special exceptions may be
granted or denied by the Board, the Board shall hear and decide
requests for such special exceptions in accordance with such
standards and criteria as specified in this Ordinance. In granting a
special exception, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions
and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this Ordinance, as
it may deem necessary to implement the purpose of this
Ordinance.
5. Unified Appeals
a. Where the Board has jurisdiction over a zoning matter pursuant to
Subsections (1) through (3) above, the Board shall also hear all
appeals which an applicant may elect to bring before it with respect
to any municipal ordinance or requirement pertaining to the same
development plan or development. In any such case, the Board
shall have no power to pass upon the nonzoning issues, but it shall
take evidence and make a record thereon as provided in section
904.5 of this Ordinance. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board
shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact which shall become
part of the record on appeal to the court.
6. Changes of Nonconforming Uses
a. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for a change of one
nonconforming use to another nonconforming use in accordance
164
with the provisions of Article 8 of this Ordinance.
904.6 Applications to the Board:
All applications and appeals to the Board shall be in writing and shall refer
to the specific provision of this ordinance which is involved and describe the
nature of the appeal, challenge or application for special exception use or
variance. The required fees shall be submitted with the application.
An appeal from a decision of the Zoning Officer or a validity challenge may
be filed by the affected landowner, by any officer or agency of the
municipality or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance or special
exception may only be filed by the landowner or a tenant with the
permission of the landowner.
904.7 Time Limitations:
No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Board later than
30 days after an application for development, preliminary or final, has been
approved by an appropriate municipal officer or body, if such proceeding is
designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval in any manner, unless
such person alleges and proves that he had no notice, knowledge, or reason
to believe that such approval had been given. If such person has succeeded
to his interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of
his predecessor in interest.
The failure of anyone, other than the landowner, to appeal from an adverse
decision on a tentative approval of a site development application or from
an adverse decision by a Zoning Officer on a challenge to the validity of an
Ordinance or Map, shall preclude an appeal from a final approval, except in
the case where the final submission substantially deviates from the
approved tentative or preliminary approval.
904.8 Hearings: The following procedures shall apply:
165
1. Public notices shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer and to any person who has made timely
request for the same. Written notice shall be given at such time and in
such manner as shall be prescribed by rules of the Board. In addition
to the written notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing
shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one
(1) week prior to the hearing.
2. A public hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the
applicant request, unless the applicant agrees in writing to an
extension of the time.
3. Hearings shall be conducted by the Board, or the Board may appoint
one member as a hearing officer. The decision, or where no decision
is called for, the findings shall be made by the Board, but the parties
may waive the decision or finding by the Board and accept the decision
or findings of the hearing officer as final.
4. Parties to the hearing shall be the municipality, any person who is
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of record
before the Board, and any other person including civic or community
organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
the power to require that all persons who wish to be considered
parties enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board
for that purpose.
5. The Chairman or acting chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have the power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and documents
requested by the parties.
6. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
166
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
7. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
8. The Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or Hearing Officer or shall be paid
by the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal
is made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid
by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
9. The Board or the hearing officer shall: (1) not communicate, directly
or indirectly, with any party or his/her representatives in connection
with any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all
parties to participate; (2) not take any notice of any communication,
reports, staff memoranda or other materials unless the parties are
afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed; and (3) not
inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of
hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are
given an opportunity to be present.
10. The Board or Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within forty-five (45) days after the last
hearing before the Board or Hearing Officer. When the application is
contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings
of fact and conclusions based thereon together with the reasons
therefore. Conclusions based on any provision of this Ordinance or of
167
any law ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the
provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion in deemed
appropriate in the light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted
by a Hearing Officer, and there had been no stipulation that his
decision or findings are final, the Board shall make his report and
recommendations available to the parties within forty-five (45) days
and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations
thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and
the Board's decision shall be entered no later than thirty (30) days
after the report of the Hearing Officer. Where the Board fails to render
the decision within the period required by this Subsection, or fails to
hold the required hearing within sixty (60) days from the date of the
applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have
been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has
agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a
decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the
failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as herein above
provided, the Board shall give public notice of the said decision within
ten (10) days from the last day it could have met to render a decision
in the same manner as provided in Subsection (1) of this Section. If the
Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so.
Nothing in this Subsection shall prejudice the right of any party
opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
11. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day
of the hearing, the Board shall provide by mail or otherwise, brief
168
notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which
the full decision or findings may be examined.
904.9 Stay of Procedures.
1. Upon filing of any appeal proceeding before the Zoning Hearing Board
and during its pendency before the boards, all land development
pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning
Officer or of any agency or body, and all official action there under,
shall be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or any other appropriate
agency or body certifies to the Board facts indicating that such stay
would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the
development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by the court
having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice to the
Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body. When an
application for development, preliminary or final, has been duly
approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the approval
are filed with the Board by persons other than the applicant, the
applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals
to order such persons to post bond as a condition to continuing the
proceedings before the Board.
2. After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to
determine if the filing of an appeal is frivolous. At the hearing,
evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the
burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous.
After consideration of all evidence presented, if the court determines
that the appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for a bond. The
right to petition the court to order the appellants to post bond may
be waived by the appellee, but such waiver may be revoked by him if
169
an appeal is taken from a final decision of the court.
3. The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court.
An order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order
directing the responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
4. If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from
an order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a
bond and the appellate court sustains the order of the court below to
post a bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion
of the petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of
zoning appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses and
attorney fees incurred by the petitioner.
9-905 APPEALS
905.1. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Zoning Officer
involving administration of the provisions of this Ordinance may appeal to
the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30
days after the decision or action of the Zoning Officer.
905.2. Upon receipt of such appeal the Board shall conduct a hearing on the appeal
in accordance with the provisions of section 904.8.
905.3. Zoning appeals to court shall be taken to the Court of Common Pleas of
Greene County in accordance with the procedures prescribed in Article X-A
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
9-906 AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING ORDINANCE OR MAP
906.1. The Governing Body may amend this ordinance as proposed by a member of
the Governing Body, by the Greene County Planning Commission, or by a
petition of a landowner who desires to challenge the validity of the
ordinance or map or any provision thereof may submit a curative
170
amendment to Borough Council, as provided by the Municipalities Planning
Code.
906.2. An amendment proposed by the Waynesburg Borough Council shall be
prepared by the Waynesburg Borough Solicitor, Zoning Officer or Greene
County Planning Commission. If a proposed amendment is not prepared by
the Greene County Planning Commission, said proposed amendment shall
be referred to the Greene County Planning Commission for review and
comments at least 30 days prior to the public hearing.
906.3. The proposed amendment shall be referred to the Greene County Economic
Development for review and comment at least 45 days prior to the public
hearing.
906.4. If the proposed amendment would effect a change in the Official Zoning
District Map, the following is required:
1. Notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the
Code Official at points deemed sufficient by the Borough along the
tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The affected tract or
area shall be posted at least one week prior to the date of the hearing.
2. Notice of the public hearing must be mailed by the Borough at least
30 days prior to the date of the hearing by first class mail to the
addresses to which real estate tax bills are sent for all real property
located within the area being rezoned, as evidences by tax records
within the possession of the municipality. The notice shall include the
location, date and time of the public hearing. This shall not apply
when the rezoning constitutes a comprehensive rezoning.
906.5. After advertising (and posting of the property, if any) has occurred, Borough
Council shall hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to public notice, and
pursuant to mailed notice and electronic notice to an owner of a tract or
171
parcel of land or an owner of the mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land
who has made a timely request in accordance with Section 109 of the MPC.
9-907 MUNICIPAL CURATIVE AMENDMENTS:
907.1. The municipality, by formal action, may declare its Zoning Ordinance or
portions thereof substantively invalid and propose to prepare a curative
amendment to overcome such invalidity.
1. Within 30 days following such declaration and proposal, the
Governing Body shall:
a. By resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of the Zoning Ordinance which may include: (1)
references to specific uses which are either not permitted or not
permitted in sufficient quantity, (2) reference to a class of use or
uses which require revision, or (3) reference to the entire
ordinance which requires revisions.
b. Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to the
Zoning Ordinance to correct the declared Invalidity.
2. Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
municipality shall either enact a curative amendment or vote to
reaffirm the validity of its Zoning ordinance. The procedures for
adopting a curative amendment shall be as prescribed by Section
906.1 of this Ordinance.
3. Upon the initiation of the procedures set forth in Subsection 1 above,
the Governing Body shall not be required to entertain or consider any
landowner's curative amendment. Similarly, the Zoning Hearing Board
is not required to give a report on any challenge to the validity of the
Ordinance if the said challenge is based upon grounds identical to or
substantially similar to those specified in the Governing Body's
172
resolution.
4. Upon completion of the procedures as set forth in Subsections 1 and
2, no rights to a cure pursuant to the provisions of Section 906.2 of
this ordinance shall, from the date of the declaration and proposal,
accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive invalidity of
the unamended Zoning Ordinance for which there has been a curative
amendment pursuant to this Section.
5. The municipality may not again utilize the above procedure for a
municipal curative amendment for a 36-month period following the
date of the enactment of a curative amendment, or the reaffirmation
of the validity of its Zoning Ordinance. However, if after the date of
declaration and proposal there is a substantially new duty or
obligation imposed upon the municipality by virtue of a change in
statute or by virtue of a Pennsylvania Appellate Court decision, the
municipality may utilize the provisions of this Section to prepare a
curative amendment to this Ordinance to fulfill said duty or obligation.
9-908 ENFORCEMENT NOTICE.
908.1 If it appears to the Zoning Officer that a violation of this Ordinance has
occurred, the Zoning Officer shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this Section.
908.2 The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel
on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a written
request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and to any
other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
908.3 An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
1. The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom
the Zoning Officer intends to take action.
173
2. The location of the property in violation.
3. The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of
this Ordinance.
4. The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced
and the date before which the steps must be completed.
5. That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board within a period of ten (10) days.
6. That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless
extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a
violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
9-909 CAUSES OF ACTION.
909.1 In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to be,
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used
in violation of this Ordinance, Borough Council or, with the approval of the
Borough Council, an officer of the Borough, or any aggrieved owner or tenant
of real property who shows that his property or person will be substantially
affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute
any appropriated action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate
such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent, in or about such
premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation.
909.2 When any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that
action shall be served upon the Borough at least thirty (30) days prior to the
time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on Borough
Council. No such action may be maintained until such notice has been given.
9-910 ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
910.1 Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon being
found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Borough, pay judgment of not more than five hundred ($500.00) plus all
174
court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough as
a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neighbor pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the District Justice, determining that there has been a
violation, further determines that there was a good faith basis for the
person, partnership or corporation violating this Ordinance to have believed
that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have only one (1) such violation until the fifth (5) day following the date of
the determination of a violation by the District Justice and thereafter each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. These
remedies shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. Any
domicile initiated or any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged,
altered, or relocated in noncompliance with Article 7, Floodplain
Management Ordinance may be declared by the Governing Body to be a
public nuisance and abatable as such.
910.2 The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an Order of Stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication of
the violation and judgment.
910.3 Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed or interpreted to grant
to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to commence any
action for enforcement pursuant to this Section.
910.4 District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings brought
under this Section.
APPENDIX
Waynesburg Zoning Use Table - Primary And Accessory Uses
October 2017
R-1:
Residential
R-2:
Residential
R-3:
Residential
B-1:
General Business
C:
Conservation
U-1:
University
U-2:
University Fields
M-1:
Manufacturing
Apartment, 2nd story and above P
Conversion Apartment SE SE SE
Dormitories P
Dwelling, Manufactured Home P
Dwelling, Multi-family SE SE P SE
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached P P P P P
Dwelling, Townhouse P P P P
Dwelling, Two Family SE P P P P
Group Care Facility SE SE SE SE
Manufactured Home Park P
Nursing Home, Institutional Facility SE SE
Personal Care Home SE SE SE SE
Student Housing P
Athletic Fields P
Cemetery SE SE SE
Clinic, Drug Treatment SE
College / Administration Offices P
College Classrooms P
Community Center SE P P P P
Community Garden SE SE SE P P SE P P
Day Care Center, Adult or Child SE SE
Funeral Home SE SE SE P SE
Library P P
Medical Marijuana, Dispensary SE
Medical Office / Clinic P SE
Place of Worship SE SE SE SE SE
Private Club SE SE P SE
Public / Essential Services P P P P P P
Public Parks / Recreation P P P P P P P
Public Parking Lot SE SE SE SE P P
Public Use or Building SE SE SE P SE
School SE SE SE P P
Veterinary Office (Clinic or Hospital) P SE
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-Based (located in the ROW) SE SE SE SE SE
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-Based, Less than 40' (located out of the ROW) SE SE SE SE SE
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower-Based, More than 40' (located out of the ROW) SE SE SE SE SE
Wireless Communications Facility on Existing Structures SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE
ZONING DISTRICTS
RESIDENTIAL USES
INSTITUTIONAL USES
PRIMARY USES
P = Permitted by right (decision by Zoning Officer)
SE = Special Exception (decision by Zoning Hearing Board)
Note: If there are discrepancies between this table and Article III,
the regulations in Article III shall apply. Page 1 of 2
Waynesburg Zoning Use Table - Primary And Accessory Uses
October 2017
R-1:
Residential
R-2:
Residential
R-3:
Residential
B-1:
General Business
C:
Conservation
U-1:
University
U-2:
University Fields
M-1:
Manufacturing
ZONING DISTRICTS
RESIDENTIAL USES
PRIMARY USES
Adult oriented uses SE
Agri-Business, Sales and Processing P P
Bars and Nightclubs P
Bed and Breakfast SE SE SE P SE
Business Service P SE
Car Wash SE SE
Commercial Recreation P SE
Commercial School P SE
Contractor's Office P SE P
Farmer's Market P SE
Financial Institution P SE
Gasoline Service Station SE SE P
Hotel / Motel SE SE
Kennel SE SE
Laundromat P SE
Microbrewery P
Nursery / Greenhouse SE SE SE
Office, Business / Professional P SE P
Personal Service P SE
Printing and Publishing Establishment SE P
Public Parking Garage SE SE
Restaurant P SE P
Retail Store P SE P
Shopping Center SE SE
Urban Agriculture P P P P P P P P
Vehicular Repair Garage SE P
Vehicle Sales / Services SE P
Light Industrial P
Manufacturing SE
Manufacturing of PA LCB Controlled Beverages SE
Medical Marijuana, Growing / Processing SE
Railroad or Truck Terminal P
Research and Development P
Salvage Yard SE
Self Service Storage Units SE SE P
Wholesale Distribution and Warehousing SE
COMMERCIAL USES
INDUSTRIAL USES
P = Permitted by right (decision by Zoning Officer)
SE = Special Exception (decision by Zoning Hearing Board)
Note: If there are discrepancies between this table and Article III,
the regulations in Article III shall apply. Page 2 of 2
Waynesburg Zoning Use Table - Primary And Accessory Uses
October 2017
R-1:
Residential
R-2:
Residential
R-3:
Residential
B-1:
General
Business
C:
Conservation
U-1:
University
U-2:
University
Fields
M-1:
Manufacturing
Accessory Dwelling Structure P P P P
Accessory uses common in residential districts (such as swimming
pools, sheds, play structures, garages, gazebos, etc.) P P P
Accessory uses incidental to primary use (dependent on Zoning Officer
approval) SE
Drive Through SE
Family Day Care P P P P
Gas Station SE SE
Greenhouse
Home-Based Business, No Impact P P P P P
Home Occupation SE SE SE SE SE
Parking Lot SE SE P SE P P P
Solar Energy System, small SE SE SE SE SE SE
Wind Energy System, small SE SE SE SE SE SE
ZONING DISTRICTS
ACCESSORY USES
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! !
! ! ! !
! ! ! !
! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! !
! ! ! !
! ! ! !
! ! ! !
! ! ! !
! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! !
! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
E High ST
E Greene ST
Bonar AVE
3rd AV
1st AVE
1st AL
N Porter ST
W High ST
N West ST
Sherman AVE
4th AVE
5th AV
N Morris ST
2nd AVE
N Liberty AVE
N Richhill ST
N Woodland Ave
Bowlby ST
Race ST
Bridge ST
Cook AVE
Wood ST
E Lincoln ST
Hessel ST
Huffman ST
N East ST
N Cherry ST
Braden ST
S Spring ST
Ross ST
7th ST
Walnut ST
6th ST
S Porter ST
E Elm ST
S Fruit ST
S Morris ST
S Morgan ST
Water ST
Walnut ALY
E Franklin ST
N Spring ST
E First St
S Richhill ST
E Cherry AV
8th ST
S Findley ALY
E South ST
S Church ST
11th ST
W Elm ST
Fruit ST
Point ST
W South ST
Tollgate RUN
S Washington ST
9th ST
E Locust ST
S Blackberry St
Crooked ALY
W Wayne ST
W Cherry AV
W Greene ST
W College ST
N Fruit ST
S Cumberland ST
W Franklin ST
Wine ALY
E College ST
N Washington ST
W First St
Mine RD
Hillcrest AVE
S East ST
Veterans WAY
W Locust ST
E Strawberry ST
10th ST
J ALY
W Strawberry ST
S West ST
South ALY
N Maiden ST
6th AV
Liberty AVE
E Wayne ST
S Cherry ST
Highland AVE
Shady LN
Crabapple DR
North ALY
Circle ALY
Walnut AVE
Short ALY
E. College St
Birch ST
Porter WAY
Park AVE
Nazer ST
Rosina AVE
Oak DR
Washington RD
Cecil AVE
Anne B Call
Ashland AV
N Church ST
4th AL
S Liberty AVE
N Findley ALY
Pershing AVE
Sugar Run RD
S Woodland Ave
Short ST
Rinehart AV
Jimay ST
Hickory ALY
5th AL
Rinehart ST
S Porter ST
N Fruit ST
E High ST
N Maiden ST
Source: Esri, DigitalGlobe, GeoEye, Earthstar Geographics, CNES/Airbus DS, USDA, USGS, AeroGRID, IGN, and the GIS
User Community
Zoning Map
Waynesburg Borough
B1 - Business
C - Conservation
M1 - Manufacturing
R1 - Low Density Residential
R2 - Medium Density Residential
R3 - High Density Residential
U - University
U2 - University Fields
Downtown Parking Overlay
0 0.05 0.1 Miles
¯
Districts
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
Flood hazard area
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
AE
X
Roads
Parcels
Subject to inundation by the
1%-annual-chance flood
October 2017