Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 188]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) [53 P.S. § 66601(d)] of the Second Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of West Lampeter, County of Lancaster, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters
1 through 285, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of West
Lampeter, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of
the Township of West Lampeter," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of West Lampeter,
and it is the intention of said Board of Supervisors that each such provision
contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears
in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted
from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions
of § 1-3 below, and only new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6
below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code,
as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of West Lampeter and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 11-9-2004.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Township.
S. Any ordinance establishing an intermunicipal agreement between or
among the Township and another municipality(ies) or entity(ies).
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances of the Township for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board
of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if
the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A1 attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances included in the Code.
These changes are enacted to bring provisions into conformity with the
desired policies of the Board of Supervisors, and it is the intent of the
Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the legislation so changed had previously been formally
amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be
deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-15.
C. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code:
1. Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Township Secretary.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Township Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
(1) References to "District Magistrate," "Justice of the Peace" and
"Alderman" are revised to read "District Justice."
(2) References to "Department of Environmental Resources" are
revised to read "Department of Environmental Protection" or
"Department of Conservation and Natural Resources," as
appropriate.
(3) References to "Department of Community Affairs" are revised to
read "Department of Community and Economic Development."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-6 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 1-10
1:6
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Township Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code
and all legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the
effective date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction of the Code in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. The enactment and application of this
ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction, the
availability of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public and
the filing of an attested copy of this ordinance with the county, as required
by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance, upon being found liable therefor
in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed
until the date of the determination of the violation by the District Justice
and/or Court. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after April 16, 2002.
§ 1-14 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 9
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewerage — See Ch. 211. Solid waste and recycling — See Ch. 224.
§ 1-15 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 1-15
9:9

ARTICLE I
Lancaster Area Refuse Authority
[Adopted 11-22-1954]
§ 9-1. Intent.2
The Board of Township Supervisors hereby signifies its intention and desire
to organize an Authority jointly with the City of Lancaster and the
Townships of Manheim, Manor, East Lampeter, Lancaster and East
Hempfield, all of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, under the provisions of
the Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq., as amended.
§ 9-2. Execution of Articles of Incorporation.
The Chairman and Secretary of the Board of Township Supervisors are
hereby authorized and directed to execute on behalf of the Township of West
Lampeter Articles of Incorporation for said Authority in substantially the
following form.3
§ 9-3. Notice.4
The Secretary of the Board of Township Supervisors is further directed
to cause a notice of the substance of this article, including the substance
of the above Articles of Incorporation, and of the proposed filing of the
above Articles, to be published once in a newspaper published and of
general circulation in the County of Lancaster, and once in the LANCASTER
LAW REVIEW, as required by the Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 5601 et seq., as amended.
§ 9-4. Filing. [Amended 9-3-1957 by Ord. No. 5]
The Secretary of the Board of Township Supervisors acting with the
appropriate officers of each of the municipalities as set forth in § 9-1 above
are directed to file said Articles of Incorporation, together with necessary
proofs of publication, with the Secretary of the Commonwealth, and to do all
other acts and things necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation
of Lancaster Area Refuse Authority, including the payment of any filing fees
in connection therewith.
§ 9-5. Appointment of first Board member.
The following named person5 be and he hereby is appointed as a member of
the first Board of the Authority, whose term of office shall commence on the
date of appointment and shall be computed from January 1 next succeeding
the date of incorporation.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
3. Editor's Note: Said Articles of Incorporation, as amended 9-3-1957 by Ord. No. 5, are on
file in the Township offices.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
5. Editor's Note: Said historical information is on file in the Township offices.
§ 9-1 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 9-5
9:11

ARTICLE II
Suburban Lancaster Sewer Authority6
[Adopted 5-4-1970 by Ord. No. 24]
§ 9-6. Intent.7
The Board of Supervisors of this Township signifies its intention and desire
to organize an Authority jointly with the City of Lancaster and the Township
of Lancaster, both located in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, under
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 5601 et seq., as amended and supplemented (the "Act"), for the purposes
of exercising any and all powers conferred by the Act.
§ 9-7. Execution of Articles of Incorporation.
The Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and the
Secretary, respectively, of this Township are authorized and directed to
execute, on behalf of this Township, Articles of Incorporation for such
Authority in substantially the following form.8
§ 9-8. Notice.
The Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and the
Secretary, respectively, of this Township, acting jointly with appropriate
officers of the City of Lancaster and the Township of Lancaster, are
authorized and directed to cause notice of the substance of this article,
including the substance of the foregoing Articles of Incorporation, and of
the proposed filing of such Articles of Incorporation, to be published as
required by the Act.
§ 9-9. Filing.
The Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and the
Secretary, respectively, of this Township, acting jointly with appropriate
officers of the City of Lancaster and the Township of Lancaster, are
authorized and directed to cause such Articles of Incorporation, together
with necessary proofs of publication, to be filed with the Secretary of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to do all other acts necessary or
appropriate to effect the incorporation of such Authority, including payment
of required filing fees.
6. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 211, Sewers and Sewerage, Art. II, Sewer Authority's Rights
and Privileges.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
8. Editor's Note: Said Articles of Incorporation, as amended 6-27-1996 by Ord. No. 141, are
on file in the Township offices.
§ 9-6 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 9-10
9:13
§ 9-10. Appointment of first Board members.
The following named persons9 are appointed the first members to represent
this Township on the Board of such Authority for the following terms of
office.
§ 9-11. Purpose.
The enactment of this article is deemed necessary for the benefit of and
preservation of the public health, peace, comfort and general welfare of
citizens of this Township and will increase the prosperity of citizens of this
Township.
9. Editor's Note: Said historical information is on file in the Township offices.
§ 9-10 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 9-11
9:14
Chapter 22
FIRE COMPANIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention under the Uniform
Construction Code — See Ch. 120.
§ 22-1. Official recognition.
Lampeter Fire Company No. 1 and the Willow Street Fire Company ("Fire
Companies," or individually, "Fire Company"), organized and existing in the
Township of West Lampeter, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, are hereby
designated as the officially recognized fire companies for the Township of
West Lampeter.
§ 22-2. Authorized activities of companies.
§ 22-3. Authorized activities of members.
In addition to actually participating in the activities of the Fire Companies
as authorized above, or in going to or returning from any activity, the
members of the Fire Companies recognized by the Township are also
authorized to do the following things:
A. The Fire Companies recognized by the Township are hereby authorized
to provide such services to the Township as may be necessary for the
protection of property and persons situate therein, which include, by
way of example and not of limitation, the extinguishment and
prevention of loss of life and property from fire, automobile accidents,
medical emergencies, hazardous materials incidents, and other
dangerous situations.
B. The Fire Companies may also provide nonemergency and public service
functions, such as, again by way of example and not of limitation,
removing water from property after storms, and assisting in the
removal, abatement and prevention of damage or injury to persons or
property, whether through natural causes or man-made situations.
C. The Fire Companies may also conduct and participate in such training
activities and drills, either within or outside of the Township, as may be
deemed necessary by the officers of the Fire Company to maintain
proficiency in providing service.
D. The Fire Companies may also respond to calls and provide services to
municipalities outside of the Township.
§ 9-11 FIRE COMPANIES § 22-3
22:15
§ 22-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to recognize the Fire Companies as the
official fire companies of the Township, and to state additional authorized
activities for fire fighters for worker's compensation purposes.
Chapter 28
INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION
Chapter 34
MANAGER
§ 34-1. Position created and revised.
The position of Township Manager is hereby created, re-created and revised
by the Township of West Lampeter.
§ 34-2. Appointment; removal.
The Township Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a
majority of all members of the Board of Supervisors. The Manager shall
serve at the pleasure of the Board and may be removed, with or without
cause, at any time by a majority vote of all its members. At least 30 days
before such removal is to become effective, the Board shall furnish the
Manager with a written statement stating its intention to remove him or her.
§ 34-3. Qualifications; residency requirements.
A. Engage in any type of drill, training, ceremony, practice, test or parade
when duly called for or authorized by an officer or officers of the Fire
Company;
B. Engage in fund-raising activities for the Fire Company, when authorized
by an officer or officers of the Fire Company;
C. Engage in the performance of any other duty or activity authorized by
any officer of the recognized Fire Company.
A. The Township Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive
and administrative abilities, with special reference to training and
experience in municipal management. During his or her tenure, the
Township Manager shall not hold any elective office.
B. No member of the Board of Supervisors of the Township shall be
appointed Township Manager within one year after the expiration of his
or her term as member of the Board of Supervisors.
C. The Manager need not be a resident of the Township at the time of his
or her appointment. However, within six months of his or her
§ 22-3 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 34-3
28:16
§ 34-4. Bond.
Before entering upon his or her duties, the Township Manager shall give a
bond to the Township, with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by
the Board of Supervisors, in the sum as determined from time to time by the
Board of Supervisors, conditioned on the faithful performance of his or her
duties, the premium for said bond to be paid for by the Township,
§ 34-5. Compensation; conditions of employment.
The Board of Supervisors may enter into an employment agreement with
the Township Manager setting forth the terms and conditions of the
Township Manager's employment. The Manager's salary shall be
established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors at the annual meeting
or, if such Manager shall be appointed after the annual meeting of the
calendar year of initial appointment, at any public meeting of the
Supervisors.
§ 34-6. Powers and duties.
§ 34-7. Required knowledge, skills and abilities.
appointment as Township Manager, the Township Manager shall reside
within a twenty-mile radius of the West Lampeter Township Municipal
Building. The Township Manager shall be removed for failure to meet
this qualification.
A. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Township
and shall be responsible to the Board of Supervisors as a whole for the
proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Township. The
powers and duties of administration of the Township business shall be
vested in the Manager, unless expressly imposed or conferred by
statute upon other Township officials.
B. Subject to recall by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, the
Township Manager shall have the duties and commensurate powers to
carry out those duties as shall be set forth in a resolution as enacted
and amended from time to time as needed.
A. The Township Manager shall possess the following:
(1) Comprehensive knowledge of the principles and practices of public
administration. The ability to apply said principles and practices.
(2) Comprehensive knowledge of fiscal policies and procedures
applicable to municipal finance administration.
(3) Comprehensive knowledge of Township policies, procedures,
relevant state and federal laws and regulations, and local
ordinances affecting municipal government.
§ 34-3 MANAGER § 34-7
34:17
(4) Comprehensive knowledge of the Second Class Township Code,10
and state and federal laws affecting Second Class townships.
(5) Knowledge of modern office practices and procedures.
(6) Ability to motivate effectively and direct the activities of other
employees, to explain and justify Township problems and needs to
supervisors, and to deal conscientiously, fairly, and diplomatically
with all public requests.
(7) Ability to learn and apply numerous rules, regulations, and laws
under which Township operations must be conducted.
(8) Ability to work effectively with Township officials, other
government officials, business associates, and the public.
(9) Ability to resolve conflict with tact and diplomacy.
(10) Ability to analyze municipal problems and needs and to recommend
workable solutions.
(11) Ability to develop and set up procedures for the activities to be
performed.
(12) Ability to assemble, organize, and present status information from
various source materials concerning the operation of Township
programs and procedures.
(13) Ability to review information for compliance with specific
administrative or procedural rules.
(14) Ability to organize work in a manner which ensures smooth
processing and efficient accomplishment of priority items.
(15) Ability to communicate effectively, both orally and in writing.
(16) Ability to work with abstract ideas and visualize possible
applications, mediations and or action to correct problems.
(17) Proficiency in the operation and use of computers.
(18) Proficiency in the operation of motor vehicles as required in the
performance of duties.
(19) Proficiency in negotiation skills in dealing with union and nonunion
employees.
B. Working conditions. Work is performed in a normal, but busy, office
environment. Attendance at evening meetings shall be as directed by
the Board of Supervisors. Travel to various Township facilities and work
sites shall be as required in the course of performing duties. Work
10.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 34-7 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 34-7
34:18
§ 34-8. Board of Supervisors procedures.
§ 34-9. Disability or absence of Manager.
If the Township Manager becomes ill, disabled, or is absent from the
Township for any reason, a qualified person designated by the Board of
Supervisors shall perform the duties of the Manager during the absence,
illness or disability.
Chapter 45
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and public property — See Ch. 185.
§ 45-1. Creation; membership.
A West Lampeter Township Park and Recreation Board is hereby created for
West Lampeter Township, the members of which shall be appointed by the
Board of Supervisors. The Park and Recreation Board shall consist of five
members, all of whom shall be residents of West Lampeter Township.
§ 45-2. Terms of office.
The members of the West Lampeter Township Park and Recreation Board
shall serve for terms of five years or until their successors are appointed.
In order that the terms of not more than two members shall expire in one
year, the first member of the Board shall be appointed for a term of one
year, the second member of the Board shall be appointed for two years, the
third member of the Board shall be appointed for three years, the fourth
frequently involves responding to angry, frustrated, or upset
individuals.
A. In the relationship between the Board of Supervisors and the Township
Manager, the Board of Supervisors shall act as a body in all its dealings
with the Manager. Individual members of the Board of Supervisors shall
refrain from interfering with the Manager or employees of the
Township in the performance of their duties, except for purposes of
inquiry. Administrative matters shall be dealt with solely through the
Township Manager.
B. Nothing herein shall prevent the Board of Supervisors from
establishing a committee of its own to review the operations and
legislative needs of the Township departments or from assigning its
members to liaison relationships with boards, commissions and
authorities.
§ 34-7 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD § 45-2
45:19
for four years and the fifth for five years. After the initial appointments, the
subsequent terms of appointment shall be for full five-year terms. Vacancies
in the Board occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments. All
members shall serve without pay. Members of the Board may be removed
from office by the Supervisors for neglect or dereliction of duty.
§ 45-3. Organization.
The Board members shall elect their own Chairman and Secretary and
select all other necessary officers to serve for a term of one year.
§ 45-4. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Board shall be as follows:
A. The Board shall monitor and review the recreational needs of the
Township and shall advise the Supervisors as to possible location, siting
and development of park lands within the Township.
B. The Board shall assist the Supervisors in the planning of parks and
recreation, including locating and coordinating financing for potential
park sites and recreational programs.
C. The Board shall not employ any personnel or consultants without the
express approval of the Board of Supervisors.
D. The Board may make recommendations to the Supervisors regarding
selection, standards and qualifications of personnel or consultants
employed or to be employed by the Township for the purpose of
recreation and parks. Any recommendations of the Board shall be
subject to the approval of the Supervisors and acted upon by the
Supervisors as they see fit.
E. The Board shall not own real or personal property or maintain a
treasury or bank account without the express approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
F. The Board shall submit an annual report to the Township Supervisors
that includes an analysis of the community recreation areas, facilities
and leadership, with particular reference to the extent and adequacy of
the programs and their effectiveness in view of the public expenditure
involved.
G. The Board shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations for the
conduct of all business within its jurisdiction as stated herein.
§ 45-2 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 45-4
45:20
Chapter 50
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 66.
§ 45-4 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD § 45-4
45:21

ARTICLE I
Municipal Retirement System
[The current Municipal Retirement System ordinance and any
amendments thereto are on file in office of the Township Secretary.]
§ 50-1. through § 50-7. (Reserved)
§ 50-1 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD § 50-1
45:23

ARTICLE II
Police Pension Benefits
[Adopted 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 24011]
§ 50-8. Adoption of new benefit plan.
West Lampeter Township (the Township), being a member municipality
of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System (the System), hereby
elects to amend its Police Pension Plan administered by the System in
accordance with Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law,
53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq. (Retirement Law), and does hereby agree to be
bound by all the requirements and provisions of the Retirement Law and
the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, 53 P.S.
§ 895.101 et seq., and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise,
placed upon member municipalities.
§ 50-9. Administration.
As part of this article, the Township agrees that the System shall administer
and provide the benefits set forth in the amended Police Pension Plan
Contract entered into between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Board and the Township, effective April 1, 2016 (the contract).
§ 50-10. Acceptance of contract.
The passage and adoption of this article by the Township is an official
acceptance of the contract and the financial obligations resulting from the
administration of the contract.
§ 50-11. Payment of obligations; liability.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and
the Contract shall be made by the Township in accordance with the
Retirement Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act. The Township hereby assumes all liability for any
unfundedness created due to the benefit structure set forth in the contract.
§ 50-12. Repealer.
The Township intends this article to be the complete authorization of the
Contract and it shall become effective and specifically repeal Ordinance
Number 229, either immediately or on April 1, 2016, which is the effective
date of the contract, whichever is later.
§ 50-13. Filing.
A duly certified copy of this article and an executed contract shall be filed
with the System.
11.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Police Pension Benefits,
adopted 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 229.
§ 50-8 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD § 50-13
45:25
Chapter 57
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
240.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 57-1. Creation.
A Township Planning Commission, consisting of seven members, is hereby
created and established for West Lampeter Township, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, pursuant to the provisions of Article II of Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.12
§ 57-2. Membership; terms of office.
The Planning Commission shall be comprised of seven members who shall
be appointed for a term of office of four years, except that the terms of office
of the members of the existing Planning Commission and newly appointed
members shall be arranged to be with two terms expiring in 1974, two
terms expiring in 1975, one term expiring in 1976, and two terms expiring
in 1977.
§ 57-3. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties conferred
and imposed on it as set forth in said Article II of said Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.13
§ 57-4. Appointment of new members.
Appointments of new members shall be made so that the members of the
existing Planning Commission shall continue in office until the end of the
terms for which they were appointed, the new members and successors
being appointed as provided by Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.14
12.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10201 et seq.
13.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10201 et seq.
14.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 50-13 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 57-4
57:26
Chapter 66
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 50.
§ 57-4 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 57-4
66:27

ARTICLE I
Board of Supervisors
[Adopted 2-20-1995 by Ord. No. 139]
§ 66-1. Annual compensation.
Each Supervisor of West Lampeter Township elected or appointed to office
on or after the effective date of this article shall receive compensation as a
Supervisor in the annual amount of $2,500.
§ 66-2. Payment schedule.
Such compensation shall be paid in quarterly installments.
§ 66-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 66-2
66:29
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 85
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 85-1. Legislative findings and purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of West Lampeter Township finds that the
commercial exploitation of explicit sexual conduct through the public
exhibition of obscene publications and devices, and the use of so-called
massage establishments, adult model studios, bath houses, body painting
studios, outcall service activities or sexual encounter centers for the
purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution constitutes a debasement
and distortion of a sensitive key relationship of human existence, central of
family life, community welfare and the development of human personality,
is indecent and offensive to the senses and to public morals and interferes
with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, in that such interferes
with the interest of the public in the quality of life and total community
environment, the tone of commerce in West Lampeter Township, property
values, and the public safety. It further finds that continued operation of
such activities is detrimental to the health, safety, convenience, good morals
and general welfare of West Lampeter Township, and of the residences,
citizens, inhabitants and businesses thereof. Accordingly, the Board of
Supervisors hereby declares such activities to be illegal as hereinafter set
forth, and further, that such activities are, and are hereby declared to be
and constitute, a public nuisance, and herein establishes penalties for such
activities.
§ 85-2. Definitions.
In this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
ADULT MODEL STUDIO — Any place where for any form of consideration
or gratuity, figure models who display specified anatomical areas are
provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed, or similarly depicted by persons paying such consideration
or gratuity, except that this provision shall not apply to any "figure studio"
or "school of art" or similar establishment which meets the requirements
established in the Education Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for
the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized thereunder, to issue
and confer a diploma.
BATH HOUSE — An establishment or business which provides the services
of baths of all kinds, including all forms and methods of hydrotherapy
§ 66-2 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 85-2
85:30
during which specified anatomical areas are displayed or specified sexual
activity occurs. This definition shall not apply to hydrotherapy treatment
practiced by, or under the supervision of, a medical practitioner or practiced
by a professional massage technician. A medical practitioner, for the
purpose of this chapter, shall be a medical doctor, physician, chiropractor or
similar professional licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BODY PAINTING STUDIO — Any establishment or business which provides
the service or applying paint or other substance whether transparent or
nontransparent to or on the human body when specified anatomical areas
are exposed.
COMMUNITY STANDARDS — The standards of the community consisting
of the County of Lancaster.
KNOWINGLY — Having knowledge of the character and content of the
material involved or failure on notice to exercise reasonable inspection
which would disclose the content and character of the same.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or business which
provides the services of massage and body manipulation, including
exercises, heat and light treatments of the body, and all forms and methods
of physiotherapy, unless operated by a medical practitioner, chiropractor
or professional physical therapist licensed by the commonwealth. This
definition does not include an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium,
reducing salon, spa or similar establishment where massage or similar
manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory
service.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
OBSCENE — That which is determined as obscene, applying the following
guidelines:
OUTCALL SERVICE ACTIVITY — Any establishment or business which
provides an outcall service which consists of individuals leaving the
premises upon request or by appointment to visit other premises for a
period of time for the purpose of providing any service during which time
specified anatomical areas are displayed or specified sexual activity occurs.
Whether the average person applying contemporary community
standards would find that the subject matter taken as a whole appeals
to the prurient interest;
A.
Whether the subject matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive
way sexual conduct of a type hereinafter described;
B.
Whether the subject matter taken as a whole lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value; and
C.
Whether subject matter which, standing alone, might not be obscene,
may nevertheless be characterized as obscene when examined in the
context of the circumstances of production, sale and publicity and, in
particular, of pandering.
D.
§ 85-2 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 85-2
85:31
PATENTLY OFFENSIVE — So offensive on its face as to affront current
standards of decency and shall be deemed to include any of the following
described forms of sexual conduct if they are depicted so as to affront
current standards of decency:
PERSON — A natural person, partnership or corporation. Whenever used
in a clause describing or imposing a fine or term of imprisonment, or both,
the term "person" as applied to partnership shall mean the partners or
members thereof and as applied to corporation shall mean the officers
thereof.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — Any business, agency, or person who, for
any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more
persons, not all members of the same family, may congregate, assemble
or associate for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activity or
exposing specified anatomical areas, excluding psychosexual workshops,
operated by professional persons, licensed by the commonwealth, to engage
in sexual therapy.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Includes any of the following:
An act of sexual intercourse, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
real or animated, including genital-genital, anal-genital or oral-genital
intercourse, whether between human beings, or between a human
being and an animal or other object;
A.
Sadomasochistic abuse meaning flagellation or torture or sexual
gratification, by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments
or in a revealing costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or
otherwise physically restrained on the part of the one so clothed;
B.
Masturbation, excretory functions and lewd exhibition to the genitals,
including any explicit close-up representation of a human genital organ
or spread-eagle exposure of female genital organs;
C.
Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the clothed or
naked pubic area of buttocks of a human male or female, or the breasts
of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or
opposite sex, or between humans and animals in an act of apparent
sexual stimulation or gratification;
D.
A device designed and marketed as useful primarily for stimulation of
the human genital organs;
E.
F. Male or female genitals in a discernibly turgid state;
Fellatio, cunnilingus, anal sodomy, seminal ejaculation, or any excretory
function.
G.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately
above the top of the areolae; or
A.
§ 85-2 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 85-2
85:32
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES15 — Includes any of the following:
§ 85-3. Prohibited conduct.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid slate, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation
of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship, and any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts
or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus,
fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism,
zooerasty; or
A.
Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal
or tumescence; or
B.
Use of human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus,
ejaculation; or
C.
Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or
female breast; or
D.
Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the infliction
of pain; or
E.
Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other contact with an animal by a
human being; or
F.
G. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
A. General.
(1) No person shall knowingly either sell, rent, distribute, exhibit,
show or transmit, or offer either to sell, rent, distribute, exhibit,
show or transmit, or have in his possession or under his control
with intent either to sell, rent, distribute, exhibit, show or transmit
to another, any obscene motion-picture film, or any obscene
literature, book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, storybook, paper,
comic book, writing, drawing, photograph, figure, image, or any
written or printed matter of an obscene nature or any device,
article or instrument of an obscene nature.
(2) No person shall knowingly participate in, support or in any way aid
or assist any person in selling, renting, distributing or showing any
obscene motion-picture film; or any obscene literature, book,
magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, storybook, paper, comic book,
writing, drawing, photograph figure, image, or any written or
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-2 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 85-3
85:33
printed matter of an obscene nature or any device, article or
instrument of an obscene nature.
(3) No person shall knowingly design, copy, draw, photograph, print,
utter, publish or in any manner manufacture or prepare any
obscene motion-picture film, or any obscene book, picture, film,
drawing, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, storybook, paper, comic
book, writing, figure, image, matter, device, article or instrument of
an obscene nature.
(4) No person shall knowingly produce, present or direct any obscene
performance or participate in the portion thereof which is obscene.
(5) No person, being the owner of any premises or having control
thereof, shall knowingly permit within on upon said premises the
exhibition, projection or showing of any motion-picture film, show,
presentation or performance of an obscene nature, or permit
anyone to sell, rent, distribute, exhibit, give away or show any
obscene literature, book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper,
storybook, paper, comic book, writing, drawing, photograph, figure
or image, or any written or printed matter of an obscene nature.
(6) No person shall knowingly write, print, publish or utter, or cause to
be printed, published or uttered, any advertisement or notice of any
kind giving information directly or indirectly, stating or purporting
to state where, how or whom or by what means any obscene
motion-picture film, picture, book, writing, paper, comic book,
figure, image, matter, article or thing of an obscene nature can be
seen, purchased, obtained or had.
B. Minors.
(1) Display of certain material. No person, within West Lampeter
Township, shall display at newsstands or any other business
establishment frequented by minors under the age of 18 years or
where said minors are or may be invited as a part of the general
public, or where they may view same, any material depicting the
acts specified in the definition of PATENTLY OFFENSIVE in § 85-2
of this chapter, male or female buttocks or genitals or the female
breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
(2) Possession and control of obscene material.
(a) In addition to any other violations or penalties prescribed
herein, any person in West Lampeter Township who has in his
possession or under his control with intent to sell, rent,
distribute, exhibit, show or transmit to another any obscene
motion-picture film or any obscene literature, book, magazine,
pamphlet, newspaper, storybook, paper, comic book, writing,
or any other written or printed matter containing photographs
or photographic images depicting a minor participating,
performing or observing any of the acts defined in Subsection
§ 85-3 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 85-3
85:34
§ 85-4. Enforcement.
Upon observing or receiving notice of a potential violation of this chapter,
the Police Department of West Lampeter Township or any other proper law
enforcement agency shall conduct an investigation to determine whether
legal action shall be taken. If the Department determines that there is
reason to believe that a violation of this chapter has or is continuing to
occur, the Department shall continue its investigation in order to determine
whether there is probable cause for the institution of legal action for the
enforcement of this chapter. The facts establishing probable cause shall be
assembled according to the following procedure:
B(1) of this section shall be guilty of a summary offense and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to the penalty set
forth in § 85-5 of this chapter, in addition to any other penalties
imposed.16
(b) Any obscene literature or film displaying or presenting
pictures, photographs or photographic images depicting
prepubescent children exhibiting underdeveloped genitalia or
breasts shall be a per se violation of the provisions of this
section without further proof of age.
C. Adult model studio, bath house, body painting studio, massage
establishment, outcall service activity and sexual encounter center. No
person shall own, operate or maintain any adult model studio, bath
house, body painting studio, massage establishment, outcall service
activity or sexual encounter center which, as a regular course of
business, is used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or
prostitution, and every such adult model studio, bath house, body
painting studio, massage establishment, outcall service activity or
sexual encounter center in or upon which acts of lewdness, assignation
or prostitution are held or occur is declared to be a public nuisance.
A. Obscene articles available for purchase. A police officer shall purchase
the allegedly obscene articles and prepare, issue or file the appropriate
process for the institution of enforcement proceedings for each article
purchased.
B. Obscene films.
(1) If an allegedly obscene film is not available for purchase, a police
officer shall prepare a search warrant for the seizure of the film.
After the search warrant has been issued, the officer shall
confiscate the film described in the search warrant and prepare,
issue or file the appropriate process for the institution of
enforcement proceedings.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-3 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 85-4
85:35
§ 85-5. Violations and penalties.17
In addition to any other penalties specifically provided, any person who
violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township
before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the Township in
the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed until the
date of the determination of the violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure.
Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to
seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 85-6. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this chapter, or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances, shall for any reason be adjudged
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter nor the application
of such clause, sentence, paragraph or part to other persons or
circumstances but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph or part thereof and to the persons or circumstances directly
involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this chapter
would have been adopted had such provisions not been included or such
person or circumstances been expressly excluded from their coverage.
Chapter 94
ANIMAL CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 172. Parks and public property — See Ch. 185.
(2) If the film seized is the only copy available, the officer shall request
the District Justice who issued the search warrant to allow the
copying of the film. The original film shall be returned to the owner
as soon as possible after it has been copied pursuant to the District
Justice's authorization.
C. Obscene live performances. An officer shall observe the allegedly
obscene performance and prepare, issue or file the appropriate process
for the institution of enforcement proceedings.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-4 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 94-1
85:36
§ 94-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "West Lampeter Township Animal
Control Ordinance."
§ 94-2. Definitions
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — The person or persons who may be
appointed by West Lampeter Township, as provided in § 94-13, who shall
have the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter and the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Dog Law.18
ANIMALS — Shall include all mammals, birds, fowl and reptiles normally
or ordinarily domesticated (including household pets such as dogs and cats)
or raised in this area or climate as livestock or for work or for breeding
purposes. Such term shall not include fish.
AT LARGE — Being upon any public highway, street, park or any other
public land, or upon property of another person other than the owner, and
not being accompanied by and under the control of the owner or any other
persons having custody of such animal.
DANGEROUS DOG — Any or all of the following:
OWNER — Shall include every person, proprietor, corporation, partnership
or association that actually owns an animal, or who has an animal in his or
its care or permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied
by him or it. The parent or guardian of any minor claiming ownership of any
animal shall also be deemed the owner of such animal.
§ 94-3. Nuisance; sanitary conditions.
Any dog which bites, inflicts injury, assaults (which assaults shall
include dogs at large approaching any person upon the streets,
sidewalks or other public grounds or places in a threatening or
terrorizing manner without provocation), or otherwise attacks a human
being or other animal without provocation;
A.
Any dog which is deemed a dangerous dog under and pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Dog Law.19
B.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person(s), corporation, partnership or other
entity whatsoever, to harbor, care for, shelter or maintain any animal in
such a manner as to disturb or unduly annoy the public through the
animal's noise, barking, smell, mischief or other harmful propensities.
All animal pens or other areas in which animals are kept shall be
maintained in a sanitary condition free of offensive, obnoxious or foul
odors.
18.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
19.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 94-1 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 94-3
85:37
§ 94-4. Vaccination against rabies required.
All dogs and cats, including outside cats, in West Lampeter Township shall
be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian in accordance with
the requirements set forth in the state rabies law.20
§ 94-5. Dangerous dogs.
B. No owner, custodian or keeper of any animal shall allow or permit any
such animal to deposit excrement (defecate) upon any property not
owned or leased by the owner, custodian or keeper of such animal,
without immediately picking up such excrement. This provision shall
not apply to horses being used for transportation in the public streets or
alleys or other public property within the Township.
A. Any person who owns or who has custody of a dangerous dog shall
register the dog with the West Lampeter Township Police Department
on a form provided by the Police Department. Upon registering a
dangerous dog the owner or custodian shall display, in a conspicuous
manner, a sign on his premises warning that there is a dangerous dog
on the premises. The sign shall be visible and legible from the sidewalk
and street and shall comply with all other applicable laws, including but
not limited to the West Lampeter Township Sign Ordinance.
B. The owner or person having custody of a dangerous dog shall confine
such dog by one of the following methods, if outside, which shall be
inspected and approved by the Animal Control Officer:
(1) A pen or structure with sides and a secure top. Pens must have
bottoms secured to the sides or the sides must be imbedded in the
ground no less than two feet. Use of this option is subject to all
other applicable laws.
(2) A fence at least six feet high above the ground and imbedded in the
ground no less than two feet. This fence must prevent any
possibility of the dog's escape and must have signs conspicuously
placed around the entire perimeter of the fence. The use of this
option is subject to all other applicable laws.
C. The owner or person having custody of a dangerous dog shall not
permit such dog to go beyond confined bounds of the owner's premises
unless the dog is securely leashed and muzzled. This leash shall be no
more than four feet in length. Dangerous dogs shall have a tag on their
collar that will be issued to the owner at the time of registration. No
dangerous dog shall be permitted to go beyond the confined bounds of
the owner's premises or the premises of the person having custody
without wearing this tag.
20.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 455.1 et seq.
§ 94-3 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 94-5
85:38
§ 94-6. Animals at large.
D. Any owner of a dangerous dog that transfers ownership of such dog
shall notify the West Lampeter Township Police of the transfer and the
new location of the dog. The West Lampeter Township Police may then
notify the responsible municipality. If the new owner resides in West
Lampeter Township, he/she shall register the dangerous dog with the
West Lampeter Township Police. The designation of dangerous dog
shall transfer with ownership of such animal.
E. Any dog which is a dangerous dog and not registered with the West
Lampeter Township Police as a dangerous dog may be immediately
seized and detained as provided in § 94-7 by the Animal Control Officer
or the West Lampeter Township Police who shall turn the dangerous
dog over to an approved animal shelter until the dangerous dog is
registered and the owner complies with other applicable provisions of
this section § 94-5 of this chapter. Upon such seizure, the Animal
Control Officer shall, by written notice sent by both regular and
certified mail and by personal notification, if possible, notify the owner
of such seizure and detention and the requirements to register the dog
within 10 days of the date of seizure. The dog shall continue to be
detained until such time as the dog is registered in accordance with this
chapter. Should the owner fail to register the dog with the West
Lampeter Township Police as a dangerous dog within such ten-day
period, the owner may be prosecuted before the local District Justice to
have said dog be deemed a dangerous dog in accordance with the Dog
Law.21 All animal shelter fees for seized and detained dangerous dogs
shall be paid by the owner.
F. The Animal Control Officer may, by written notice sent by both regular
and certified mail to the owner of any dog determined to be dangerous
by the Animal Control Officer, notify the owner of the requirements to
register that dog as a dangerous dog with the West Lampeter Township
Police within 10 days of such notice. The dog may be detained by the
Animal Control Officer until such time that the dog has been registered.
G. No dog may be declared a dangerous dog for inflicting injury or damage
on any person committing a willful trespass or other tort upon premises
occupied by the owner of the dog, or teasing, tormenting or abusing or
assaulting the dog, or committing or attempting to commit a crime. No
dog may be declared dangerous for taking any action to defend or
protect a human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an
attack or assault.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having custody of any
animal or the parent or guardian of any minor owning or having custody
of any animal to allow the animal to go beyond the boundaries of their
premises or to run at large over the streets or public grounds or upon
the property of anyone other than the owner or person having custody
21.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 94-5 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 94-6
85:39
§ 94-7. Seizure and detention.
§ 94-8. Notice of detention and impoundment.
If the owner of a detained animal can be identified by license tag or
other means, the owner shall be given immediate notice, either in person
or by phone or by both regular and certified mail, of the detention and
impoundment by the keeper of the shelter to which the animal was
delivered. If the owner is unknown, written notice of the impoundment
shall be posted at the shelter and at the West Lampeter Township Police
Department for a period of 10 days from the day of seizure, describing the
animal, the place and time of seizure, and the location of impoundment.
§ 94-9. Redemption of animal.
The owner of an animal which has been detained and impounded may
reclaim his animal upon payment of a seizure fee as established from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors and upon payment of all other
reasonable expenses and costs incurred by the keeper of the animal shelter
by reason of the detention, impoundment and maintenance of the animal,
provided that such expenses and costs shall not exceed a per-day maximum
as established from time to time by resolution of the Board. The owner shall
pay the seizure fee to the Township. In addition, the expenses and costs
incurred by the shelter keeper due to impoundment and maintenance of
the animal may be paid by the owner to the shelter keeper in a manner
determined by the shelter keeper. All such fees and costs paid by an owner
shall be entered on the redemption portion of a form approved by the
of such animal. It shall also be unlawful for the owner or person having
custody of such animal to permit such animal to pose a danger to
pedestrians using adjacent sidewalks and streets.
B. It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog
traveling on the streets or public grounds to have the animal on a leash
at all times.
A. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer or any police officer of
West Lampeter Township to seize any animal running at large and to
convey it to an approved animal shelter, as provided in § 94-15, where it
shall be detained and impounded in a humane manner.
B. Upon seizure, the Animal Control Officer or police officer of the
Township shall complete a seizure form approved by the Chief of Police.
Upon detention and impoundment, the keeper of the approved shelter
to which the animal is delivered shall make a complete registry entering
the breed, color, and sex of the animal, and indicate whether the animal
is licensed. The registry shall be made upon a form approved by the
Chief of Police. If the animal is licensed, the keeper of the approved
shelter used shall communicate with the Treasurer of Lancaster County
and obtain and enter upon the registry the name and address of the
owner and the number of the license tag.
§ 94-6 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 94-9
85:40
Chief of Police. In no event shall any animal required to be licensed by law
be released from detention and impoundment until it has been licensed.
Payment of the seizure fee, expenses and costs shall not bar prosecution of
the owner for any violation of law.
§ 94-10. Seizure without detention.
Notwithstanding § 94-7, if an animal is found at large and its owner can
be identified and located, the animal need not be detained and impounded
but may, instead, be taken to and turned over to the owner. In such case,
the Animal Control Officer or police officer who seized the animal shall
complete a registry as required in § 94-7. The owner, whose animal is seized
without detention and impoundment, shall be subject to pay the seizure fee
in the manner as set forth in § 94-10 except that if circumstances warrant,
payment of the seizure fee may be delayed for a period of 15 days. Use of
the procedure set forth in this section shall not bar a prosecution for any
violation of law.
§ 94-11. Destruction of unclaimed animals.
It shall be the duty of the keeper of an approved animal shelter to keep
detained and impounded animals for a period of at least 10 days. If, after
10 days have elapsed from the giving or posting of notice as required in
§ 94-8, a detained and impounded animal has not been claimed, the keeper
of an approved shelter may either destroy the animal in a humane way
or sell the animal, provided that no animal shall be sold for vivisection,
or put the animal up for adoption. The proceeds derived from the sale
of an animal, after deduction of the seizure fee and reasonable expenses
and costs incurred because of its detention, shall be paid to the County
Treasurer as required by the Dog Law.22 The Township shall pay an
impoundment fee established from time to time by unclaimed and
subsequently destroyed.
§ 94-12. Quarantine of animals.
In the event an animal bites any person or other animal:
A. The owner or custodian of the animal shall:
(1) Immediately notify the West Lampeter Township Police of the
incident and complete an animal bite report on such form as the
Animal Control Officer or police officer shall prescribe;
(2) Quarantine the animal for a period of 10 days to observe for signs
of rabies at such location and under such conditions as are imposed
or required by the Animal Control Officer;
(3) At the expiration of 10 days following the day of the biting incident,
have the animal examined by a veterinarian. A certificate of
22.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 94-9 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 94-12
85:41
§ 94-13. Appointment of Animal Control Officer.
The Board may, by resolution, appoint an Animal Control Officer(s) who
shall have the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter and the
Dog Law.23 The term of the appointment shall be indefinite and subject to
termination by the Board on 10 days' written notice. The Animal Control
Officer(s) in the performance of the duties under the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to control by the Chief of Police of West Lampeter
Township. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to limit any
examination shall be filed with the Animal Control Officer on such
form as the Animal Control Officer shall prescribe, completed and
signed by the veterinarian. The certificate of examination shall be
filed not more than 14 days following the bite incident; and
(4) If the animal dies within the ten-day quarantine period, the
animal's head shall be removed by a veterinarian and tested for
rabies by the appropriate state laboratory or a laboratory
designated by the commonwealth for that purpose; and
(5) All costs, including laboratory preparation, laboratory examination,
quarantine and veterinary examination of the animal shall be borne
by the owner or custodian of the animal.
B. The Animal Control Officer shall have the right and duty to seize any
animal that bites a human or animal if he determines such seizure is
necessary to insure that the animal shall be quarantined. If any owner
or custodian shall refuse any order of the Animal Control Officer to
quarantine the animal and to have it examined by a veterinarian, the
Animal Control Officer shall take the action necessary to comply with
Subsection A(2) and (3) hereof and the owner or custodian of the animal
shall be liable to the Township for all costs thereof which may be
collected as an additional penalty for violation of this section.
C. The owner of any animal placed under quarantine shall not sell,
exchange, lease, lend, give away, allow to stray, remove or allow to be
removed, such animal until the quarantine has been revoked.
D. Any animal under quarantine shall be muzzled while outside the
confines or structure specified by the Animal Control Officer for the
quarantine.
E. If a biting incident occurs that involves an unclaimed or stray animal,
the owner of which cannot be identified, the Animal Control Officer
shall attempt to capture the animal or destroy it if necessary. The same
procedures as outlined in this section concerning quarantine and
veterinary examination of the offending animal shall be followed with
the costs borne by the Township.
23.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 94-12 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 94-13
85:42
police officer of West Lampeter Township in enforcing any of the provisions
of this chapter or the Dog Law.
§ 94-14. Compensation of Animal Control Officer.
Compensation of the Animal Control Officer shall be established by
resolution of the Board appointing a person or persons to that position and
by resolution from time to time thereafter.
§ 94-15. Approved animal shelters.
Animals seized may be impounded only at shelters approved by resolution
of the Board. An approved shelter shall comply with all requirements of
the Dog Shelter Rules as set forth in 7 Pa. Code § 23 et seq. The keeper
of the approved shelter shall fill out disposition information upon a form
approved by the Chief of Police and submit it to the Police Department on
a timely basis indicating the final disposition of each animal seized with the
Township and turned over to such keeper for detention and impoundment.
§ 94-16. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 95
ATTORNEYS' FEES, COLLECTION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 246.
§ 95-1. Legislative intent.
By Act 1 of 1996, the General Assembly amended the Municipal Claims and
Tax Lien Act of May 16, 1923, P.L. 207, as amended and supplemented, 53
P.S. §§ 7101 through 7505, to specifically authorize inclusion of attorneys'
A. Except as provided below, any person who violates any provision of this
chapter shall, for every such violation, upon conviction thereof before a
District Justice, be subject to a fine or penalty payable to the Township
of not less than $50 nor more than $600 plus costs, and in default of
payment thereof shall be subject to imprisonment of not more than 30
days.
B. The owner of a dangerous dog who fails to comply with the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before a District Justice, be
subject to a fine or penalty of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000
plus costs for the first offense and not less than $500 nor more than
$1,500 plus costs for a second or subsequent offenses, and in default of
payment thereof shall be subject to imprisonment for not more than 30
days.
§ 94-13 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 95-1
85:43
fees incurred in the collection of delinquent accounts as part of a municipal
lien. Act 1 requires that municipalities by ordinance adopt a schedule of
attorneys' fees. Act 1 further requires that, prior to imposing attorneys'
fees, the municipality must notify the owner of the property with the
delinquent account by certified mail of the municipality's intent to recover
these fees and the manner by which assessment of the fees may be avoided
by payment of the delinquent account. It is the intention of the Board of
Supervisors in enacting this chapter to comply with the requirements of Act
1 of 1996.
§ 95-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this
chapter, have the meanings herein indicated:
DELINQUENT ACCOUNT — Any sums due and owing to the Township
which have not been paid within the time required by the Township's
ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations or policies including, but not
limited to, charges for trash collection, sewer service, water service,
removal or abatement of nuisances, taxes, municipal improvements, or any
other charge which may lawfully be imposed by the Township and for which
a municipal claim may be filed.
HOURLY RATE — The hourly fee charge by the Township Solicitor to
the Township consistent with the ordinary and customary charges by the
Township Solicitor for similar services in the community, but in no event
shall the hourly rate exceed the rate charged by the Township Solicitor to
the Township when fees are not reimbursed by or otherwise imposed upon
delinquent customers of the Township.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Lampeter, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP SOLICITOR — The person or law firm appointed by the Board
of Supervisors to serve as legal counsel to the Township in accordance with
Section 1101 of the Second Class Township Code.
§ 95-3. Imposition of attorneys' fees for collection of delinquent
accounts.
The Board of Supervisors specifically authorizes the recovery of attorneys'
fees incurred by the Township in the collection of delinquent accounts
from the person or persons who are responsible for the payment of such
delinquent accounts. The Board of Supervisors authorizes the Township
Manager, the Township Secretary or the Assistant Township Secretary to
take all actions required by applicable law to enable the Township to
recover attorneys' fees incurred from the persons responsible for this cost
and to include such attorneys' fees in municipal claims. This authorization
includes, but is not limited to, sending notification to such persons of the
intention of the Township to impose attorneys' fees incurred in collection
efforts upon such persons.
§ 95-1 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 95-4
85:44
§ 95-4. Schedule of attorneys' fees for services related to collection
of delinquent accounts.
The Township shall impose attorneys' fees upon persons who have
delinquent accounts in accordance with the following schedule of the
minimum time required by the Township Solicitor for the listed service
times the hourly rate of the Township Solicitor in effect at the time the
Township Solicitor performed the service on behalf of the Township:
Service
Minimum Time
(tenths of hours)
Prepare collection warning letter, including review
of Township information
0.4
Obtain and review tax account information for
property
0.2
Obtain and review deed for property 0.2
Prepare certification of amount owing to Township 0.3
and transmit certification to Township 0.5
Prepare municipal lien 0.5
Prepare civil action cover sheet 0.1
File municipal lien 0.2
Forward copy of municipal lien to Township 0.2
Prepare civil action complaint before Magisterial
District Judge for collection of account
0.7
Prepare for and attend hearing before Magisterial
District Judge concerning civil action to collect
delinquent account2.5
2.5
Prepare and file satisfaction of municipal lien 0.2
§ 95-5. Recovery of additional attorneys' fees in specific
circumstances.
The services and minimum times expended by the Township Solicitor for the
services set forth in § 95-4 of this chapter are based upon the experiences
of the Township Solicitor and upon standard collection practices. Should
the person or persons responsible for payment of a delinquent account
take action or should other circumstances occur which will require the
Township Solicitor to perform additional or more time-consuming services
than contemplated by § 95-4, it is the intention of the Township to recover
all of its attorneys' fees so incurred. Such actions include, but are not
limited to, filing of counterclaims, challenging the legal power of the
Township to impose and collect the fee, rate, charge or other cost or similar
actions.
Chapter 120
§ 95-4 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 95-5
120:45
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 197.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
240.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 120-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "West Lampeter
Township Construction Code Ordinance."
§ 120-2. Legislative intent.
§ 120-3. Adoption of state code by reference; modifications.
[Amended 3-12-2007 by Ord. No. 195]
The Township hereby adopts the standards which the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry has adopted as the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code identified in Section 403.21 of the L & I Regulations, as
such regulations and standard codes adopted by such regulations may be
A. By Act 45 of 1999,24 the Pennsylvania Legislature provided for the
adoption of a Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code and directed the
Department of Labor and Industry to promulgate regulations for the
Uniform Construction Code. In 2002, the Department of Labor and
Industry adopted final regulations governing certification and training
of persons to administer the Uniform Construction Code, and on
January 10, 2004, the Department issued final regulations for the
administration of the Uniform Construction Code. The Uniform
Construction Code incorporates the International Building Code/2003,
the International Residential Code/2003, the International Existing
Building Code/2003, the standards incorporated into such publications
by reference, and other publications as set forth in the L & I
Regulations. The Board of Supervisors desires to adopt and administer
the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code and establish
administrative and enforcement regulations.
B. In accordance with Section 302(a) of the Pennsylvania Construction
Code Act,25 this chapter does not adopt the International Property
Maintenance Code and shall not be considered as a property
maintenance code. All Township regulations governing the
maintenance of properties shall be in ordinances separate and distinct
from the West Lampeter Township Construction Code.26
24.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
25.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.302(a).
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Property Maintenance.
§ 95-5 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 120-3
120:46
amended from time to time, as the West Lampeter Township Construction
Code, with the following additions to the International Building Code/2006
or such future edition of the International Building Code as may be adopted
from time to time:
A. Section 202, Definitions, shall be amended by inserting the following
definitions in alphabetical order:
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The governing body of the Township.
BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL — A Township official certified by L & I
under Section 103 of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act.27 The
term includes an individual certified in a category established under
Chapter 401 of the L & I Regulations to manage building code
enforcement activities, supervise building inspectors or plans
examiners, issue building permits, occupancy permits, notice of
violations and orders to vacate, and initiate prosecutions.
CONSTRUCTION CODE OFFICIAL — A Township official certified by
L & I under Section 103 of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act28
in an appropriate category established under Section 701(b) of the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act29 to perform plan review of
construction documents, inspect construction or administer and
enforce codes and regulations in that category under the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act or related statutes.
DEP — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
L & I — The Department of Labor and Industries of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
L & I Regulations — All regulations adopted by L & I to implement the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act.
PENNSYLVANIA CONSTRUCTION CODE ACT — Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§ 7210.101 et seq., as amended.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Lampeter, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE — The Code adopted pursuant to
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act and the L & I Regulations.
B. Section 1612.3 is amended by inserting "West Lampeter Township" and
"April 19, 2005," in the respective blanks.
C. Section 3410.2 is amended by inserting the date of December 14, 2002,
for residential dwellings and December 14, 2002, for nonresidential
structures.
27.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.103.
28.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.103.
29.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.701(b).
§ 120-3 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 120-4
120:47
§ 120-4. Administration and enforcement; modifications.
The Township hereby adopts the provisions of Chapter 1, Administration,
of the International Building Code/2003 and the provisions of the L &
I Regulations set forth below to govern administration and enforcement
of the West Lampeter Township Construction Code. The administrative
provisions of other codes which L & I has made part of the UCC, including
but not limited to the International Residential Code/2003, are not part
of the West Lampeter Township Construction Code. The provisions of this
Construction Code govern if there is a conflict with the provisions of the
Codes set forth in Section 403.21 of the L & I Regulations or the L & I
Regulations relating to administration or enforcement. Changes from the
International Building Code/2003, Chapter 1, and the L & I Regulations to
the West Lampeter Township Construction Code are as follows:
A. Section 101.1. Insert "Township of West Lampeter, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania."
B. Section 101.2 shall provide as follows:
101.2 Scope. These regulations shall control all matters concerning
the construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition,
location, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and structures
and shall apply to existing or proposed structures except as such
matters are otherwise provided for in other ordinances or statutes,
including but not limited to Chapter 285, Zoning, Chapter 240,
Subdivision and Land Development, Chapter 230, Stormwater
Management, or in the rules and regulations authorized for
promulgation under the provisions of this Construction Code.
Whenever there is a conflict between the provisions of this
Construction Code and any other Township ordinance, including but
not limited to Chapter 285, Zoning, it is the intent of the Board
of Supervisors that the more stringent requirement shall apply. All
construction which the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act or the L &
I Regulations exempt from compliance with the Uniform Construction
Code are exempt from the provisions of this Construction Code. Items
exempted from compliance with the Uniform Construction Code by
Sections 403.1(b) and 403.1(e) of the L & I Regulations do not have
to comply with the Construction Code but shall comply with all other
applicable Township ordinances.
C. Section 101.3 shall be amended by adding the following sentence to the
existing section:
§ 120-4 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 120-4
120:48
It is the further intent of the Board of Supervisors that all construction
within the Township shall comply with the provisions of the Americans
with Disabilities Act and all applicable regulations to implement the
Americans with Disabilities Act promulgated by federal and state
regulatory agencies and with the code requirements for housing
accessibility, and this code shall be interpreted in a manner which
fulfills this intent. It is also the further intent of the Board of
Supervisors to comply with the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act and the L & I Regulations.
D. Section 101.4.5 shall be deleted in is entirety.
E. Section 103, Department of Building Safety, shall be deleted in its
entirety and a new Section 103, Administration, shall be inserted which
shall provide as follows:
103 ADMINISTRATION
103.1 Building Official. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint a
person or persons to serve as a Building Code Official and a
Construction Code Official as those teams are defined in the L &
I Regulations. Both the Building Code Official and the Construction
Code Official shall be considered the "Building Official" as such term is
defined and used in this Construction Code.
103.2 Powers and duties of Building Code Official and
Construction Code Official. The Building Code Official shall have all
powers set forth in the L & I Regulations and shall have the powers
and duties of the Building Official set forth in this Construction Code.
The Construction Code Official shall have the powers set forth in the
L & I Regulations and may also have the powers of the Building
Official set forth in this Construction Code. The respective duties and
responsibilities of the Building Code Official and the Construction
Code Official shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors and shall
be within the limitations of any certifications required or issued by L &
I.
103.2.1 The Building Code Official shall serve at the pleasure of
the Board of Supervisors. The Building Code Official shall provide
supervision of the Construction Code Official, receive uniform
construction code permit applications, address citizen inquiries,
concerns and complaints, issue building permits and occupancy
permits, and manage code enforcement activities, including but not
limited to issuing notices of violations and orders to vacate, and
initiation of prosecutions.
§ 120-4 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 120-4
120:49
103.2. 2. The Construction Code Official shall serve at the pleasure
of the Board of Supervisors. The Construction Code Official shall
perform plan review of construction documents, issue Construction
Code permits, inspect construction, provide the Building Code
Official with reports of inspections and recommendations upon
issuance of certificates of occupancy, and administer and enforce
this Construction Code.
103.3 Organization. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint such
other officers, technical assistants, inspectors and other employees as
shall be necessary for the administration of this Construction Code.
F. Section 104.4 shall be amended by inserting the following language
after the first sentence:
The Building Official shall have the right to reject any report
performed by any individual or agency unless the permit holder has
requested and obtained the prior approval of the Building Official for
such individual or agency to perform such inspection. Any individual
or agency performing such inspection and providing such report shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Building Official that such
individual or agency has obtained all necessary certifications from L &
I.
G. Section 104.8 shall provide as follows:
104.8 Liability. The Township and the Building Official shall have
all immunities and rights granted by the Pennsylvania Judicial Code,
including but not limited to Chapter 85.
H. Sections 105, Permits, 106, Construction Documents, and 111, Service
Utilities, of Chapter 1 of the International Building Code/2003 shall not
be a part of the Township Construction Code. The Township hereby
adopts and incorporates Sections 403.41, 403.42, 403.42a, 403.43,
403.44, 403.47, 403.48, 403.61, 403.62, 403.62a, 403.63 and 403.66 of
the L & I Regulations to govern applications for and issuance of
Construction Code permits for nonresidential and residential
construction with the changes set forth below:
(1) Sections 403.42(a) and 403.62(a) shall be amended by inserting the
following at the end of the existing sections:
It shall be the joint responsibility of the owner, lessee, if any,
and the contractor to determine that a Construction Code permit
(and all other required permits and approvals) has been obtained
before performing any work. It shall be unlawful for any
contractor or subcontractor to perform any work for which a
Construction Code permit is required unless the owner and
contractor obtain and post a Construction Code permit as required
by this Construction Code.
§ 120-4 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 120-4
120:50
(2) Sections 403.42a(b) and 403.62a(b) shall be amended by inserting
the following at the end of the existing sections: [Amended
3-12-2007 by Ord. No. 195]
At the time of filing an application for a Construction Code permit,
the applicant shall present to the Building Code Official adequate
evidence that the applicant has obtained from all governmental
authorities having jurisdiction, all permits, licenses, approvals
and/or variances required in connection with the proposed use,
occupancy, construction, enlargement, alteration or demolition.
Such agencies shall include but not be limited to the Zoning
Officer, Zoning Hearing Board, Lancaster County Conservation
District, public water service provider (where public water service
is proposed), Sewage Enforcement Officer (where on-lot sewage
disposal is proposed) or public sewage service provider (where
public sewer service is proposed), State Police, Fire Marshal,
DEP, L & I, and the Pennsylvania Departments of Community
and Economic Development and Transportation. No application
for a Construction Code permit is complete without a copy of
any required zoning permit and proof of any required subdivision
and/or land development approval, stormwater management plan
approval. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if required by statute
or L & I Regulations, the Building Code Official shall accept
applications which do not contain evidence that the applicant has
obtained all other required approvals and commence review of the
application and plan. No construction code permit shall be issued
unless the applicant demonstrates that the applicant has obtained
all other required approvals.
(3) Sections 403.43(h) and 403.63(h) shall be amended by inserting
the following at the end of the existing sections:
The applicant shall post a copy of the Construction Code permit at
a location on the property clearly visible to members of the public.
(4) In addition to all types of construction, placement of structures,
repairs, and alterations for which the Uniform Construction Code
requires a permit, the Township, pursuant to the authorization of
Act 92 of 2004, shall require persons to obtain permits under the
West Lampeter Township Construction Code for all of the following:
[Added 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 185]
(a) The construction, erection, or placement of any accessory
structure which is equal to or greater than 400 square feet,
whether or not such accessory structure is connected to any
utility.
(b) The construction, erection, or placement of any accessory
structure which is less than 400 square feet, if such accessory
structure is provided with any utility service. The applicant
shall obtain a permit only for the purpose of inspection for the
§ 120-4 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 120-4
120:51
utility or utilities being installed or provided to the accessory
structure.
(c) All alterations or repairs to residential buildings which are
exempt from the UCC by Act 92 of 2004; provided, however,
that the following types of alterations and repairs shall
continue to be exempt and no permit will be required:
[1] Replacement of windows and doors when there is no
change in the size of the existing opening.
[2] Reroofing of less than 25% of the total existing roof square
footage.
[3] Replacement of a hot water heater, boiler, or furnace, or
the replacement of any part of a hot water heater, boiler or
furnace with the same efficiency rating, electrical and
plumbing requirements.
[4] Addition or replacement of siding on the exterior of the
residential structure.
[5] Repair or replacement of any nonstructural portion of a
deck, porch or stoop.
[6] Replacement of an appliance switch or receptacle with a
switch or receptacle which is the same or has a like rating.
[7] The addition of one appliance switch or receptacle.
[8] The repair or replacement of any nonstructural member.
[9] The repair or replacement of any sink, toilet, tub, shower
or similar plumbing fixture without relocation of any drain
or venting device.
I. A new Section 108.1.2 shall be inserted which shall provide as follows:
108.1.2 Time of payment of fees. Applicants for permits under this
Construction Code shall pay to the Township at the time of application
all fees established for the review of the application and plans. Prior to
the issuance of a Construction Code permit, applicants shall pay to the
Township the estimated fees for all inspections required. If additional
inspections become necessary during the course of construction,
applicants shall reimburse the Township for all such costs within 15
days after the date of an invoice for such costs. Applicants shall pay
to the Township costs incurred for all inspections required during the
course of construction prior to the issuance of a certificate of use and
occupancy for the structure for which a Construction Code permit has
been issued.
J. Section 108.4 shall be revised to provide:
§ 120-4 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 120-4
120:52
108.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person
who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas,
mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary
Construction Code permits shall be subject to an additional fee for
expedited processing which shall be equal to the fee which should have
been paid at permit application. The expedited processing fee shall
be paid in full in addition to the normal application fee prior to the
issuance of a Construction Code permit.
K. Section 108.6 shall be deleted in its entirety.
L. Sections 109.3, 109.4, 109.5, and 109.6 of the International Building
Code/2003 shall be deleted and the Township hereby adopts Sections
403.45, 403.64, and 403.86 of the L & I Regulations governing
inspections with the changes set forth below:
(1) Sections 403.64(g) shall be deleted in its entirety.
M. Section 110, Certificate of Occupancy, of the International Building
Code/2003 is deleted. The Township adopts Sections 403.46 and 403.65
of the L & I Regulations governing certificates of occupancy. Sections
403.46 and 403.65 of the L & I Regulations are amended as follows:
(1) Section 403.46(b) is amended by adding the following subsection:
(10) A statement that the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
shall not be deemed permission to occupy the structure or
commence a use if any other ordinance requires the issuance of a
permit or certificate prior to use and occupancy.
(2) Section 403.65(b) is amended by adding the following subsection:
(9) A statement that the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall
not be deemed permission to occupy the structure or commence
a use if any other ordinance requires the issuance of a permit or
certificate prior to use and occupancy.
N. Section 112, Board of Appeals, shall be amended in its entirety to
provide as follows:
§ 120-4 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 120-4
120:53
112.1 Board of Appeals. The Township hereby establishes the West
Lampeter Township Construction Code Board of Appeals which shall
be composed of five members, each of which shall serve a term of five
years staggered so that the term of no more than one member expires
each year. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it is the intention of the
Board of Supervisors that this Township shall participate in a Regional
Board of Appeals if such board of appeals is formed. The Board of
Supervisors may at any appropriate time remove all of the members of
the Board of Appeals and appoint the members of a Regional Board of
Appeals as the Board of Appeals under this code at such time as the
Regional Board of Appeals is formed.
112.2 Authority of Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall
hear and rule on appeals, requests for variances and requests for
extensions of time. An application or appeal shall be based upon,
and the Board of Appeals in making its decisions shall consider those
factors set forth in the L & I Regulations.
112.3 Membership of Board of Appeals. A member of the Board
of Appeals shall be qualified by training and experience to pass on
matters pertaining to building construction. Members of the governing
body may not serve on the Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals
member may not cast a vote or participate in a hearing in any appeal,
request for variance or request for extension of time in which the
member has a personal, professional or financial interest.
112.4 Operation of Board. The Board of Appeals may establish
policies and procedures necessary to carry out its duties. The Board
shall annually select one of its members to serve as Chairperson and
one of its members to serve as Vice Chairperson. The Board of Appeals
shall keep minutes of its meetings and file a written decision on all
appeals under this Construction Code. The Board of Appeals shall
provide notice of and conduct its meetings in accordance with the
Sunshine Act, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
112.5 Procedures for applications and appeals. Any person
desiring to file an application or appeal to the Board of Appeals may
file such appeal with the Building Code Official. All applications and
appeals to the Board of Appeals shall be in writing and shall specify
the section of this Construction Code from which relief is sought or
the action of the Building Official which is the subject of the appeal.
The written application or appeal shall state all of the grounds for
the application or appeal and shall include any necessary plans or
specification to provide the Board of Appeals with information to
evaluate the application or appeal and shall include the fee. No
application appeal will be considered complete without the necessary
appeal fee. Any appeal from a determination of the Building Official
shall be filed within 20 calendar days of the determination.
§ 120-4 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 120-4
120:54
112.5.1 Hearings. An applicant or appellant who desires to
present testimony to the Board of Appeals shall request a hearing
in the application or appeal. If the applicant or appellant does not
request a hearing, it will be assumed that the Board of Appeals
may render its determination based on the written information
submitted with the application or appeal and any additional
information available to members of the Board of Appeals.
112.5.2 Parties. The Township shall be considered a party to
all appeals or applications filed with the Board of Appeals. Other
persons affected by the appeal or application who have made timely
appearances of record may also be recognized as parties to the
appeal or application.
112.5.3 Decision. The Board of Appeals shall render its decision
in writing within any time periods imposed in state laws or L & I
Regulations. The Board of Appeals shall provide the applicant or
appellant, the Building Official and the Township with copies of the
appeal.
O. Section 113, Violations, shall provide as follows:
113.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish,
use or occupy, or to permit the erection, construction, alteration,
extension, repair, removal, demolition, use or occupancy of, any
building or structure or equipment regulated by this Construction
Code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of this
Construction Code. It shall also be unlawful for any person to place
inaccurate or misleading information on an application or plan or to
omit relevant information from an application or a plan submitted to
the Township.
113.2 Notice of violation. The Building Official may serve a notice
of violation on any person responsible for the erection, construction,
alteration, extension, repair, removal, demolition, use, permission to
use, occupancy, or permission for occupancy of a building or structure
or equipment in violation of the provisions of this Construction Code,
or in violation of a detailed statement or a plan approved thereunder,
or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions
of this Construction Code. Such notice shall order discontinuance of
the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be a defense to an
enforcement action that the Building Official did not serve or that the
defendant did not receive a written notice of violation prior to the
institution of the enforcement action.
113.2.1 If an inspection reveals a violation of this Construction
Code, the Construction Code Official shall discuss the inspection
results with the permit holder at the completion of the inspection.
§ 120-4 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 120-4
120:55
113.2.2 When a violation relates to an unsafe building, structure,
or equipment, the Building Official shall proceed in accordance with
Section 403.84 of the L & I Regulations.
113.3 Prosecution of violation. If the Building Official has served
a notice of violation and the notice of violation is not complied with
within the time specified by the Building Official, or if the Building
Official determines that there is insufficient time to serve a notice
of violation or that such notice of violation will have no practical
or beneficial effect, the Building Official shall notify the Board of
Supervisors of the violation and shall request the Board of Supervisors
to authorize institution of enforcement proceedings against the
violator and/or authorize the Township Solicitor to institute the
appropriate proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or
abate such violation or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful use of the building or structure in violation of the provisions
of this Construction Code or of the order or direction made pursuant
thereto. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Building Official may
institute summary enforcement proceedings without prior
authorization of the Board of Supervisors.
113.4 Violations and penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this Construction Code or who shall fail to comply with
any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter,
extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy, or permit the use or
occupancy of, any building or structure or equipment regulated by this
Construction Code in violation of the provisions of this Construction
Code or of an approved plan or of a directive of the Building Official
or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
Construction Code, or who shall permit the use, occupancy, erection,
construction, alteration, extension, removal, demolition or repair of
the building or structure or equipment in violation thereof, shall, upon
being found guilty in an enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a penalty of not less than $200 and not more than
$1,000 for each violation plus all costs of prosecution, which fines and
penalties may be collected as provided by law. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and each section of
this Construction Code which is violated shall be deemed a separate
offense. The Building Official may request the Police Department to
make arrests for any offense against this Construction Code or orders
of the Building Official affecting the immediate safety of the public.
113.5 Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the Township Solicitor or the Building
Official from instituting appropriate action to prevent the unlawful
construction or to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent
illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to stop an
illegal act, conduct business, or use of a building or structure on or
about any premises.
P. Section 114.3 shall provide as follows:
§ 120-4 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 120-4
120:56
Chapter 128
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 163. Parks and public property — See Ch. 185.
§ 128-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "West Lampeter Township Curfew
Ordinance."
§ 128-2. Legislative intent.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of West Lampeter, being
cognizant of the problem of juvenile delinquency and believing that it can be
114.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform
to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall commit a violation of
this Construction Code and shall be subject to penalties or fines as
provided in Section 113.4 and remedies as provided in Section 113.5.
Q. Section 115, Unsafe Structures and Equipment, of the International
Building Code/2003 is deleted. The Township adopts Section 403.84 of
the L & I Regulations governing unsafe buildings, structures, or
equipment.
R. Table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Code/2003 is hereby
completed by inserting the following information:
Ground snow load: 30 pounds per square foot.
Wind speed (mph): 90 mph.
Seismic design category: A, B, C, D.
Weathering: severe.
Frost line depth: 30 inches.
Termite: moderate to heavy.
Decay: slight to moderate.
Winter design temperature: 10° F.
Ice shield underlayment required: Yes.
Flood hazard: 6/21/1982.
Air freezing index: 1,000.
Mean annual temperature: 50° F.
§ 120-4 CURFEW § 128-2
128:57
dealt with more effectively by regulating the hours during which minors less
than 18 years of age may remain in public places and certain establishments
without adult supervision, and by defining more clearly certain duties and
responsibilities upon those who have the custody and responsibility for the
care of such minors, directs that in the administration and enforcement of
this chapter the fundamental purpose of reducing juvenile delinquency shall
be foremost.
§ 128-3. Definitions.
In this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
AFTER HOURS — The period of time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday evenings and 12:00 midnight and
6:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday evenings.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business carried on for
profit, any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is
invited, and any similar place.
MINOR — Any person less than 18 years of age. For the purpose of this
chapter any person shall be deemed to be 18 years of age on the date of his
or her 18th birthday and not before this time.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
owning, operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing penalty, the word "operator" shall include
the members, partners, officers, and managers of any firm, association,
partnership, or corporation.
PARENT — A parent; a guardian; or an adult person 21 years of age or over
responsible either temporarily or permanently for the custody or care of any
minor or for the control of such minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground,
vacant lot, public building or ground, railway station, bus terminal or
similar place.
REMAIN — Loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play, or be.
§ 128-4. Unlawful conduct of minor.
No minor 12 years of age or older shall remain in or upon any public
place or establishment in the Township of West Lampeter after hours unless
accompanied by a parent; or unless upon an errand or other legitimate
business directed by a parent, in which case the minor shall carry written
identification and dated evidence of such parental direction, including a
statement of the applicable date and time; or unless engaged in gainful,
lawful employment after hours, in which case the minor shall carry written
identification and dated evidence of such employment, including a
statement of the applicable date and time. Furthermore, no minor or parent
shall falsify such documents as mentioned above.
§ 128-2 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 128-5
128:58
§ 128-5. Unlawful conduct of operators of establishments.
No operator of an establishment shall knowingly permit any minor to
remain upon the premises of such establishment after hours.
§ 128-6. Rules and regulations.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized from time to time to promulgate
such rules and regulations, including the extension of hours for special
occasions, as in his opinion shall be necessary or useful in the enforcement
of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall, however, be subject to the
approval of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of West Lampeter.
§ 128-7. Separate offenses.
Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 128-8. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 137
ENGINE BRAKE RETARDERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 172. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 262.
§ 137-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "West Lampeter Township Engine Brake
Retarder Ordinance."
A. Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a summary offense.
B. Any minor or parent convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter
for the first time shall be fined $5. Any minor or parent convicted of
violating the provisions of this chapter for the second time shall be fined
$50 and/or imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90 days. Any minor or
parent convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter for the third
time shall be fined $100 and/or imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90
days. Any minor or parent convicted of violating the provisions of this
chapter for the fourth or subsequent time shall be fined $300 and/or
imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90 days.
C. Any operator convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter for the
first time shall be fined $50 and/or imprisoned for a term not to exceed
90 days. Any operator convicted of violating the provisions of this
chapter for the second or subsequent time shall be fined $300 and/or
imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 128-5 ENGINE BRAKE RETARDERS § 137-2
137:59
§ 137-2. Findings. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 190]
The Board of Supervisors of West Lampeter Township, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, finds as a fact that the operation of an engine brake retarder
on a gasoline-powered or diesel-powered motor vehicle not equipped with
exhaust mufflers, or equipped with defective or modified exhaust mufflers,
so as to create excessive noise through the use of said engine brake
retarder, adversely affects the public health, safety and welfare of the
residents in the Township of West Lampeter and is a nuisance in fact.
§ 137-3. Prohibited acts. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 190]
No gasoline-powered or diesel-powered motor vehicle shall be operated
on ay highways, streets, avenues, alleys and boulevards, etc., within the
Township of West Lampeter, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, utilizing, in
said operation, an engine brake retarder without exhaust mufflers or with
defective or modified exhaust mufflers permitting excessive noise to be
created by said motor vehicle through the use of the engine brake retarder.
§ 137-4. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to emergency driving situations requiring the
utilization of an engine brake retarder to protect the safety and property
of the residents of West Lampeter Township, other motor vehicle operators,
pedestrians and the operator and passengers of the motor vehicle involved
in said emergency situation.
§ 137-5. Posting of signs. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 190]
Signs shall be posted at the Township boundary lines in appropriate places,
advising motor vehicle operators of the prohibition of the use of engine
brake retarders consistent with this chapter.
§ 137-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons, firm, corporation or organization violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon summary conviction before a District
Justice having jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
and costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment thereof, shall be
sentenced to undergo imprisonment for a period not to exceed 10 days.
§ 137-7. Enforcement.
Any law enforcement officer of West Lampeter Township shall implement
the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 137-2 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 137-7
137:60
Chapter 140
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 172.
§ 140-1. Legislative intent.
The intent of this chapter is to insure public safety, health, and welfare by
minimizing the number of false alarms originating from the site of the alarm
system, reducing the service demands on emergency response agencies,
and improving the safety to the public.
§ 140-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM ACTIVATION REPORT — A written report issued by the emergency
service agency citing the false alarm activation.
ALARM SYSTEM — A functionally related group of devices that when either
automatically or manually activated will sound audio or visual warning
devices on or off the protected premises.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The West Lampeter Township Board of
Supervisors.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE AGENCY — The Pennsylvania State Police, or
any municipal police, fire or emergency medical service department or
volunteer fire companies and emergency services.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal activated by an automatic protection device,
any audible alarm or other kind of direct or indirect signal given to which
police, fire department or emergency response agencies respond which
is not the result of an attempted illegal entry, burglary, intrusion, fire,
medical or other similar emergency, excluding weather extremes and utility
interruptions, which activates a protection device.
LOCK BOX — A secure, tamperproof Knox-Box® or similar device approved
by the Township with a lock operable only by the fire department master
key; and containing entry keys and other keys that may be required for
access in an emergency.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or similar entity.
TOWNSHIP — West Lampeter Township.
§ 137-7 ENGINE BRAKE RETARDERS § 140-2
137:61
TOWNSHIP CODE OFFICIAL — The West Lampeter Township Official
charged with the duty of administration and enforcement of codes as
adopted by West Lampeter Township.
§ 140-3. Lock box requirements.
§ 140-4. Alarm systems.
A. All occupancies, other than one- and two-family dwellings, installing an
alarm system as of the date of the adoption of this chapter, having an
electronic or radio connection to a central station, shall install an
approved lock box for the premises being protected.
B. The lock box installation and location shall be as follows:
(1) At a height approximately six feet above grade; and,
(2) To the right side of the main entrance door(s) facing the public
roadway; or
(3) At a location approved by the Township Code Official.
C. All lock boxes shall be electronically supervised and shall have the
tamper switch connected to the fire alarm panel to indicate a
supervisory or trouble signal. The supervisory signal shall report to the
central station for owner/occupant notification.
D. Keys that provide immediate access to the premise and to fireprotection-
related equipment shall be identified as to the door they
operate and secured in the lock box within two days of new lock box
installations.
E. Persons required to install lock boxes in accordance with this section
shall obtain and submit an application from the Township Building Code
department. The cost of the applicant to the Township shall be
established from time to time by resolution by the Board of Supervisors.
A. All persons owning and operating an alarm system within the Township
shall have the following duties and responsibilities with respect to such
system:
(1) To keep and maintain the system in good operating condition, order
and repair.
(2) To keep and maintain at the site of the alarm system, a complete set
of written operating instructions for such system.
(3) To provide training and instruction to individuals customarily
occupying the site of the alarm system in its proper operation.
(4) To cooperate with the Township and/or the designee in preventing
or minimizing the number of false alarms originating from the site
of the alarm system.
§ 140-2 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 140-5
137:62
§ 140-5. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 143
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire companies — See Ch. 22. Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 120.
§ 143-1. Adoption of Fire Prevention Code.
A certain document, three copies of which have been and are presently
on file in the office of the Secretary of the Township of West Lampeter,
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, being marked and designated as "Building
Officials and Code Administrators, Inc., BOCA National Fire Prevention
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying any premises
within West Lampeter Township to make or cause to make a false fire or
security alarm directly or indirectly to any fire department or
emergency response agency responding to alarms within the Township
when the false alarm is caused by faulty detection or alarm equipment
or by the negligence of said property owner, lessee or person.
B. The responding emergency response agency shall determine whether
the activation of an alarm constitutes a false alarm as defined by this
ordinance and shall issue a false alarm activation report to the property
owner or lessee with a copy to the Township Code Official.
C. Any person that owns, uses or operates an alarm system may not cause
or permit a subsequent false alarm to occur after three false alarms in
the same consecutive twelve-month period.
D. Upon notification of a false alarm violating Subsection C, the Township
shall assess a service fee against the responsible party in the amount of
$200 per each event.
E. In addition to other such remedies as may be available under existing
law, the Township may institute an action in equity to prevent, restrain,
correct, abate or enjoin such violation of this chapter.
F. Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit the prosecution of false
alarms pursuant to 18 Pa. C.S. § 7511, as may be amended, by the
emergency response agency responding to the false alarm or by the
Township.
G. The issuance of any permit shall not constitute acceptance by the
Township of any liability to maintain any equipment, or answer alarms
nor otherwise to render the Township liable to any person for any loss
or damage relating to the alarm system or procedure.
§ 140-5 FIRE PREVENTION § 143-1
143:63
Code/1996, Tenth Edition," be and is adopted as the Fire Prevention Code
of the Township of West Lampeter, creating a code of fire prevention
regulations for the protection of public health, safety and welfare as herein
provided. Each and all of the regulations of the BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code/1996, Tenth Edition, except as provided in § 143-2 of this
chapter, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part thereof, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, enumerated in § 143-2
of this chapter.
§ 143-2. Deletions, additions and insertions.
Changes from the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code/1996, Tenth
Edition, to the Fire Prevention Code of the Township of West Lampeter are
as follows:
§ 143-3. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any lawsuit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in
this chapter, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be
lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 163
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 128. Noise — See Ch. 172.
§ 163-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Antiloitering Ordinance."
§ 163-2. Findings; purpose.
The Supervisors of West Lampeter Township are cognizant of the problems
caused by unregulated gathering of persons on the premises of places of
business, particularly on parking lots, when said places of business are
closed, with the resultant misconduct, noise of vehicles and dropping of
refuse, and they enact this chapter to protect the peace, safety and welfare
of the inhabitants of the Township.
A. Section F-101.1. Insert "Township of West Lampeter, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania."
§ 143-1 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 163-3
163:64
§ 163-3. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to loiter, either on foot or in a
vehicle, around and about the premises of a place of business, such as but
not limited to gas stations and diners, when such place of business is not
open for business.
§ 163-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall after conviction
in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be fined $10 for the
first offense and $25 for any subsequent offense, and in default of payment
shall under go imprisonment in Lancaster County Prison for a period not
exceeding five days for the first offense, and not exceeding 10 days for any
subsequent offense.
Chapter 172
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 94.
Engine brake retarders — See Ch. 137.
Loitering — See Ch. 163.
§ 172-1. Violations and penalties.
Whoever willfully makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and
unseemly noise or disturbance to the annoyance of the peaceable residents
near by, or near to any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park or
square, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling
public annoyed, is guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct and upon
conviction thereof before any District Justice, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100 and costs of prosecution,
and in default of the payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 185
PARKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park and Recreation Board — See Ch. 45.
Animals running at large — See Ch. 94, Art. I.
Curfew — See Ch. 128.
Loitering — See Ch. 163.
§ 163-3 NOISE § 185-1
172:65
§ 185-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Park and Public
Property Ordinance."
§ 185-2. Definitions.
For the purpose and within the meaning of this chapter, the following
definitions shall pertain:
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of West Lampeter, or
its duly authorized representative.
PARK — Includes parks, playgrounds, recreation centers and all other areas
of the Township of West Lampeter and devoted to the active or passive
recreation by the public within the Township of West Lampeter.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Includes all other lands owned by the Township of
West Lampeter and devoted to uses other than those listed in the definition
of "park" above.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Lampeter.
§ 185-3. Regulations.
A. All public parks and playgrounds owned, operated, maintained or
supported by the Township shall be closed between the hours of sunset
and sunrise unless such hours are modified by the Board of Supervisors
for a particular park or playground by motion or resolution approved by
the Board at a public meeting. No person, other than authorized
supervisors, police, road crew or similar personnel, shall occupy,
frequent or use the parks and playgrounds between such closed hours,
except when the parks and playgrounds are being used for special
events, entertainment, athletic contests or similar affairs which have
been authorized or scheduled and/or are supervised by the Township.
[Amended 5-12-2008 by Ord. No. 207]
B. All structures, equipment and facilities owned by the Township in park
and public property are to be used in an appropriate fashion for the
activities for which they were designed and intended.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the acts hereinafter
described within the limits of any Township park or public property:
(1) To engage in any conduct which interferes with the peaceable use
of park or public property by other people, including but not limited
to the throwing of stones, sticks or hard objects in the vicinity of
other people (and the use of lewd, vulgar or sexually suggestive
language or behavior in the presence of other people).
(2) To permit any owner's dog, livestock or other pet or animal under
the owner's control to run at large.30 An owner is responsible for
30.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 94, Animals, Art. I, Running at Large.
§ 185-1 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 185-3
172:66
§ 185-4. Facility use permits.
It shall be required to obtain a permit to reserve any facility or pavilion for
an activity, event or function in any of the Township parks.
cleaning up any waste from his or her animal and properly
disposing of said waste in containers provided for same or in the
owner's trash collection receptacles.
(3) To discharge any firearms as that term is defined by § 6120(b) of
the Pennsylvania Uniform Firearms Act except for the justifiable
use of force as authorized by Chapter 5 of the Pennsylvania Crimes
Code or to use or possess any bow and arrow, slingshot, air rifle or
any other device (other than firearms as defined above) capable of
throwing any projectile of any sort, including the hand throwing of
rocks or stones intended to be used as weapons. This Subsection
C(3) shall not be operative in any specific area now designated or to
be designated in the future by the Township as a rifle range,
archery range, or any other specific area whose purpose is to allow
the activities otherwise prohibited by this subsection.31 [Amended
5-12-2008 by Ord. No. 207]
(4) To engage in archery and hitting of golf balls, except on such
grounds or place specifically designated for such purpose.
(5) To possess, drink or be under the influence of any alcoholic
beverages or illegal drugs.
(6) To break, cut, deface, disturb, injure or take any flower, fruit, plant,
tree, shrub, bench, building, fence, monument or other structure,
apparatus or property.
(7) To operate any motorized vehicle, snowmobiles, minibikes, go-carts
or any similar device at any place other than roadways or special
areas specifically designed for operation of such vehicles.
(8) To throw or deposit cans, bottles, broken glass, paper or rubbish of
any kind except in specially designated containers provided for
their proper disposal.
A. Each permit issued by the Township, or its designated agent, shall be
subject to park rules and regulations, and a person to whom such a
permit may be granted shall be bound by the rules and regulations as
fully as though the same were inserted in the permit.
B. Any person to whom such a permit may be granted shall be liable for
any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person for reason of
negligence of the person or persons to whom such permits may be
granted, their agents or employees.
31.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 278, Weapons.
§ 185-3 NOISE § 185-4
172:67
§ 185-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this
chapter or any regulations adopted by the Board of Supervisors thereunder
is guilty of a summary offense and upon conviction thereof shall before a
District Justice be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than
$300 together with costs of prosecution and in default of payment thereof
shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 197
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 120.
Storage of garbage and recyclables — See Ch.
224.
Removal of snow and ice — See Ch. 235, Art.
IV.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 197-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "West Lampeter
Township Property Maintenance Code."
§ 197-2. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code.
A certain document, copies of which have been and are presently on file
in the Office of the Secretary of the Township of West Lampeter, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania, being marked and designated as the "International
Property Maintenance Code/2006," as published by the International Code
Council is adopted as the West Lampeter Township Property Maintenance
Code, creating a code of property maintenance regulations for the
protection of public health, safety and welfare as herein provided. Each
and all of the regulations of the International Property Maintenance Code/
2006, except as provided in § 197-3 of this chapter, are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, enumerated in § 197-3.
§ 197-3. Deletions, additions and insertions.
Changes from the International Property Maintenance Code/2006 to the
West Lampeter Township Property Maintenance Code are as follows:
C. Specific portions of the rules and regulations of this chapter may be
waived only upon written approval of the Board of Supervisors.
D. The Board of Supervisors may from time to time, by separate resolution,
establish reasonable fees and deposits for the use of parks and facilities
therein.
§ 185-4 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 197-3
197:68
A. Section 101.1 shall be amended by inserting "Township of West
Lampeter, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania."
B. Section 103.5 shall provide as follows:
103.5. Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the
Code Official in carrying out his responsibilities under this code shall
be established by resolution or ordinance of the Board of Supervisors.
C. Section 106.3, Prosecution of violation, shall be amended to provide as
follows:
106.3. Prosecution of violation. If the Code Official has served a
notice of violation and the notice of violation is not complied with
within the time specified in such notice, or if the Code Official
determines that there is insufficient time to serve a notice of violation
or that such notice of violation will have no practical or beneficial
effect, the Code Official shall notify the Board of Supervisors of the
violation and shall request the Board of Supervisors to authorize
institution of enforcement proceedings against the violator and/or
authorize the Township Solicitor to institute the appropriate
proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct, or abate such
violation or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code
or any order or direction made pursuant thereto. If the Code Official
or if any police officer observes a violation of Section 302 or Section
307 of this code, in addition to the foregoing, such Code Official
or police officer is hereby empowered to institute summary criminal
proceedings against the violator.
D. Section 106.4 shall provide as follows:
§ 197-3 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 197-3
197:69
106.4. Penalty. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code;
or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof;
or who shall use, maintain or alter a lot, building or structure in
violation of any approved plan or directive of the Code Official or of any
order, permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code;
or who shall violate any order of the Code Official; or who shall fail
to remedy or who shall negligently or improperly remedy any health
hazard; or who shall fail to completely implement a plan to remedy
a health hazard which has been reviewed and approved by the Code
Official shall be liable upon summary conviction therefor to fines and
penalties of: a) not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 plus all costs
of prosecution for a first offense; b) not less than $200 nor more than
$1,000 plus all costs of prosecution for a second offense; and c) not less
than $300 nor more than $1,000 plus all costs of prosecution for a third
offense, which fines and penalties may be collected as provided by law.
All fines and penalties collected for violation of this code shall be paid
over to the Township Treasurer. Each day that a violation continues
and each section of this code which is violated shall be deemed a
separate offense. This code may also be enforced by an action in equity
brought in the Lancaster County Court of Common Pleas.
E. Section 107.3 shall provide as follows:
107.3. Method of service. Service of said notice shall be made upon
the owner or occupant of the said premises in any of the following
manners: by delivering the same to such owner or occupant personally
or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any adult person in
charge of the said premises or by affixing the same in a conspicuous
position upon said premises or by sending said notice by certified or
registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known address
with return receipt requested. Such procedures shall be deemed the
equivalent of personal notice.
F. Insert new Sections 107.6 through 107.6.2 which shall provide as
follows:
107.6. Notice to abate health hazard or public nuisance. It shall
be the duty of the Code Official to cause a notice to be served upon the
owner or occupant of any premises whenever property is maintained
so as to constitute a health hazard or a public nuisance and to require
abatement of the health hazard or public nuisance within 10 days from
the date of service of such notice or such other time period as may be
set forth in the notice. Service of such notice shall be as provided in
Section 107.3.
§ 197-3 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 197-3
197:70
107.6.1. Performance of work upon noncompliance with notice.
In the event that the owner or occupant shall refuse or neglect to
abate such health hazard or public nuisance within the time period as
required by such notice, or in the event that the owner or occupant
shall perform action necessary to eliminate the health hazard in a
negligent or incomplete fashion, the Code Official may cause such
condition to be eradicated and/or removed, or take action necessary
to eliminate such health hazard or nuisance of which the owner or
occupant has been notified, keeping an account of the expenses of
inspecting the premises, service of notice and abating the health
hazard and nuisance. All such costs and expenses shall be charged to
and paid by the owner or occupant.
107.6.2. Collection of costs. All costs and expenses the Township
incurs in the abatement of such health hazards and public nuisances
shall be a lien upon the premises, and whenever a bill therefor remains
unpaid after it has been rendered, the Township Solicitor shall file
a municipal claim and/or civil action for such costs and expenses,
together with a penalty of 25% of the costs and expenses, and for
allowable attorneys' fees, in the manner provided by law for the
collection of municipal claims and/or the filing of civil actions.
G. Section 110.3 shall provide as follows:
110.3. Failure to comply. Whenever the owner of a property fails
to comply with a demolition order within the time period prescribed,
the Code Official shall request the Board of Supervisors to authorize
the Township Solicitor to institute an action at law or in equity against
the property owner to obtain an order authorizing the Code Official to
raze and remove such structure or contract for the razing and removal
of such structure at the expense of the owner of the property. At the
completion of such razing and removal, the Township Solicitor shall
file a municipal claim as a lien against the property in the amount
of the Township's costs plus a penalty of 25% of such costs and for
allowable attorneys' fees. The Township Solicitor may also institute
any proceedings at law or in equity to provide for the collection of the
Township's costs and expenses.
H. Section 110.4 shall be deleted in its entirety.
I. Section 111, Means of appeal, shall be deleted in its entirety. A new
Section 111, Appeals, shall be inserted which shall provide as follows:
§ 197-3 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 197-3
197:71
111.1. Appeals. An appeal from any decision of the Code Official
may be taken to the Board of Supervisors. Such appeal shall be made
in writing within 10 days after such decision has been made. The
appeal shall be verified by an affidavit, shall state the grounds therefor
and shall be filed with the Township Secretary. The appeal shall be
accompanied by the appeal fee which shall be established by ordinance
or resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The appellant or his
representative shall have the right to appear and be heard, if such
right is requested in the written appeal. The Board of Supervisors
shall make a prompt decision on such appeal. In making a decision,
the Board of Supervisors may vary or modify any provision of this
code where there are practical difficulties in the way of executing the
strict letter of the law so that the spirit of the law shall be observed,
public safety secured, and substantial justice done. Such variation or
modification shall be the minimum necessary in order to grant relief.
The Board of Supervisors shall render a written decision, copies of
which shall be provided to the Code Official and the appellant.
J. Section 202, General definitions, shall be amended by inserting the
following definitions:
ABATE/ABATEMENT — When used in connection with lead-based
coating, the reduction of, removal of, or encapsulation of lead, followed
by thorough cleanup and post-cleanup treatment, from the surfaces
and sources that promote exposure resulting in the possibility of lead
toxicity or poisoning, which abatement shall be in a manner approved
or determined to be appropriate by the Code Official. The methods of
abatement and subsequent disposal of lead shall not present a hazard
to health from fumes, dust or vapors by inhalation, ingestion or
absorption through the skin and mucous membranes and shall be in
accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, regulations and safety
standards of the Township, the state and federal agencies.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The governing body of the Township.
EXPOSED SURFACE — When used in connection with lead-based
coatings, all interior surfaces of a dwelling or other structures which
may be occupied by children and those exterior surfaces of such
dwelling or structures which are readily accessible to children under
six years of age, such as stairs, decks, porches, railings, windows,
doors and sidings. Any yard or other area in the vicinity of a dwelling
or structure, including without limitation any soil, yard or other area
which may be subject to contamination from flaking or peeling leadbased
coatings or any other source of lead, is also considered an
exposed surface.
LEAD-BASED COATING — Any paint, varnish, glaze or other applied
liquid surface coating and putty or plaster which contains a quantity of
lead in excess of 0.6 milligrams per square centimeter of surface.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The West Lampeter Township Police
Department.
§ 197-3 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 197-3
197:72
POLICE OFFICER — A member of the Police Department.
RECOGNIZED METHOD OF ANALYSIS — Any recognized method of
lead detection and analysis which results in measurement of lead in
milligrams in a square centimeter of a particular area, including
without limitation a radio isotope x-ray fluorescent analyzer for in-place
determination of lead content.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Lampeter, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
VEHICLE, HAZARDOUS — A vehicle, including but not limited to an
automobile, bus, van, truck, recreational vehicle or trailer, which:
Contains one or more broken windows or one or more missing
doors or a missing trunk or hood which allow entry into the vehicle
by children or vermin; or
(1)
Is structurally unstable or supported by blocks, jacks or other
devices which may slip or move, presenting a danger to passersby;
or
(2)
Is parked upon property in such a manner as to obstruct the vision
of drivers or interfere with the free movement of pedestrians or
traffic or create a fire hazard.
(3)
K. Insert a new Section 301.4 which shall provide as follows:
301.4. Interference with compliance. No person shall take or cause
any person to take any action which creates a condition which results
in a premises violating any requirement of this code, including but
not limited to the tampering with water service or sewer service or
facilities, depositing of rubbish or garbage or any other discarded
materials on a premises, removal of fire extinguishers, and blocking
exits. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be a violation of
this code for the supplier of public water service to cease service for
nonpayment of water or sewer rates or charges in accordance with
applicable laws and procedures.
L. Section 302.4 shall provide as follows:
302.4. Weeds. All premises and exterior property of lots other than
lots or portions of lots which contain delineated wetlands, contain
wooded areas greater than 10,000 square feet, or are located within
the A Agricultural District, OSR Residential - Open Space District, and
the Floodplain Area Overlay Zoning District, as established by Chapter
285, Zoning, shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in
excess of the 10 inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds
shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation other
than trees or shrubs; provided, however, this term shall not include
cultivated flowers and gardens, protected wildflowers and wetlands.
§ 197-3 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 197-3
197:73
The Code Official or any officer or employee of the Township
designated for this purpose is hereby authorized to give notice, by
personal service, by United States mail or by posting the property, to
the owner of any premises whereon grass, weeds or other vegetation
is growing or remaining in violation of the provisions of this code,
directing and requiring such owner to remove, trim or cut such grass,
weeds or vegetation so as to conform to the requirements of this code,
within five business days after the issuance of such notice. In case
any person shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such notice
within five business days after the issuance of such notice, Township
authorities may remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation,
and the cost thereof, together with a penalty of 25% of such cost and
allowable attorneys' fees, may be collected by the Township from such
person in the manner provided by law.
If the Code Official or any officer or employee of the Township has
given notice under this section in the calendar year and the owner did
not comply with the notice within the required five business days, the
Township shall not be required to give additional notice to the owner
before the Township removes, trims or cuts grass, weeds or vegetation
on the property in that same calendar year, and the Township may
collect the cost thereof, together with a penalty of 25% of such cost,
and allowable attorneys' fees from such person in the manner provided
by law.
M. Section 302.8 shall be amended to provide as follows:
302.8. Vehicles. Except as provided in other regulations, the parking
and storage of motor vehicles, including but not limited to
automobiles, buses, vans, trucks, recreational vehicles, and trailers,
shall be limited as provided herein and as provided in Chapter 285,
Zoning.
§ 197-3 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 197-3
197:74
302.8.1. Hazardous vehicles. No person who owns a hazardous
vehicle shall park, place, deposit or permit the parking, placement
or depositing of the hazardous vehicle on any property. No property
owner shall permit any hazardous vehicle to remain on a premises.
If any hazardous vehicle is parked or placed upon a premises, the
Code Official and/or the Police Department shall notify the owner
or occupant of the premises of the duty to remove the hazardous
vehicle. The Code Official and/or the Police Department shall post upon
the hazardous vehicle in a conspicuous place a notice directing the
removal of the hazardous vehicle within 10 days. Should the vehicle
not be removed, the Code Official and/or the Police Department shall
serve a second notice, which shall be in writing and shall provide a
time limit not to exceed five days within which the hazardous vehicle
has to be removed. Said notice shall be served as provided in Section
107.3 herein and shall additionally be posted upon the hazardous
vehicle. If the owner of the premises fails to remove the hazardous
vehicle, the Township may take action to abate the health and/or safety
hazard resulting from the hazardous vehicle in the manner provided in
Sections 107.3.2 and 107.3.3 herein.
N. A new Section 302.10 shall be added which shall provide as follows:
302.10. Used vehicle parts and tires. No person shall place, deposit
or permit the placement or depositing of used vehicle parts or tires
outside of an enclosed structure on any property unless such used
vehicle parts or tires are secured to prevent removal and unless such
used vehicle tires are wrapped or covered in a manner sufficient
to prevent the accumulation of any standing water, to eliminate all
breeding grounds for insects and to eliminate all areas which could be
used as harborage for rodents or other animals.
O. Section 304.2, Protective treatment, shall be amended by adding the
following sentence to the existing section:
If exterior painted surfaces contain lead levels as set forth in Section
305.7 herein, all requirements of Section 305.7 shall be met.
P. Section 304.14, Insect screens, shall be amended by inserting "April
15" and "October 1" into the appropriate places.
Q. A new Section 305.7 shall be added which shall provide as follows:
305.7. Lead-based coatings. Any source of lead, including without
limitation a lead-based coating, shall be considered a health hazard
to a child under six years of age who has demonstrated an elevated
blood level (which for the purposes of this code shall be considered to
be a level equal to or greater than 10 micrograms per deciliter or any
future standard established by the United States Public Health Service
Centers for Disease Control) if:
§ 197-3 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 197-3
197:75
1. It exists in or about a dwelling or other structure in which a child
under six years of age who has demonstrated an elevated blood lead
level commonly resides or visits; and
2. It is determined to be on any flaking, peeling, non-intact
deteriorated surface or on any exposed surface or in any soil or dust
found in or about the dwelling or structure or in any rugs, carpet or
other surface coverings in or about the dwelling or structure; and
3. It contains a quantity of lead in excess of 0.6 milligrams per square
centimeter of surface when measured by a recognized method of
analysis.
305.7.1. Notices. Sources of lead, including lead-based coating areas,
must be marked with warnings immediately upon positive testing, and
notice of these areas shall be given to the occupant at the time of
testing to avoid further child poisoning.
305.7.2. Abatement of health hazard. If it is determined that there
exists a health hazard under Section 305.7, the owner shall be
responsible to abate the hazard within such time as specified by the
Code Official. The owner and/or occupant of the premises shall bear
the cost of abatement and shall present a written plan of abatement
to the Code Official for review and approval prior to initiating said
abatement. The owner and/or occupant of the premises shall abate
the health hazard in accordance with the approved plan, shall
completely perform all steps of such approved plan, and shall perform
the work set forth in the approved plan in a good and workmanlike
fashion. The owner and/or occupant of the premises shall submit
proof satisfactory to the Code Official of abatement promptly upon
completion.
R. Section 307, Rubbish and garbage, shall be amended by adding new
Sections 307.4, Notices of violation, and 307.5, Enforcement, which
shall provide as follows:
307.4. Notices of violation. The Code Official or any officer or
employee of the Township designated for this purpose is hereby
authorized to give notice, by personal service, by United States mail
or by posting the property, to the owner of any premises on which
there exist accumulations of rubbish or garbage remaining in violation
of the provisions of this code, directing and requiring such owner to
remove such accumulations of rubbish or garbage so as to conform
to the requirements of this code, within five business days after the
issuance of such notice. In case any person shall neglect, fail or refuse
to comply with such notice within five business days after the issuance
of such notice, Township authorities may remove such accumulations
of rubbish or garbage, and the cost thereof, together with a penalty of
25% of such cost, and allowable attorneys' fees may be collected by
the Township from such person in the manner provided by law.
§ 197-3 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 197-3
197:76
If the Code Official or any officer or employee of the Township has
given notice under this section in the calendar year and the owner did
not comply with the notice within the required five business days, the
Township shall not be required to give additional notice to the owner
before the Township removes accumulations of rubbish or garbage on
the property in that same calendar year, and the Township may collect
the cost thereof, together with a penalty of 25% of such cost, and
allowable attorneys' fees from such person in the manner provided by
law.
307.5. Enforcement. The Code Official or any police officer shall
be authorized to institute summary criminal proceedings against any
person who fails to comply with the requirements of this Section 307
prohibiting accumulations of rubbish or garbage and requiring proper
storage and disposal of rubbish and garbage. The failure to maintain
exterior premises and property and the interior of a structure free
from accumulation of rubbish and garbage and/or the failure of any
person to comply with the requirements of Sections 307.2 and 307.3
of this code is a violation of the provisions of this code, whether or not
the Code Official or other officer or employee of the Township provides
the notice set forth above. Any police officer and the Code Official may
institute summary enforcement proceedings pursuant to Section 106
of this code. Such prosecution shall not prevent the Township from also
proceeding under the provisions of Section 307.4 to abate nuisance
conditions on the property.
S. Section 507.1, General, shall be amended to provide as follows:
507.1. General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards, courts, and
other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner
which creates a nuisance. Without limiting the foregoing, drainage
of stormwaters from any source shall not be directed into any drain
connecting with any public sewer system, any individual or community
sewage disposal system, any cesspool, or any absorption area for a
sewage disposal system. Drainage water from any source shall not be
directed on to the cartway of a public street or discharged in such a
manner that water accumulates on the cartway of a public street.
T. Section 602.3, Heat supply, shall be amended by inserting "October 1"
and "April 15" into the appropriate places.
U. Section 602.4, Occupiable work spaces, shall be amended by inserting
"October 1" and "April 15" into the appropriate places.
§ 197-3 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 197-3
197:77
Chapter 211
SEWERS AND SEWERAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Suburban Lancaster Sewer Authority — See
Ch. 9, Art. II.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 230.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
240.
§ 197-3 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 197-3
197:78
ARTICLE I
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 6-7-1971 by Ord. No. 26]
§ 211-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms and phrases used in this article shall be as follows:
APPROVED PRETREATMENT PROGRAM — A program administered by
the City, the Authority, or another publicly owned treatment works for the
pretreatment of industrial wastes which has been approved by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.[Added 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 224]
AUTHORITY — Suburban Lancaster Sewer Authority, a Pennsylvania
municipality authority.32
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system of
any structure to the lateral of a sewer.
CITY — The City of Lancaster, Lancaster County, a Pennsylvania municipal
corporation.[Added 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 224]
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within this Township upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be
discharged.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any improved property located in this
Township used wholly or in part for the manufacturing, processing,
cleaning, laundering or assembly of any product, commodity or article, or
any other improved property located in this Township from which wastes, in
addition to or other than sanitary sewage, are discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any and all wastes discharged from an industrial
establishment, other than sanitary sewage.
LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the
curbline or, if no such lateral shall be provided, then "lateral" shall mean
that portion of, or place in, a sewer which is provided for connection of any
building sewer.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation or other group or entity.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
from any improved property.
32.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 9, Authorities, Municipal, Art. II, Suburban Lancaster Sewer
Authority.
§ 211-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 211-1
197:79
SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time,
for collecting, transporting, pumping and disposing of sanitary sewage and/
or industrial wastes, owned, maintained and operated by or in behalf of the
Authority.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewage collection
system used or usable for sewage collection purposes.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Lampeter, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, acting by and through its Board of Supervisors or, in
appropriate cases, by and through its authorized representatives.
§ 211-2. Use of public sewers required.
A. The owner of any improved property located in this Township adjoining
or adjacent to or whose principal building is within 150 feet from the
sewage collection system shall connect such improved property to the
sewage collection system, in such manner as this Township, the
Authority, or the City may require, within 60 days after notice to such
owner from this Township to make such connection, for the purpose of
the discharge of all sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from such
improved property, subject to such limitations and restrictions as shall
be established herein or otherwise shall be established by this
Township, the Authority, or the City from time to time. [Amended
6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 224]
B. All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from any improved property,
after connection of such improved property with a sewer shall be
required under Subsection A or has been made, shall be conducted into
a sewer, subject to such limitations and restrictions as shall be
established herein or otherwise shall be established by this Township,
the Authority, or the City, or their successors and assigns, from time to
time. [Amended 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 224]
C. No person shall place or deposit or permit to be placed or deposited
upon public or private property within this Township any sanitary
sewage or industrial wastes in violation of Subsection A. No person
shall discharge or permit to be discharged to any natural outlet within
this Township any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in violation of
Subsection A, except where suitable treatment has been provided
which is satisfactory to this Township.
D. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be used and maintained at anytime upon any improved property
which has been connected to a sewer or which shall be required under
Subsection A to be connected to a sewer. Every such privy vault,
cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle in existence shall
be abandoned and, at the discretion of this Township, shall be cleansed
and filled under the direction and supervision of this Township; and any
such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
not so abandoned and, if required by this Township, cleansed and filled,
§ 211-1 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 211-2
197:80
§ 211-3. Building sewers and connections.
shall constitute a nuisance and such nuisance may be abated as
provided by law, at the expense of the owner of such improved property.
E. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle at
any time shall be connected with a sewer.
F. The notice by this Township to make a connection to a sewer, referred
to in Subsection A, shall consist of a written or printed document
requiring such connection in accordance with the provisions of this
article and specifying that such connection shall be made 60 days from
the date such notice is given. Such notice may be given at any time after
a sewer is in place which can receive and convey sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes for treatment and disposal from the particular
improved property. Such notice shall be served upon the owner either
by personal service or by registered mail or by such other method as at
the time may be provided by law.
G. Any person discharging industrial wastes into the sewage collection
system shall do so in accordance with the industrial pretreatment and
discharge regulations of Chapter 249 of the Code of the City of
Lancaster as set forth in Ordinance No. 21-2017, adopted by Lancaster
City Council on December 19, 2017, and any future amendments or
corresponding provisions thereof, which regulations are incorporated
herein by reference as though fully set forth herein and made a part
hereof, and in accordance with any other approved pretreatment
program. The Authority, the City and any other publicly owned
treatment works within the service area of this Township shall have the
authority to enforce the pretreatment program requirements of 40 CFR
§ 403(f) or any future corresponding regulations. [Added 6-13-2011
by Ord. No. 224; amended 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 251]
H. The Township appoints the Authority and the City as agents of this
Township for the enforcement of this article as it relates to the
discharge of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes into the sewage
collection system and for the enforcement of any approved
pretreatment program. All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes shall
be discharged into the sewage collection system subject to such
limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or shall
otherwise be established by this Township, the Authority, the City or
other applicable approved pretreatment program from time to time,
including future amendments thereto. The Township shall not be
responsible for any costs or expenses incurred by the Authority, the City
or any other publicly owned treatment works in connection with the
administration and enforcement of any sanitary sewage or industrial
waste limitations and restrictions, including but not limited to any
approved pretreatment program. [Added 6-13-2011 by Ord. No.
224]
§ 211-2 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 211-3
197:81
§ 211-4. Rules and regulations.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, each improved
property shall be connected separately and independently with a sewer
through a building sewer. Grouping of more than one improved
property on one building sewer shall not be permitted, except under
special circumstances and for good sanitary reasons or other good
cause shown, and then only after special permission of this Township
and the Authority, in writing, shall have been secured.
B. All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and all costs
and expenses of connection of a building sewer to a sewer shall be
borne by the owner of the improved property to be connected; and such
owner shall indemnify and save harmless this Township and the
Authority from all loss or damage that may be occasioned, directly or
indirectly, as a result of construction of a building sewer or of
connection of a building sewer to a sewer.
C. Connection specifications.
(1) A building sewer shall be connected to a sewer at the place
designated by the Authority and where the lateral is provided.
(2) The invert of a building sewer at the point of connection shall be at
the same or a higher elevation than the invert of the sewer. A
smooth, neat joint shall be made and the connection of a building
sewer to the lateral shall be made secure and watertight.
D. If the owner of any improved property located in this Township and
accessible to and whose principal building is within 150 feet from the
sewage collection system, after 60 days' notice from this Township, in
accordance with § 211-2A, shall fail to connect such improved property,
as required, this Township may make such connection and may collect
from such owner the costs and expenses thereof. In such case, this
Township shall forthwith, upon completion of the work, send an
itemized bill of the cost of the construction of such connection to the
owner of the improved property to which connection has been so made,
which bill shall be payable forthwith. In case of neglect or refusal by the
owner of such improved property to pay said bill, this Township shall
file a municipal lien for said construction within six months of the date
of the completion of the construction of said connection, the same to be
subject in all respects to the general law providing for the filing and
recovery of municipal liens.
A. Where an improved property, at the time connection to a sewer is
required, shall be served by its own sewage disposal system or device,
the existing house sewer line shall be broken on the structure side of
such sewage disposal system or device and attachment shall be made,
with proper fittings, to continue such house sewer line, as a building
sewer.
§ 211-3 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 211-4
197:82
§ 211-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No.
188; 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 224]
B. No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and
approved by this Township and the Authority. If any part of a building
sewer is covered before so being inspected and approved, it shall be
uncovered for inspection at the cost and expense of the owner of the
improved property to be connected to a sewer.
C. Every building sewer of any improved property shall be maintained in a
sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved
property.
D. Every excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury.
Streets, sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of
installation of a building sewer shall be restored, at the cost and
expense of the owner of the improved property being connected, in a
manner satisfactory to this Township.
E. If any person shall fail or refuse, upon receipt of a notice of this
Township or the Authority, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory
condition with respect to a building sewer, within 60 days of receipt of
such notice, this Township or the Authority may refuse to permit such
person to discharge sanitary sewage and industrial wastes into the
sewage collection system until such unsatisfactory condition shall have
been remedied to the satisfaction of this Township and the Authority.
F. This Township reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to
connections with a sewer and the sewage collection system, which
additional rules and regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be and
shall be construed as part of this article.
A. Any person who commits, takes part in, or assists in a violation of this
article commits a summary offense and upon conviction therefor shall
be subject to a fine of $1,000 for a violation of any approved
pretreatment program and of not less than $100 and not more than
$1,000 for any other violation, together with costs of prosecution. Each
day or a portion thereof in which a violation exists shall be considered a
separate violation of this article, and each regulation of this article
which is violated shall be considered a separate violation. In default of
payment of any fine and costs, such person shall be liable to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days. The amount of any
fine imposed by a magisterial district judge or a court shall be in
addition to any other fine or penalty which may be imposed under any
other ordinance of this Township or under any statute including, but not
limited to, the Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law, 35 P.S.
§ 752.1 et seq.
§ 211-4 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 211-5
197:83
§ 211-6. Purpose.
It is declared that enactment of this article is necessary for the protection,
benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of inhabitants of
this Township.
B. In addition to or in lieu of the penalties provided in Subsection A, any
violations of this article may be abated or enforced by proceedings
seeking equitable relief against the violator.
§ 211-5 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 211-6
197:84
ARTICLE II
Sewer Authority's Rights and Privileges
[Adopted 6-7-1971 by Ord. No. 27]
§ 211-7. Grant by Township.
This Township grants to the Authority, its successors and assigns, all
easements, rights-of-way and other rights and privileges necessary and
desirable in, along, over and under streets, roads, lanes, courts, public
squares, alleys, highways and other properties of this Township, together
with free ingress, egress and regress therein and thereto, along with other
persons having interests, rights or privileges therein, for use in connection
with constructing, replacing, repairing, altering, maintaining and operating
the sewage collection system, as the same shall exist, from time to time.
§ 211-8. Rules, regulations and conditions.
The rights and privileges granted to the Authority under § 211-7 shall be
exercised by the Authority under and subject to such reasonable rules,
regulations and conditions as shall be adopted and specified, from time to
time, by this Township; and this Township reserves the right to adopt and
specify, from time to time, such reasonable rules, regulations and conditions
in connection with exercise by the Authority of such rights and privileges.
§ 211-7 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 211-8
197:85

ARTICLE III
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 5-22-1978 by Ord. No. 46]
§ 211-9. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive and retain sewage
whether from residential or commercial uses and it is hereby declared that
the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit and
preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this
municipality.
§ 211-10. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — Supervisors of West Lampeter Township, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of
the sewage at another site. Holding tanks include but are not limited to the
following:
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPALITY — West Lampeter Township, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health, or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
CHEMICAL TOILET — A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a
holding tank.
A.
RETENTION TANK — A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to it by
a water-carrying system.
B.
VAULT PIT PRIVY — A holding tank designed to receive sewage where
water under pressure is not available.
C.
§ 211-9 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 211-11
197:87
§ 211-11. Scope. [Amended 2-8-2010 by Ord. No. 215]
Use of a holding tank may be considered to remedy an existing problem, or
for temporary use prior to the expected installation of public sewage or as
approved by the Authority. Nothing contained herein shall apply to farming
operations, including commercial hog, poultry or dairy operations having
self-contained sewage retention and disposal systems, or to such operations
as may be approved by the appropriate governmental administrative agency
having jurisdiction over such facility.
§ 211-12. Sewage disposal, collection and transportation.
Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the
Township the control and methods of holding tank sewage disposal and the
collection and transportation thereof.
§ 211-13. Rules and regulations.
Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and
regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from time to
time to effect the purposes herein.
§ 211-14. Conformance with other provisions.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Authority shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the Township,
and all applicable laws, and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 211-15. Rates and charges.
The Authority shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rates, assessments, and other charges in the area served by its facilities at
reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable low.
§ 211-16. Exclusivity of collection, transportation and disposal
rights. [Amended 2-8-2010 by Ord. No. 215]
A. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the
direction and control of the Authority unless the Authority shall
approve, in writing, a private contract between an owner and an
authorized person, firm or corporation engaged in the collection and
disposal of sewage, and such disposal shall be made only at such site or
sites as may be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
B. The Authority will receive, review and retain pumping receipts from
permitted holding tanks.
C. The Authority will complete and retain annual inspection reports for
each permitted tank.
§ 211-11 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 211-17
197:88
§ 211-17. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
§ 211-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No.
188]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the Township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
§ 211-19. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation
of § 211-17 above shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by the
municipality or the Authority by either seeking appropriate equitable or
legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Prior to the installation thereof execute an agreement with the
Authority specifically acknowledging owner's duty and agreeing that
owner shall be responsible to have the holding tank pumped out as
required by Township rules and regulations and by applicable rules and
regulations of administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this article or any
ordinance of this Township, the provisions of any applicable law, and
the rules and regulations of the Authority and any administrative
agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. Permit only the Authority or a person approved in writing in advance by
Authority to collect, transport, and dispose of the contents therein.
§ 211-17 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 211-19
197:89

ARTICLE IV
Sewage Management
[Adopted 7-14-2003 by Ord. No. 178]
§ 211-20. Title; findings; purpose.
§ 211-21. Definitions.
A. This article shall be known and may be cited as "An Ordinance
Providing for a Sewage Management Program for West Lampeter
Township."
B. In accordance with municipal codes, the Clean Streams Law (Act of
June 27, 1937, P.L. 1987, No. 394, as amended, 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 to
691.1001), and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act of January
24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., known as "Act
537"), it is the power and the duty of Township of West Lampeter to
provide for adequate sewage treatment facilities and for the protection
of the public health by preventing the discharge of untreated or
inadequately treated sewage. The Official Sewage Facilities Plan for
Township of West Lampeter indicates that it is necessary to formulate
and implement a sewage management program to effectively prevent
and abate water pollution and hazards to the public health caused by
improper treatment and disposal of sewage.
C. The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation, inspection,
maintenance and rehabilitation of on-lot sewage disposal systems; to
further permit intervention in situations which may constitute a public
nuisance or hazard to the public health; and to establish penalties and
appeal procedures necessary for the proper administration of a sewage
management program.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A sewage enforcement officer, duly appointed
employee of the Township, professional engineer, plumbing inspector,
or any other PSMA-certified person who is authorized to function within
specified limits as an agent of West Lampeter Township to administer
or enforce the provisions of this article.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors, Township West Lampeter,
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly or
privately owned, for the collection of sewage from two or more lots, and
the treatment and/or disposal of the sewage on one or more lots or at
any other site.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (DEP).
§ 211-20 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 211-21
197:91
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEMS — A system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposal of sewage
in whole or in part into the approved soil or into any waters of this
commonwealth.
MALFUNCTION — A condition which occurs when an on-lot sewage
disposal system discharges sewage onto the surface of the ground,
into groundwaters of this commonwealth, into surface waters of this
commonwealth, backs up into a building connected to the system or
in any manner causes a nuisance or hazard to the public health or
pollution of ground or surface water or contamination of public or
private drinking water wells. Systems shall be considered to be
malfunctioning if any condition noted above occurs for any length of
time during any period of the year.
OFFICIAL SEWAGE FACILITIES PLAN — Any comprehensive plan for
the provision of adequate sewage disposal systems, adopted by the
Board and approved by the DEP, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act (Act 537), as amended.33
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system for disposal of
domestic sewage involving pretreatment and subsequent disposal of
the clarified sewage into an approved subsurface soil absorption area
or retaining tank. This term includes both individual sewage systems
and community sewage systems.
PERSON — Any individual, association, public or private corporation
for profit or not for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department,
board, bureau of agency of the commonwealth, political subdivision,
municipality, district, authority, or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty or
imposing a fine or imprisonment, the term "person" shall include the
members of an association, partnership or firm and the officers of any
local agency or municipal, public or private corporation for profit or not
for profit.
PSMA — The Pennsylvania Septage Management Association.
PSMA-CERTIFIED INSPECTOR — An individual who has successfully
completed the PSMA Course 101 within the past two years or has in
some way maintained PSMA certification in an approved manner.
QUALIFIED — An individual who has successfully completed the PSMA
Course 101 within the past two years or has in some way maintained
PSMA certification in an approved manner.
REGISTERED — Any corporation (with individual PSMA-certified field
workers) or any PSMA-certified individual who has applied for, and
obtained, recognition by West Lampeter Township and shall be
permitted to conduct field inspections and/or make repairs to on-lot
sewage disposal systems.
33.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 211-21 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 211-21
197:92
§ 211-22. Applicability.
From the effective date of this article, its provisions shall apply in any
portion of the Township identified by the Board as a sewage management
district. Within such area or areas, the provisions of this article shall apply
REHABILITATION — Work done to modify, alter, repair, enlarge or
replace an existing on-lot sewage disposal system.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products
or excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or
animals and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or
inimical to the public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of
water for domestic water supply or for recreation or which constitutes
pollution under the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as
"The Clean Streams Law," as amended.34
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — A person certified by
DEP who is hired or employed by the Township. Such person is
authorized to conduct investigations and inspections, review permit
applications, issue or deny permits and do all other activities as may
be provided for such person in the Sewage Facilities Act,35 the rules
and regulations promulgated thereunder and this article or any other
ordinance adopted by the Township.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT — Any area or areas of the
Township designated in the Official Sewage Facilities Plan adopted by
the Board as an area for which a Sewage Management Program is to be
implemented.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — A comprehensive set of legal
and administrative requirements encompassing the requirements of
this article, the Sewage Facilities Act, the Clean Streams Law,36 the
regulations promulgated there under and such other requirements
adopted by the Board to effectively enforce and administer this article.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or other parcel
of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines. The enumerating of lots shall
include as a lot that portion of the original tract or tracts remaining
after other lots have been subdivided therefrom.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Lampeter, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
B. For the purpose of this article, any term that is not defined herein shall
have that meaning attributed to it under the Sewage Facilities Act37 and
regulations promulgated thereto.
34.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
35.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
36.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq. and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq., respectively.
37.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 211-21 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 211-22
197:93
to all persons owning any property serviced by an on-lot sewage disposal
system and to all persons installing or rehabilitating on-lot sewage disposal
systems.
§ 211-23. Permit requirements.
A. No person shall install, construct or request bid proposals for
construction, or alter an individual sewage system or community
sewage system or construct or request bid proposals for construction or
install or occupy any building or structure for which an individual
sewage system or community sewage system is to be installed without
first obtaining a permit from the SEO which permit shall indicate that
the site and the plans and specifications of such system are in
compliance with the provisions of the Clean Streams Law (35 P.S.
§§ 691.1 to 691.1001) and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (35
P.S. § 750.1 et seq.) and the regulations adopted pursuant to those Acts.
B. No system or structure designed to provide individual or community
sewage disposal shall be covered from view until approval to cover the
same has been given by an SEO. After 72 hours have elapsed, excepting
Sundays and holidays, after which the SEO issuing the permit has
received notification of completion of construction, the applicant may
cover said system or structure unless permission has been specifically
refused by the SEO.
C. Applicants for sewage permits may be required to notify the SEO of the
schedule for construction of the permitted on-lot sewage disposal
system so that inspection(s) in addition to the final inspection required
by the Sewage Facilities Act38 may be scheduled and performed by an
SEO.
D. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for a new building,
which will contain sewage generating facilities until a valid sewage
permit has been obtained from an SEO.
E. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued and no work shall
begin on any alteration or conversion of any existing structure, if said
alteration or conversion will result in the increase or the potential
increase in sewage flows from the structure, until either the structure's
owner receives a permit for alteration or replacement of the existing
sewage disposal system or the structure's owner and the appropriate
officials of the Township receive written notification from an SEO that
such a permit will not be required. The SEO shall determine whether
the proposed alteration or conversion of the structure will result in
increased sewage flows.
F. Sewage permits may be issued only by an SEO hired or employed by the
Township. The DEP shall be notified as to the identity of each SEO so
hired or employed by the Township.
38.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 211-22 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 211-23
197:94
§ 211-24. Registrations and inspections.
G. Where appropriate, the Township will allow the installation of
denitrification systems approved by the DEP. Such systems shall be
permitted and a portion of the review shall be the execution of an
agreement with the Township concerning the operation and
maintenance of the system.
A. Any on-lot sewage disposal system may be inspected by an authorized
agent at any reasonable time as of the effective date of this article.
B. Property owners of on-lot sewage disposal systems shall, on a triennial
basis, register such systems with the Township on forms provided and
pay a fee as established by the Board of Supervisors. Such fees will be
due on the first day of a given calendar year.
C. Such inspection may include a physical tour of the property, the taking
of samples from surface water, wells, other groundwater sources, the
sampling of the contents of the sewage disposal system itself and/or the
introduction of a traceable substance into the interior plumbing of the
structure served to ascertain the path and ultimate destination of
wastewater generated in the structure.
D. An authorized agent shall have the right to enter upon land for the
purposes of inspections described in this section.
E. A schedule of routine inspections may be established to assure the
proper functioning of the sewage systems in the sewage management
district.
F. An SEO shall inspect systems known to be, or alleged to be,
malfunctioning. Should said inspections reveal that the system is
indeed malfunctioning, the authorized agent shall order action to be
taken to correct the malfunction. If total correction cannot be done in
accordance with the regulations of DEP including, but not limited to,
those outlined in Chapter 73 of Title 25 of Pennsylvania Code, or is not
technically or financially feasible in the opinion of the authorized agent
and a representative of DEP, then action by the property owner to
mitigate the malfunction shall be required.
G. If there arises a geographic area where numerous on-lot sewage
disposal systems are malfunctioning, a resolution of these area-wide
problems may necessitate detailed planning and a revision to the
portion of the Sewage Facilities Plan pertaining to areas affected by
such malfunctions. If a DEP-authorized Official Sewage Facilities Plan
Revision has been undertaken, repair or replacement of individual
malfunctioning sewage disposal systems within the area affected by the
revision may be delayed, pending the outcome of the plan revision
process. However, immediate corrective action will be compelled
whenever a malfunction, as determined by Township officials and/or the
DEP, represents a serious public health or environmental threat.
§ 211-23 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 211-25
197:95
§ 211-25. Operation.
§ 211-26. Maintenance.
A. Only normal domestic wastes shall be discharged into any on-lot
sewage disposal system.
B. The following shall not be discharged into the system.
(1) Industrial waste.
(2) Automobile oil and other nondomestic oil.
(3) Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including, but not
limited to, pesticides, disinfectants (excluding household cleaners),
acids, paints, paint thinners, herbicides, gasoline and other
solvents.
(4) Clean surface or ground water, including water from roof or cellar
drains, springs, basement sump pumps and french drains.
A. Each person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal
system, shall have such system inspected by West Lampeter Township
or other authorized agent as sanctioned by the Township once every
three years or as required by the Township. Thereafter such system
shall have the tank pumped at a frequency established by the
Pennsylvania Septage Management Association schedule or whenever
an inspection reveals that the septic tank is filled with solids or scum in
excess of 1/3 of the liquid depth of the tank. Certification from the
pumper/hauler shall be submitted to the Township within the
prescribed six-month and three-year pumping period. That certification
shall include a statement that the physical condition of the tank,
including baffles, was inspected, and the tank and baffles are in
satisfactory condition.
B. The required pumping frequency may be increased at the discretion of
an authorized agent if the septic tank is undersized, if solids buildup in
the tank is above average, if the hydraulic load on the system increases
significantly above average, if a garbage grinder is used in the building,
if the system malfunctions or for other good cause shown. If any person
can prove that such person's septic tank has been pumped within three
years of the six-month anniversary of the effective date of this article,
then that person's initial required pumping may be delayed to conform
to the general three-year frequency requirement except where an
inspection reveals a need for more frequent pumping frequencies.
C. Any person owning a property served by a septic tank shall submit, with
each required pumping service, a written statement, from the pumper/
hauler or from any other qualified individual acceptable to the
Township, that the baffles in the septic tank have been inspected and
found to be in good working order. Any person whose septic tank baffles
§ 211-25 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 211-26
197:96
§ 211-27. System rehabilitation.
are determined to require repair or replacement shall first notify the
Township of the necessary repair.
D. Any person owning or building a structure served by an on-lot sewage
disposal system, which contains an aerobic, or denitrification treatment
tank shall follow the operation and maintenance recommendations of
the equipment manufacturer. A copy of the manufacturer's
recommendations and a copy of the service agreement shall be
submitted to the Township within six months of the effective date of this
article. Thereafter, service receipts shall be submitted to the Township
at the intervals specified by the manufacturer's recommendations. In no
case may the service or pumping intervals for the treatment tanks
exceed those required for septic tanks.
E. Additional maintenance activity may be required as needed including,
but not limited to, cleaning and unclogging of piping, servicing and the
repair of mechanical equipment, leveling of distribution boxes, tanks
and lines, removal of obstructing roots or trees, and the diversion of
surface water away from the disposal area.
A. No person shall operate or maintain an on-lot sewage disposal system
in such a manner that it malfunctions. All liquid wastes, including
kitchen and laundry wastes and water softener backwash, shall be
discharged to a treatment tank. No sewage system shall discharge
untreated or partially treated sewage to the surface of the ground or
into the waters of the commonwealth unless a permit for such
discharge has been obtained from DEP.
B. A written notice of violation shall be issued to any person who is the
owner of any property which is found to be served by a malfunctioning
on-lot sewage disposal system, or which is discharging sewage without
a permit.
C. Remediation of a permitted repair or replacement shall commence
within 30 days of notification by the Township that a malfunction has
been identified, unless seasonal or unique conditions mandate a longer
period, in which case the Township may grant an extension of time.
D. An SEO or other authorized agent shall have the authority to require
the repair of any system found to be unsatisfactory by the following
methods: cleaning, repair or replacement of components of the existing
system, adding capacity or otherwise altering or replacing the system's
treatment tank, expanding the existing disposal areas, replacing the
existing disposal area, replacing a gravity distribution system with a
pressurized system, replacing the system with a holding tank or any
other alternative appropriate for the specific site.
E. In lieu of, or in combination with, the remedies described in Subsection
D above, an SEO may require the installation of water conservation
§ 211-26 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 211-27
197:97
§ 211-28. Work performed by Township; liens.
The Township, upon written notice from an SEO or authorized agent that an
imminent health hazard exists due to failure of property owner to maintain,
repair or replace an on-lot sewage disposal system as provided under the
terms of this article, shall have the authority to perform, or contract to have
performed, the work required by the SEO or authorized agent. The property
owner shall be charged for the work performed and, if necessary, a lien shall
be entered therefor in accordance with law.
§ 211-29. Disposal of septage.
§ 211-30. Administration and enforcement.
equipment and the institution of water conservation practices in
structures served. Water using devices and appliances in the structure
may be required to be retrofitted with water saving appurtenances or
they may be required to be replaced by water conserving devices.
F. In the event that the rehabilitation measures in Subsections A through
E are not feasible or effective, the property owner may be required to
apply for a permit to install an individual spray irrigation treatment
system or to DEP for a single residence treatment and discharge
system. Upon receipt of said permit the owner shall complete
construction of the system within 30 days unless seasonal or unique
conditions mandate a longer period, in which case the Township may
grant an extension of time.
G. Should none of the remedies described in this section be totally
effective in eliminating the malfunction of an existing on-lot sewage
disposal system, the property owner is not absolved of responsibility for
that malfunction. The Township may require whatever action is
necessary to lessen or mitigate the malfunction to the extent necessary.
A. All septage originating within the sewage management district shall be
disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the Solid Waste
Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.) and all
other applicable laws and at sites or facilities approved by DEP.
B. Pumper/hauler of septage operating within the sewage management
district shall operate in a manner consistent with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S.
§§ 6018.101 to 6018.1003) and all other applicable laws.
A. The Township shall fully utilize those powers it possesses through
enabling statutes and ordinances to effect the purposes of this article.
B. The Township shall hire or employ qualified individuals to carry out the
provisions of this article. Those employees shall include an SEO and
may include an administrator and such other persons as may be
§ 211-27 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 211-30
197:98
§ 211-31. Appeals.
§ 211-32. Violations and penalties.
Any person failing to comply with any provision of this article shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $500 and costs, and not more than $5,000
and costs, or in default thereof shall be confined in the county jail for a
period of not more than 90 days. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute
a separate offense.
necessary. The Township may also contract with private qualified
persons or firms as necessary to carry out the provisions of this article.
C. All permits, records, reports, files and other written materials relating
to the installation, operation and maintenance and malfunction of on-lot
sewage disposal systems in the sewage management district shall
become the property of, and be maintained by, the Township. Existing
and future records shall be available for public inspection during
regular business hours at the official office of the Township. All records
pertaining to sewage permits, building permits, occupancy permits and
all other aspects of the sewage management program shall be made
available, upon request, for inspection by representatives of DEP.
D. The Board shall establish all administrative procedures necessary to
properly carry out the provisions of this article.
E. The Board shall establish a fee schedule, and authorize the collection of
fees to cover the cost of the administration of this program.
A. Appeals from final decisions of the Township or any of its authorized
agents under this article shall be made to the Board in writing within 30
days from the date of written notification of the decision in question.
B. The appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Board at its
regularly scheduled meeting, if a written appeal is received at least 14
days prior to that meeting. If the appeal is received within 14 days of
the next regularly scheduled meeting, the appeal shall be heard at the
next regularly scheduled meeting. The Board shall thereafter affirm,
modify, or reverse the aforesaid decision. The hearing may be
postponed for a good cause shown by the appellant or the Board.
Additional evidence may be introduced at the hearing provided that it is
submitted with the written notice of appeal.
C. A decision shall be rendered in writing within 30 days of the date of the
hearing.
§ 211-30 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 211-32
197:99
Chapter 222
SOLICITING AND CANVASSING
§ 222-1. Intent and purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of West Lampeter Township finds and declares
that the provisions of this chapter are enacted to establish regulations
regarding solicitations, peddling, distribution of handbills, and canvassing
within West Lampeter Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
("Township").
§ 222-2. Applicability.
Except as otherwise indicated, all provisions in this chapter shall be applied
to all solicitation, peddling and canvassing within the jurisdictional
boundaries of West Lampeter Township.
§ 222-3. Registration and permit required.
No person shall engage in solicitation, peddling, distribution of handbills,
and/or canvassing for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales or subscriptions
for any goods, wares or merchandise, or for the purposes of soliciting
or obtaining any business or commercial information without first having
registered with and obtained a permit from the Township.
§ 222-4. Application for permit. [Amended 11-13-2017 by Ord. No.
248]
Each person seeking such a permit shall submit a written application with
the Township on a form provided by the Township, containing the following
information:
A. Applicant's name, address, birthdate, telephone number, company
information, vehicle information and such other information as the
Township may deem relevant and require from time to time.
B. The nature of the goods, wares, merchandise or services that are to be
sold or distributed.
C. A current driver's license (with photo) and proof of registration for
vehicle being used.
D. Applicants are required to complete and submit a criminal history
check through the PATCH system. Applicant must print a copy of their
PATCH criminal record check whether they have a criminal record or
not. The applicant shall pay the cost directly to the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania through the PATCH website.
E. Fees for said solicitation and canvassing permit will be established by
Resolution of the Board of Supervisors, and may change from time to
time. Upon payment of the prescribed fee, the Police Department, if it
§ 211-32 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 222-4
197:100
§ 222-5. Identification. [Amended 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 248]
No person shall solicit, peddle or canvass within the Township without
possessing, in a manner prescribed by the Township, a current, valid copy
of the official permit issued by the Township, together with such other
identification as may be required by Township. Such person shall solicit,
peddle or canvass only the items, commodities, services or subscriptions
identified in the registration application. Each person conducting such
activity shall obtain a permit. Permits are nontransferable.
§ 222-6. Exemptions.
§ 222-7. Hours of operation.
Solicitation and canvassing shall only occur within the Township during the
following hours:
finds the application is in order, shall issue a permit, which shall be
valid for not more than 30 days.
F. Following completion of said permit application, the Police Department
will have two business days to investigate the applicant and to grant or
deny the permit.
A. The following are exempt from the requirement to secure a permit
when conducting activities consistent with their charter and under the
protection of the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United
States.
(1) Officers or employees of the Township, county, state or federal
government, or any subdivision thereof, when on official business;
(2) Charitable, religious or nonprofit organizations or corporations
which have received tax exempt status under 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3),
other similar civic, charitable or nonprofit organization; and
(3) Boys or girls under 18 years of age who take orders for and deliver
newspapers, greeting cards, candy, cookies and other fund-raising
items for the benefit of the Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, local schools,
churches or similar not-for-profit organizations. [Amended
11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 248]
(4) Representatives of political organizations.
B. Activities and arrangements having prior consent of the occupant are
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
A. Monday to Friday from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
B. Saturday from 12:00 noon to 5:00 p.m. [Amended 11-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 248]
§ 222-4 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 222-7
197:101
§ 222-8. Compliance with "no soliciting" signs.
No solicitor, peddler or canvasser shall enter upon any residence within
the Township that is posted with signage providing that such contact,
solicitation or canvassing is not desired by the resident thereof.
§ 222-9. Enforcement.
The West Lampeter Township Police shall be charged with the responsibility
of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
§ 222-10. Violations and penalties.
This chapter shall be enforced as a summary offense under the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person or persons, corporation,
partnership or other entity whatsoever violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction before a District Judge, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $600 per violation, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such costs and prosecution,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; provided, however, that
if the District Judge determines that the defendant is without the financial
means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such
defendant shall be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and
over such periods of time as the District Judge deems to be just.
Chapter 224
SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Lancaster Area Refuse Authority — See Ch. 9,
Art. I.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 197.
Disposal of sewage — See Ch. 211.
C. No soliciting on Sundays or federal holidays. [Added 11-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 248]
§ 222-7 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 222-10
197:102
ARTICLE I
Solid Waste Disposal
[Adopted 1-19-1987 by Ord. No. 88]
§ 224-1. Definitions.
A. The following terms shall have the followings meanings in this article:
COUNTY — The County of Lancaster.
EXISTING CONTRACT — Any agreement or contract fully executed
prior to the effective date of this article for the collection, disposal or
transportation of municipal waste generated within this municipality.
FACILITY — The waste to energy incinerator to be constructed by or on
behalf of LCSWMA pursuant to the plan.
FULL SYSTEM OPERATION or FULLY OPERATIONAL — That date
which is 60 days from the date upon which the county and other
municipalities representing in the aggregate not less than 60% of the
population of the county, as determined by the 1980 Decennial Census
of the United States, execute the Intermunicipal Agreement and enact
waste flow ordinances.
LCSWMA — The Lancaster County Solid Waste Management Authority,
its assigns, its successors in interest, and its predecessor in interest,
the Lancaster Area Refuse Authority.39
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of West Lampeter, a township of the
second class located with the County of Lancaster, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
cooperative enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal institution or
agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other governmental
agency or any other entity or any group of such persons which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provisions
of this article prescribing a fine, penalty, imprisonment or denial or
grant of any license, the term "person" shall include the officers and
directors of a corporation or other legal entity having officers and
directors.
PLAN — The Municipal Waste Management Plan for the county adopted
by the county or municipalities therein and approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
POINT OF ENTRY INTO THE SYSTEM — Any delivery site within the
system designated by LCSWMA for delivery of regulated municipal
waste.
39.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 9, Authorities, Municipal, Art. I, Lancaster Area Refuse
Authority.
§ 224-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 224-1
197:103
§ 224-2. Operation by licensed collectors.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse
of metals, glass, paper, yard waste and other materials which would
otherwise become municipal waste.
REGULATED MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial
lunchroom or office waste, and other material including solid or
semisolid material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial, or institutional establishments and from community
activities, and any other solid waste which is within the definition
"municipal waste" set forth in Section 103 of the Pennsylvania Solid
Waste Management Act, Act of July 2, 1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, 35 P.S.
§ 6018.103 (Purdon Supp. 1985), and which LCSWMA, the county, or
any contractor ("contractor") selected by the county or LCSWMA to
construct and/or operate a resource recovery facility or facilities to be
located within the municipal boundaries of the county by ordinance
or regulation is willing to accept at the facility, but excluding a) any
liquid waste or sludge, b) any waste which is defined by existing or
future federal or state law or regulation as hazardous waste or residual
waste, c) infectious waste, pathological waste, or other waste for which
treatment or handling requirements different from those normally
applicable to municipal waste apply, d) polychlorinated biphenyls, e)
any waste which may be marketable and which is intentionally
segregated for purposes of recycling, and f) materials specifically
excluded under applicable county or LCSWMA ordinances, rules or
regulations.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The segregation and collection, prior to
delivery to a point of entry into the system, of materials for the sole
purpose of recycling.
SYSTEM — The overall solid waste management and disposal system
and every aspect thereof owned or operated by or on behalf of
LCSWMA, including, without limitation, equipment, transfer stations,
resource recovery facilities, and landfills, owned or operated, or to be
acquired, constructed or operated by LCSWMA or any agent, designee
or contractor thereof in implementation of the plan.
TRANSFER FACILITY — Any solid waste facility which is now or
hereafter may be established by LCSWMA or the county for the purpose
of accepting solid waste for processing and economical consolidation
for subsequent delivery to the facility or other solid waste disposal site.
B. All other words and phrases shall have the same meanings as set forth
in the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980,
P.L. 380, No. 97, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. (Purdon Supp. 1985), as it
may hereinafter be amended or supplemented by legislation regarding
municipal waste planning.
A. Licensing. No person who is not duly licensed by LCSWMA to deliver
waste to the county system may collect or transport municipal waste
§ 224-1 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 224-2
197:104
§ 224-3. Disposal at designated solid waste processing or disposal
facility.
§ 224-4. Regulations.
located or generated within this municipality. This prohibition shall
become effective 120 days from the effective date of this section of this
article.
B. Compliance with rules, regulations and ordinances. In carrying on
activities related to solid waste collection or transportation within this
municipality, all municipal waste collectors and all municipal waste
transporters shall comply with all rules, regulations and ordinances
pertaining to the collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste
as may be hereinafter enacted by this municipality or by the county
pursuant to a parallel County Waste Flow Ordinance and all rules and
regulations enacted by LCSWMA pursuant to authority given it under
53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5617, as hereafter amended.40
C. Administration. Licenses hereunder shall be issued, revoked and
administered by LCSWMA.
A. Delivery to LCSWMA/county sites. All municipal waste collectors and
transporters shall deliver and dispose of all regulated municipal waste
collected or generated within the municipality at a transfer station or
disposal facility owned and operated by or on behalf of LCSWMA,
subject to such reasonable regulations for the operation thereof as may
be established by the county or LCSWMA.
B. Disposal at other sites. Disposal of regulated municipal waste collected
or generated within the municipality may occur at other sites only as
permitted by rule, regulation, ordinance or order duly issued by the
county or by the written agreement of the county, LCSWMA, and the
municipality. Disposal of regulated municipal waste at an existing
facility from sources reflected on the notice to the municipality, the
county, and LCSWMA as provided in § 224-6C of this article shall be
permitted.
C. Recycling. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit source
separation or recycling or to affect any sites at which source separation
or recycling may take place.
A. Compliance with county and LCSWMA regulations. The collection,
transportation and disposal of municipal waste present or generated
within the municipality shall be subject to such further reasonable rules
and regulations as may from time to time be promulgated by the county
pursuant to its Waste Flow Ordinance and such rules and regulations as
may be adopted by LCSWMA pursuant to 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5617, as
hereafter amended, including, without limitation, regulations
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 224-2 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 224-4
197:105
§ 224-5. Existing contracts.
§ 224-6. New or expanded private dumps, transfer stations and
landfills prohibited; continuation of existing facilities.
governing applications and standards for licensing, fees to be charged
for such licensing, the terms of licenses, procedures, recordkeeping,
transportation routes and other matters.41
B. County authorization to adopt regulations. Rules and regulations
adopted by the county pursuant to the parallel County Waste Flow
Ordinance to be adopted pursuant to the intermunicipal agreement
described in § 224-11 hereof shall be deemed rules and regulations
adopted under this article and the county is hereby authorized to adopt
such rules and regulations.
C. Consistency of regulations with ordinance and other laws. No rules or
regulations adopted pursuant to this article shall be contrary to or less
stringent than the provisions of this article, the plan, the County Waste
Flow Ordinance, the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act42 or
regulations adopted thereunder, or such other laws, regulations or
requirements as may be enacted by the United States of America, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or the Pennsylvania Environmental Quality
Board governing municipal waste planning, collection, storage,
transportation, processing or disposal.
A. Noninterference with existing contracts. Nothing contained in this
article shall be construed to interfere with or in any way modify the
provisions of any existing contract in force in the municipality on the
effective date of this article.
B. New contracts and renewals of existing contracts. No renewal of any
existing contract upon the expiration of the original term thereof and no
new contract for municipal waste collection, transportation, processing
or disposal shall be entered into after the effective date of this article,
unless such renewal or such contract shall conform to the requirements
of this article, the County Waste Flow Ordinance, rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder, and the terms of licenses issued thereunder.
A. Prohibition of private waste processing and disposal facilities. No
person other than LCSWMA, the United States of America, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a county, a municipality, an Authority
created by the foregoing, or a person acting on behalf of the foregoing
shall use or permit to be used any property owned or occupied by that
person within the municipality as a municipal waste processing or
disposal facility, either for municipal waste generated within the
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
42.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 224-4 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 224-6
197:106
§ 224-7. Unlawful activities; nuisance.
municipality or elsewhere, without the express written approval of the
municipality, the county and LARA.
B. Recycling. The prohibition set forth in § 224-6A of this article shall not
interfere with the operation of any program for recycling.
C. Existing facilities. The prohibition set forth in § 224-6A of this article
shall not interfere with the operation of any privately or publicly owned
solid waste facility which has been issued a solid waste permit before
the effective date of this article, provided:
(1) The owner or operator of the facility provides written notice to the
county and the municipality of the facility permit number, address,
ownership and existing sources of waste no later than 60 days after
the effective date of this article;
(2) The facility accepts regulated municipal waste from no sources
within the county other than those then authorized by the facility's
solid waste permit and then being accepted, as reflected on the
notice provided the county and municipality pursuant to this
section; and
(3) The facility shall not be expanded in capacity, with the exception of
facilities owned or operated by or on behalf of another county,
which facilities may expand if such expansion is consistent with a
DEP-approved municipal waste management plan.
(4) Notices under this section shall be submitted to the Secretary of
the Board of Supervisors on behalf of the municipality. The county
may by resolution designate LCSWMA or another authority or
agency as the entity which will receive notice pursuant to this
section.
A. Unlawful conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Accumulate or cause to be accumulated municipal waste in an
amount greater than 20 tons, other than waste which has been
source-separated for the purpose of recycling;
(2) Violate, cause or assist in the violation of any provision of this
article, any rule, regulation or order promulgated hereunder, or
any rule, regulation or order promulgated by LCSWMA or the
county consistent with this article;
(3) Process, treat, transfer, or dispose of or cause to be processed,
treated, transferred or disposed regulated municipal waste
generated within the municipality at any solid waste facility other
than a solid waste facility owned or operated by or on behalf of the
county or LCSWMA or at an existing solid waste facility as
permitted by § 224-6C of this article, without the express written
§ 224-6 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 224-7
197:107
§ 224-8. Violations and penalties.44
Any person who engages in unlawful conduct as defined in this article
shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees,
incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment
shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by
the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 224-9. Revocation of license.
Upon finding that any person has engaged in unlawful conduct as defined in
this article:
§ 224-10. Injunctions; concurrent remedies.
consent of any municipality within which the facility is located, the
county, and LCSWMA;
(4) Collect or transport municipal waste present or generated within
the county without a valid license for disposal issued by LCSWMA;
(5) Hinder, obstruct, prevent or interfere with the municipality, the
county, LCSWMA or their personnel in the performance of any duty
under this article or in the enforcement of this article;
(6) Act in a manner that is contrary to Pennsylvania Solid Waste
Management Act,43 regulations promulgated thereunder, the plan,
this article, the county ordinance, rules or regulations promulgated
thereunder, or the terms of licenses issued thereunder.
B. Public nuisance. Any unlawful conduct set forth in Subsection A hereof
shall constitute a public nuisance.
A. LCSWMA, the municipality, the county may revoke any license issued
by LCSWMA to that person in accordance with § 224-2 of this article;
and
B. LCSWMA may deny any subsequent application by that person for a
license pursuant to § 224-2 hereof.
A. Restraining violations. In addition to any other remedy provided in this
article, the municipality, the county or LCSWMA may institute a suit in
43.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 224-7 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 224-10
197:108
§ 224-11. Intermunicipal agreement.
equity where unlawful conduct or public nuisance exists as defined
in this article for an injunction to restrain a violation of this article
or rules, regulations, orders or the terms of licenses promulgated or
issued pursuant to this article. In addition to an injunction, the court
may impose penalties as authorized by § 224-8 hereof and revoke any
licenses as authorized by § 224-9 hereof.
B. Concurrent remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this
article shall be deemed concurrent. The existence or exercise of any
remedy shall not prevent the municipality, the county or LCSWMA from
exercising any other remedy provided by this article or otherwise
provided at law or equity.
A. Entry into Intermunicipal Agreement. In order to implement the intent
and terms of this article, the municipality, pursuant to the authority of
the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.,
and Article IX, Section 5, of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, hereby enters into the intermunicipal joint cooperation
agreement between this municipality, the county, and other
municipalities within the County of Lancaster, which is attached hereto
as Exhibit A and incorporated herein,45 together with such changes
consistent with this article, if any, as may be approved by the officials of
the parties executing the same, such execution to be conclusive
evidence of such approval ("intermunicipal agreement").46
B. Terms and implementation of intermunicipal agreement. As more fully
set forth in the intermunicipal agreement and this article:
(1) Conditions and terms of agreement. In the agreement:
(a) The county agrees:
[1] To arrange for the provision of municipal waste disposal
facilities for the economical and environmentally sound
disposal of municipal waste generated within the
participating municipalities,
[2] To coordinate recycling activities and marketing, and
[3] To assure continuing municipal waste planning for the
county and the participating municipalities by entering
into an agreement with LCSWMA;
(b) The county and participating municipalities representing, in
the aggregate, not less than 60% of the population of the
county each agree to enact a Waste Flow Ordinance in a form
substantially similar to this article and to assure otherwise that
45.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 224-10 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 224-11
197:109
all acceptable municipal solid waste be delivered to the county
system;
(c) The county agrees:
[1] To enact rules and regulations,
[2] To cause LCSWMA to enact additional rules and
regulations and to administer a licensing program, and
[3] To enforce this article and the parallel Municipal and
County Waste Flow Ordinances;
(d) The county agrees to assure reasonable solid waste disposal
fees for residents of the participating municipalities; and
(e) The parties agree to cooperate in the joint enforcement of the
intermunicipal agreement and all ordinances enacted pursuant
to the intermunicipal agreement and this municipality thereby
agrees cooperatively to exercise, to delegate to the county, and
to allow delegation of such powers, duties and responsibilities
as set forth in the intermunicipal agreement.
(2) Duration of term of the agreement. The term of the Intermunicipal
Agreement shall commence upon the date on which the county and
other municipalities representing at least 60% of the population of
the county have executed the intermunicipal agreement and shall
terminate 40 years following that date, unless terminated earlier
for cause.
(3) Purpose and objectives of agreement. The purpose of the
intermunicipal agreement is to provide a mechanism i) to finance,
to construct and to operate a municipal waste disposal system to
serve this municipality and other municipalities within the county,
ii) to administer a countywide recycling program, and iii) to provide
continuing municipal waste planning, as more fully set forth in the
recitals to the intermunicipal agreement and this article.
(4) Manner and extent of financing the agreement. Enforcement of this
article shall be financed by the county's general revenues, except
insofar as the municipality elects to enforce this article;
administration of this article the recycling program and planning
shall be financed by LCSWMA with revenues received from
operation of the county system; and construction and operation of
the county system shall be financed by debt instruments issued by
LCSWMA and operating revenues.
(5) Organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement.
LCSWMA shall be formed from LARA by amendment of LARA's
Articles of Incorporation; LCSWMA shall a) construct and operate
or arrange for the construction and operation of the county system
and b) administer and enforce this article and parallel ordinances
§ 224-11 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 224-11
197:110
§ 224-12. County/LCSWMA operations and charges.
The municipality has been advised by the county that the plan proposes
to provide for solid waste processing and disposal facilities which will be
operated efficiently and economically by LCSWMA and in accordance with
all applicable laws and regulations, and also that LCSWMA will impose
reasonable charges, which will be uniform among all classes of the users
of the plant or plants from participating municipalities which execute the
intermunicipal agreement within 90 days of the date upon which DEP
grants preliminary approval to the plan. Charges may differ for different
categories of waste and for different points of entry into the system.
§ 224-13. Construal of provisions.
The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally construed, so as
best to achieve and to effectuate the goals and purposes hereof. This article
shall be construed in pari materia with the Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No.
97, known as the "Solid Waste Management Act," 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 224-14. When effective.
Sections 224-5 and 224-11 of this article shall become effective
immediately, as provided by law, and the remainder of this article shall
become effective on the date upon which the system becomes fully
operational.
adopted by the county and other municipalities pursuant to the
intermunicipal agreement; and the county and the municipality
shall enforce said waste flow ordinances with assistance from
LCSWMA.
(6) Management and acquisition of property. All property within the
county system shall be acquired, managed and disposed of by
LCSWMA, in accordance with its separate agreement with the
county and the powers and duties imposed upon LCSWMA by law.
C. Execution. Appropriate officers of the municipality are authorized and
directed to execute the intermunicipal agreement on behalf of the
municipality.
§ 224-11 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 224-14
197:111

ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 7-15-1991 by Ord. No. 115]
§ 224-15. Definitions.
Any capitalized term, if not defined in this article, shall have the meaning
as from time to time set forth in the LCSWMA Rules and Regulations. In
addition, as used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ACT 97 — The Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380,
No. 97, as now or hereafter amended.47
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act, Act of July 28, 1988, P.L. 528, No. 101, as now or hereafter amended.48
ALUMINUM — All food and beverage cans made of the light in weight,
ductile and malleable metallic substance or element commonly known as
"aluminum." This description excludes aluminum foil, trays, plates, and
miscellaneous aluminum products.
BULK CONTAINER — A refuse container not intended to be moved or, if
moved, to be transported by vehicle for the purpose of disposal.
COMMENCEMENT DATE — October 1, 1991, the date upon which the
Municipality's mandatory Recycling program and the Contract collection
services begin.
COMMINGLED — Recyclable Materials which have been segregated from
Regulated Municipal Waste but which have not been separated into
different types of Recyclable Materials, and which have been placed in a
Recycling Container for the purposes of collection.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals, including but not limited to, fairs, bazaars, socials,
picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more individuals
per day.
CONTRACT — The agreement between the Municipality and the Contractor
under which collection services are to be provided to specified Residential
Units for Contract Waste and Recyclable Materials.
CONTRACTOR — The Person providing Contract Waste and Recyclable
Materials collection services under the Contract.
CONTRACT WASTE — Those portions of Regulated Municipal Waste which
are to be collected and disposed of under the Contract. Contract Waste
consists exclusively of Refuse and Oversized Refuse Items.
CORRUGATED PAPER (CORRUGATED CARDBOARD) — Layered paper or
cardboard in which one or more layers is pressed into parallel grooves
47.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
48.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 224-15 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 224-15
197:113
or ridges and which is normally used for wrapping, packing, shipping
and/or storage of dry materials (e.g., packing boxes, appliance boxes).
Specifically excluded from this definition are pressboard and cardboard
commonly known as "asian board" or "asian cardboard," as well as any
corrugated cardboard containing a shiny finished side or sides or which is
contaminated with food or other material.[Added 3-11-2002 by Ord. No.
166]
CURBSIDE — The correct location for the placement of Refuse Containers
and Recycling Containers for the purpose of collection by the Contractor,
which shall be a) adjacent to the Residential Unit, and b) no more than five
feet from the public street used by collection vehicles.
CUSTOMER — There are two types of customers in the Municipality's
program for the collection of Regulated Municipal Waste and Designated
Recyclable Materials. The two types are defined as follows:
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those Source-Separated
Recyclable Materials designated in § 224-22 of this article.
EXISTING CONTRACT — Any contract for the storage, collection,
transportation, processing, or disposal of Regulated Municipal Waste or
Recyclable Materials generated or located within the Municipality which
was legally entered into prior to the effective date of this article, and when
entered into was legally enforceable.
EXTRA REFUSE CONTAINERS — Refuse Containers which are in excess of
the three Refuse Container per Collection Site limit under the contract.
EXTRA SERVICE TAG — A label which must be affixed to Tires, White
Goods, Oversized Refuse Items, Yard Waste, and Extra Refuse Containers in
order for such items to be collected by the Contractor.
FACILITY — Any specific site or Person designated by LCSWMA as the
specific place or site or Person to which Solid Waste or Source-Separated
Recyclable Materials, or any portion of Solid Waste or Source-Separated
Recyclable Materials, must or may be delivered; or in the absence of a
specific site or Person being designated by LCSWMA, any approved site for
the delivery of any category of Solid Waste or Source-Separated Recyclable
Materials. A site will be deemed an approved site for the purposes of this
definition so long as that site a) is in possession of all applicable local, state
and federal permits, b) is operating in accordance with all applicable local,
state and federal laws and regulations, and c) provides LCSWMA with such
data and information as LCSWMA requests, including, without limitation, 1)
the quantity, type, source, and date of receipt of Solid Waste and Source-
MUNICIPAL CUSTOMER — A Residential Unit that elects to receive
the collection services for Contract Waste and Designated Recyclable
Materials under the Contract.
A.
OTHER CUSTOMER — A Residential Unit that elects not to receive the
collection services under the Contract and that independently contracts
with a Licensed Hauler for the collection of Regulated Municipal Waste
and Designated Recyclable Materials.
B.
§ 224-15 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 224-15
197:114
Separated Recyclable Materials that were generated in Lancaster County
and delivered to the site, 2) proof that the site is in compliance with a)
and b) above, and 3) in the case of Source-Separated Recyclable Materials,
proof that all such materials received at the site are, in fact, Recycled.
GLASS, CLEAR — Clear Glass consists only of clear food and beverage
containers made of glass, of one gallon or less capacity, and comprised
of the hard, brittle and transparent or partially transparent substance
produced by fusion of silica and silicates or sand containing soda and lime
and/or other chemicals and substances usually included in the manufacture
of glass.
GLASS, COLORED — Colored Glass consists only of green or brown food
and beverage containers made of glass, of one gallon or less capacity,
and comprised of the hard, brittle and transparent or partially transparent
substance produced by fusion of silica and silicates or sand containing soda
and lime and/or other chemicals and substances usually included in the
manufacture of glass.
HOUSEHOLD BATTERIES — Cell or cells providing electrical current to
small appliances such as electronic units, toys, watches and hearing
aids.[Added 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 166]
IN-HOME MEDICAL WASTE — Items disposed of in accordance with the
Township's Policies and Procedures which may pose a potential health and/
or safety hazard to those handling the refuse. Such items include, but are
not limited to, sharp objects such as needles, syringes and lancets, soiled
bandages, disposable sheets and medical gloves.[Added 3-11-2002 by
Ord. No. 166]
LCSWMA — Lancaster County Solid Waste Management Authority, a
municipal authority organized and existing under the Municipality
Authorities Act, as amended (53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.). 49
LCSWMA FACILITY — Any Facility owned or operated by or on behalf of
LCSWMA.
LICENSED HAULER — A Person who is in possession of all pertinent
permits and licenses which may be required by the Municipality and
LCSWMA, for the collection, transportation, storage or disposal of Solid
Waste or Recyclable Materials.
MULTIFAMILY UNIT — A property with four or more Residential Units,
including without limitation, apartment complexes, condominium
complexes, retirement homes, and mobile home parks, excluding farms.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of West Lampeter, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPALITY'S POLICIES AND PROCEDURES — The rules and
regulations adopted and revised from time to time by the Municipality
which govern and pertain to the Municipality's Recycling program and the
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 224-15 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 224-15
197:115
collection, storage or transportation of Regulated Municipal Waste with the
Municipality.
NEWSPRINT — Paper which has been used for the production of daily,
weekend and special edition publications and advertisements (i.e.,
newspaper, magazines and telephone books).[Amended 3-11-2002 by
Ord. No. 166]
NONRESIDENTIAL UNITS — All commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments, all Community Activities and all farms, excluding
Residential Units and Multifamily Units.
OVERSIZED REFUSE ITEMS — Refuse which will not fit into Refuse
Containers but which is not Bulky Waste, including small furniture, carpet,
portable televisions and the like, but excluding Tires and White Goods.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
governmental entity or agency, or any other legal entity whatsoever which
is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PLASTICS — Recyclable plastics are identified on the bottom of the
container and consist of two types of containers, namely: No. 1 PETE (such
as soda bottles) and No. 2 HDPE (such as milk, spring water, and detergent
bottles).[Added 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 166]
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Any material which would be Regulated
Municipal Waste but for Source Separation and which will be processed into
raw materials or products which are beneficially reused.
RECYCLING — The separation, collection, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed of or processed as Waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of Solid Waste and creation and recovery of
reusable materials or energy.
RECYCLING CONTAINER — For Residential Units, the term "Recycling
container" shall refer to the container supplied by the Municipality. For
Multifamily Units and Nonresidential Units, the term "Recycling Container"
shall refer to a receptacle which is constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass
and has handles of adequate strength for lifting.
REFUSE — All Regulated Municipal Waste except the following categories
of solid waste:
A. Construction/Demolition Waste.
B. Bulky Waste.
C. Putrescible Waste.
D. Uncompactible Waste.
E. Special Handling Waste.
F. Household Hazardous Waste.
§ 224-15 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 224-15
197:116
REFUSE CONTAINER —
REGULATED MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any Solid Waste generated or
collected within the Municipality which is garbage, refuse, industrial
lunchroom or office waste and other material, including solid, liquid,
semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of
residential, municipal, commercial, or institutional establishments and from
community activities and any Sludge which is not Residual or Hazardous
Waste from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment
plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term
does not include Designated Recyclable Materials.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Any occupied single-family detached, semidetached,
or townhouse dwelling, or an occupied dwelling unit within a multifamily
building containing three or fewer dwelling units, excluding farms. When
used in this article or the Municipality's Policies and Procedures, the term
"Residential Unit" shall also refer to any Multifamily Unit or Nonresidential
Unit that requests and receives approval from the Municipality to use the
collection services provided under the Contract.
SCAVENGING — The uncontrolled or unauthorized removal of Recyclable
Materials from the Curbside.
SOURCE-SEPARATE OR SOURCE SEPARATION — The process of
separating, or the separation of, Recyclable Materials from other Solid
Waste at the location where generated for the purpose of Recycling.
STEEL AND BIMETALLIC CANS — The ferrous metal food or beverage
containers commonly known as "tin cans."
YARD WASTE — All garden residues, leaves, grass clippings and sod.
G. Source-Separated Recyclable Materials.
H. Unacceptable Waste.
I. Oversized Refuse Items.
A receptacle which is:
Constructed of plastic, metal, or fiberglass, having handles of
adequate strength for lifting, and having a tight-fitting lid capable
of preventing entrance into the container by vectors; or
(1)
A polyethylene bag which is specifically designed for storage and
collection, is protected against animal damage and overloading so
as to prevent littering or attraction of insects or rodents, and has a
holding strength capable of withstanding normal stresses until it is
collected.
(2)
A.
With respect to Residential Units, the weight of a Refuse Container and
its contents shall not exceed 30 pounds nor shall its capacity exceed 32
gallons.
B.
§ 224-15 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 224-16
197:117
§ 224-16. Mandatory recycling.
All Persons within the Municipality shall Source-Separate Designated
Recyclable Materials.
§ 224-17. Collection, transportation and disposal. [Amended
30-11-2002 by Ord. No. 166]
§ 224-18. Placement for collection.
§ 224-19. Residential units.
A. Each person who owns or occupies a Residential Unit, Multifamily Unit
or Nonresidential Unit within the Municipality shall ensure that
Regulated Municipal Waste and Designated Recyclable Materials
generated at Residential Units, Multifamily Residential Units or
Nonresidential Units are Source-Separated, properly contained, placed
and collected, transported and disposed of in accordance with this
article, the Municipality's Policies and Procedures and the LCSWMA
Rules and Regulations.
B. Each person who owns or occupies a Residential Unit, Multifamily Unit
or Nonresidential Unit within the Municipality shall not burn or permit
the burning of any recyclable materials (including leaves).
A. Persons may not place containers along streets for pickup sooner than
3:00 p.m. on the day before the scheduled pickup unless the container
is a Bulk Container.
B. Persons shall not leave Refuse and Recycling Containers at the place of
collection longer than 12 hours after the scheduled day of collection
unless the container is a Bulk Container.
A. Election. Each Residential Unit will have one opportunity prior to the
Commencement Date to elect whether to receive collection services
under the Contract. Residential Units electing to receive such services
shall be governed by Subsection B below. Residential Units electing not
to receive such services shall be governed by Subsection C below.
B. Residential units electing to receive contract services (municipal
customers). Collection services for Contract Waste and Designated
Recyclable Materials shall be provided to Municipal Customers by the
Contractor. Municipal Customers shall not during the term of the
Contract enter into any independent agreements with any haulers for
the collection of Contract Waste or Designated Recyclable Materials.
Municipal Customers shall prepare Designated Recyclable Materials
and Contract Waste for collection in accordance with the Municipality's
Policies and Procedures. With respect to Regulated Municipal Waste
which is not Contract Waste, Municipal Customers shall provide proper
collection, transportation and disposal by utilizing a Licensed Hauler to
collect and transport such materials to a Facility.
§ 224-16 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 224-19
197:118
§ 224-20. Multifamily units and nonresidential units.
§ 224-21. Frequency of collection.
C. Residential units electing not to receive contract services (other
customers). Other Customers shall provide proper collection,
transportation, and disposal of Regulated Municipal waste and
Designated Recyclable Materials generated at such Residential Units
by utilizing a Licensed Hauler to collect and transport such materials to
a Facility.
A. Each Person who owns or occupies a Nonresidential Unit or Multifamily
Unit shall provide proper collection, transportation, and disposal for
Regulated Municipal Waste and Designated Recyclable Materials by
utilizing a Licensed Hauler to collect and transport such materials to a
Facility.
B. With respect to Contract Waste and Designated Recyclable Materials, a
Person who owns or occupies a Multifamily Unit or Nonresidential Unit
may request Municipality approval to receive the services under the
Contract. Each Person who owns or occupies a Multifamily Unit or
Nonresidential Unit approved to receive services under the Contract
shall:
(1) Comply with the Municipality's Policies and Procedures established
for Residential Units that are Municipal Customers; and
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 224-22B and C of this article,
shall Source-Separate the Recyclable Materials designated in
§ 224-22A.
C. Each Person who owns a Multifamily Unit or Nonresidential Unit that
does not receive services under the Contract shall;
(1) Provide Recycling Containers at easily accessible locations for
Source Separation of Designated Recyclable Materials;
(2) Provide written instructions to all Persons occupying each
Multifamily Unit and Nonresidential Unit to ensure that all
Designated Recyclable Materials are Source-Separated; and
(3) Provide collection and transportation of Source-Separated
Designated Recyclable Materials at a frequency of not less than
once per month.
A. Regulated Municipal Waste and Designated Recyclable Materials shall
be collected from Residential Units on the same day a minimum of once
weekly through the year.
B. Regulated Municipal Waste and Designated Recyclable Materials shall
be collected from Multifamily Units and Nonresidential Units using
Bulk Containers as often as necessary, but at least once per month.
§ 224-19 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 224-21
197:119
§ 224-22. Designated recyclable materials.
C. Hotels, restaurants, institutions and commercial establishments shall
have daily collection in the event the refuse contains any substantial
amount of decomposable material.
A. Each Person who owns or occupies a Residential Unit shall Source-
Separate the following Recyclable Materials:
(1) Clear Glass.
(2) Colored Glass.
(3) Aluminum.
(4) Steel and Bimetallic Cans.
(5) Newsprint.
(6) Yard Waste.
(7) Tires.
(8) White Goods.
(9) Plastics [Added 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 166]
B. Each Person who owns or occupies a Multifamily Unit shall Source-
Separate the following Recyclable Materials:
(1) Clear Glass.
(2) Colored Glass.
(3) Aluminum.
(4) Steel and Bimetallic Cans.
(5) Yard Waste.
(6) Tires.
(7) White Goods.
(8) Plastics. [Added 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 166]
(9) Newsprint. [Added 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 166]
C. Each Person who owns or occupies a Nonresidential Unit shall Source-
Separate the following Recyclable Materials:
(1) Clear Glass.
(2) Colored Glass.
(3) Aluminum.
§ 224-21 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 224-22
197:120
§ 224-23. Approved haulers.
(4) Steel and Bimetallic Cans.
(5) Yard Waste.
(6) High-Grade Office Paper.
(7) Corrugated Cardboard.
(8) Tires.
(9) White Goods.
(10) Plastics. [Added 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 166]
A. With respect to Contract Waste and Designated Recyclable Materials
generated by Municipal Customers, no Person other than the
Contractor shall collect, transport, store, process, or dispose of such
waste. With respect to Regulated Municipal Waste other than Contract
Waste which is generated by Municipal Customers, and Regulated
Municipal Waste or Designated Recyclable Materials which are
generated by Other Customers, Multifamily Units, or Nonresidential
Units, no Person other than a Licensed Hauler shall collect, transport,
store, process, or dispose of such waste.
B. Each Licensed Hauler that collects or transports Regulated Municipal
Waste or Designated Recyclable Materials generated in any Residential
Unit, Nonresidential Unit or Multifamily Unit shall:
(1) For Residential Units submit to the Municipality, on forms provided
by the Municipality, reports concerning the sources, types, weight,
etc., of materials collected; and
(2) Comply with the LCSWMA Rules and Regulations concerning the
use of LCSWMA Manifests; and
(3) Comply with the Municipality's Residential Waste Management
Policies and Procedures, and with the Licensed Hauler Licensing
Requirements.
C. Each Licensed Hauler who provides regularly scheduled service for the
collection of Regulated Municipal Waste from any Other Customer shall
also collect Designated Recyclable Materials from such Other
Customer. Each such Licensed Hauler shall establish, and notify each
Other Customers, of procedures for the Source Separation, segregation
and packaging of Regulated Municipal Waste and Designated
Recyclable Materials. Such procedures shall permit commingling of all
Aluminum, Clear Glass, Colored Glass, and Steel and Bimetallic Cans
and Plastics, in a single Recycling Container. Each such Licensed
Hauler shall schedule collections for Tires and White Goods at least
twice annually and shall give each Other Customer at least 30 days'
advance notice of the schedule for such collections. Newsprint shall
§ 224-22 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 224-23
197:121
either be bagged or bundled in accordance with instructions from the
Licensed Hauler to each Other Customer. [Amended 3-11-2002 by
Ord. No. 166]
D. The schedule for collection of Regulated Municipal Waste and
Designated Recyclable Materials from Other Customers shall be as
specified in the Municipality's Policies and Procedures.
E. Recycling Containers for Residential Units will be provided by the
Municipality which shall retain title to all such Recycling Containers.
For Municipal Customers, the Municipality shall distribute Recycling
Containers to all of their Residential Unit Customers in accordance with
guidelines established by the Municipality. For Other Customers, the
Licensed Hauler shall distribute Recycling Containers to all their
Residential Unit Customers in accordance with guidelines established
by the Municipality. [Amended 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 166]
F. Each Licensed Hauler shall give written notice to each Customer of
such Licensed Hauler's obligations under this article and particularly
the requirement to offer collection services for Designated Recyclable
Materials.
G. No Person who generates, owns or possesses Designated Recyclable
Materials or Regulated Municipal Waste shall, by contract for collection
services or otherwise, cause, permit or assist in the collection,
transportation, storage, processing or disposal of such Waste by any
Person other than:
(1) The Contractor with respect to Contract Waste or Designated
Recyclable Materials generated by Municipal Customers; and
(2) A Licensed Hauler with respect to Regulated Municipal Waste
other than Contract Waste generated by Municipal Customers, and
Regulated Municipal Waste or Designated Recyclable Materials
generated by Other Customers, Multifamily Units, or
Nonresidential Units.
H. No Licensed Hauler who collects, transports or disposes of Designated
Recyclable Materials or Regulated Municipal Waste shall, by contract
for such services or otherwise, cause, permit, or assist in the storage,
collection, transportation, processing or disposal of Designated
Recyclable Materials in a manner which treats such materials as
Regulated Municipal Waste, or which is otherwise inconsistent with
Source Separation or Recycling. Any delivery of Designated Recyclable
Materials to a LCSWMA Facility in accordance with the LCSWMA Rules
and Regulations shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of
Subsection C of this section.
I. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 224-19B above, any person who
occupies a Residential Unit may transport to a facility the Regulated
Municipal Waste and Recyclable Materials generated at such residence
in order to dispose of extraordinary quantities of refuse or recyclable
§ 224-23 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 224-23
197:122
§ 224-24. Requirements for collection and transportation
equipment.
§ 224-25. Disposal practices.
materials beyond the three container limit or of materials not collected
as provided for in the current contract hauler's contract. This section
is not to be construed as alleviating the responsibility of an owner of a
Residential Unit under § 224-19B to continue trash service as provided
for Municipal Customers. [Amended 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 166]
J. All Regulated Municipal Waste and Designated Recyclable Materials
generated or collected in the Municipality shall be transported directly
to a Facility in accordance with the LCSWMA Rules and Regulations
and without any intervening transfer, unloading, processing, sorting,
salvaging, scavenging, or reuse of any portion of any load of such
Regulated Municipal Waste and Designated Recyclable Materials from
the time of its collection until the time of its delivery to the Facility.
A. Haulers shall be required to collect and remove Regulated Municipal
Waste in motor-driven vehicles having steel, nonleakable, automatic
packer-type bodies, and to so conduct the collection, removal and
transportation of the Regulated Municipal Waste so as to assure
general cleanliness and sanitation throughout the entire process and
operation thereof. The vehicles shall be licensed and approved by
LCSWMA.
B. Haulers shall be required to collect and remove Designated Recyclable
Materials in motor-driven vehicles or trailers designated for recyclable
collection and removal and transportation of the Designated Recyclable
Materials so as to assure general cleanliness and sanitation throughout
the entire process and operation thereof.
C. The name of the owner of the vehicle and the license sticker issued by
the Township shall be displayed in a prominent and legible manner on
both sides of all vehicles used for collection and transportation.
D. Collection and transportation vehicles shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
A. All Regulated Municipal Waste shall be hauled directly to a Facility
owned, operated or approved by LCSWMA for disposal, or other facility
to which solid waste may be delivered in accordance with the specific
approval of LCSWMA. Haulers shall not transfer any Regulated
Municipal Waste from vehicles after collection or prior to disposal at the
Facility. [Amended 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 166]
B. Haulers shall transport the collected Recyclable Materials either to a
Facility, or directly to markets. The haulers shall take title to the
Recyclable Materials upon collection. It is the responsibility of the
hauler to remove and dispose of Recyclable Materials generated in the
§ 224-23 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 224-25
197:123
§ 224-26. Illegal dumping.
No Person shall store, process, or dispose of any Regulated Municipal Waste
or Designated Recyclable Materials except at a Facility. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, Yard Waste may be composted (in accordance with
Municipality's guidelines) on the property on which such Waste was
generated.
§ 224-27. Collection service fees.
Fees for services provided by the Municipality shall be charged to all
Municipal Customers within the Municipality. The amount of fees and the
schedule for payment of fees shall be as specified in the Municipality's
Policies and Procedures.
§ 224-28. Scavenging.
From the time of placement for collection of any Designated Recyclable
Materials all such Designated Recyclable Materials shall be the property
of the generator or of the Contractor or the Licensed Hauler who has
contracted to provide collection, as provided in the contract. It shall be a
violation of this article for any Person, other than such Licensed Hauler,
to collect or pick up, or cause to be collected or picked up, any such
Designated Recyclable Materials.
§ 224-29. Existing contracts.
Township in a manner which is consistent with the intent and effect of
Recycling. The hauler shall be responsible to ensure that all Recyclable
Materials collected are transported to markets for sale and not
disposed of as Regulated Municipal Waste in landfills or other disposal
sites.
A. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair the obligations of
any Existing Contract.
B. No renewal or modification of any Existing Contract, and no new
contract for the storage, collection, transportation, processing, or
disposal of Regulated Municipal Waste or Designated Recyclable
Materials, shall be entered into after the effective date of this article
unless such renewal or modification or new contract shall conform to
the requirements of this article and the Municipality's Policies and
Procedures.
C. No contract which is entered into, renewed, extended, modified, or
assigned after the effective date of this § 224-29 shall provide for
collection services to be performed after the Commencement Date for
Contract Waste or Designated Recyclable Materials generated by any
Municipal Customer. This provision shall not apply to the Contract
between the Municipality and the Contractor. With respect to any
contract which violates this subsection, such contract shall be deemed
§ 224-25 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 224-29
197:124
§ 224-30. Powers and duties of municipality.
§ 224-31. Township Waste Reduction and Recycling Committee.
void and the hauler that is a party to such contract shall reimburse to
the applicable Municipal Customers any funds which have been paid for
such collection services and shall not collect or attempt to collect any
funds for such collection services.
A. The Municipality shall have the power to establish service fees, record
and reporting requirements, and standards and procedures for the
issuance, administration and revocation of licenses, as deemed
necessary, including without limitation:
(1) Application procedures, fees, standards and conditions for licenses;
(2) The fixing of a monetary bond, with or without surety, to secure the
compliance by any Licensed Hauler with any such requirements,
standards or procedures; and
(3) Any other matters deemed necessary or convenient by the
Municipality.
B. In the event of suspension or revocation of any license which is issued
by the Municipality or LCSWMA, the Person whose license is suspended
or revoked shall refund to each Customer any prepaid fees.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint a five-member committee to
serve as the Township’s Waste Reduction and Recycling Committee.
The Board may, at its discretion, appoint four residents and one
business representative of the Township to serve on the Committee. The
term of office of each member shall be three years. (For the initial
ordinance adoption, the first year of such appointments shall require
that three positions be appointed for a term of three years and two
positions appointed for a term of one year. Each subsequent
appointment shall be for a term of three years). The Committee, with
assistance from LCSWMA, the Contractor and Licensed Haulers, shall
be responsible for a) oversight and review of the Township's recycling
program, including program costs and fees, and b) developing and
implementing a waste reduction and recycling public awareness
program. [Amended 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 166; 12-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 238]
B. Before March 1 of each year, the Committee shall submit a report to the
Board of Supervisors outlining for the prior year:
(1) The amount of recycling accomplished in different material
categories and by different categories of waste generators (e.g.,
residential units, multifamily units, commercial units, etc.);
(2) The various costs of each aspect of the program; and
§ 224-29 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 224-31
197:125
§ 224-32. Unlawful activity.
It shall be unlawful for any Person to violate, or cause or permit or assist
in the violation of, any provision of this article or any provision of the
Municipality's Policies and Procedures. All unlawful conduct shall also
constitute a public nuisance.
§ 224-33. Requirement for permits.
§ 224-34. Inspection procedures.
§ 224-35. Violations and penalties.50
Any person violating any provision of this article or any provision of the
Municipality's Policies and Procedures shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township
before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the Township in
the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be imposed until the
date of the determination of the violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure.
Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to
seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
(3) Recommendations for improving the effectiveness and efficiency of
the program.
A. No person shall engage in any disposal or processing of any solid waste
material without a valid permit from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
B. No hauler shall use any vehicle for collection of Regulated Municipal
Waste or Designated Recyclable Materials without a valid license from
the Township and from LCSWMA.
A. All containers, vehicles and equipment, of applicants, contractors, or
licensed haulers shall be subject to inspection by the Township at any
reasonable hour without prior notice.
B. If violations of this article are discovered in the course of such
inspections, the Township may proceed with prosecution under this
article or may petition the Court of Common Pleas of Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, for an injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, to
enforce this article.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 224-31 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 224-36
197:126
§ 224-36. Persons liable.
For purposes of the obligations established by this article or the
Municipality's Policies and Procedures, and for purposes of any fine,
penalty, imprisonment or other sanction, the terms "Person," "Municipal
Customer," "Other Customer," "Residential Unit," "Multifamily Unit" and
"Nonresidential Unit" shall:
§ 224-37. Injunctive relief.
In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, the Municipality
may institute proceedings to restrain any violation of, or to require
compliance with, this article and/or the Municipality's Policies and
Procedures.
§ 224-38. Concurrent remedies.
The penalties and remedies set forth in this article are in addition to, not
in lieu of, any fines, penalties or remedies provided in the Municipality's
Policies and Procedures. The existence or exercise of any remedy shall
not prevent the Municipality from exercising any other remedy a) provided
under i) this article or ii) the Municipality's Policies and Procedures, or b)
available at law or equity.
§ 224-39. Effect on other ordinances.
This article is in addition to, and not in lieu of, prior ordinances. Prior
ordinances, to the extent that they are inconsistent with this article, are
hereby repealed.
§ 224-40. When effective.
This article shall become effective five days from enactment, except for
§§ 224-16 through 224-23 of this article which shall become effective on the
Commencement Date.
A. Include officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity
having officers and directors; and
B. Refer to, and impose joint and several liability upon, both:
(1) The persons residing in or occupying any such Residential,
Multifamily or Nonresidential Units; and
(2) The owner, landlord, condominium owner's association and/or
agent of an owner, landlord or condominium owner's association of
such premises.
§ 224-36 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 224-40
197:127
Chapter 230
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage — See Ch. 211.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
240.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 224-40 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 224-40
197:128
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 230-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "West Lampeter
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 230-2. Statement of findings.
The Board of Supervisors finds that:
§ 230-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare by
minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits described in § 230-2 of
this chapter through provisions designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood control efforts in
downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens
public health and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of
water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of SWM, including reasonable regulation of
development and activities causing accelerated runoff, is fundamental
to the public health, safety, welfare, and the protection of the people of
the Township and all the people of the commonwealth, their resources,
and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4) under the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
E. Riparian forest buffers enhance water quality by filtering pollutants in
runoff, providing light control and temperature moderation, processing
pollutants, increasing infiltration and providing channel and shoreline
stability thus decreasing erosion (DEP Riparian Forest Buffer Guidance,
November 27, 2010).
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and
§ 230-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-3
197:129
§ 230-4. Statutory Authority.
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this
commonwealth.
B. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as practicable.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source.
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater
management best management practices (SWM BMPs) that are
implemented within the Township.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
I. Promote stormwater runoff prevention through the use of nonstructural
best management practices (BMPs).
J. Provide a regulatory environment that supports the proportion, density
and intensity of development called for in the comprehensive plan;
allow for creative methods of improving water quality and managing
stormwater runoff; and promote a regional approach to water resource
management.
K. Help preserve and protect exceptional natural resources, and conserve
and restore natural resource systems.
L. Promote stormwater management practices that emphasize infiltration,
evaporation, and transpiration.
A. Primary authority. The Board of Supervisors of West Lampeter
Township is empowered to regulate these activities by the authority of
the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as
amended, the "Storm Water Management Act," and Act 394 of 1937, as
amended, 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq., the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law.
The Board of Supervisors of West Lampeter Township also is
empowered to regulate land use activities that affect stormwater
impacts by the authority of the Second Class Township Code, Act of May
1, 1933 (P.L. 103, No. 69),51 as reenacted and amended by the Act of
November 9, 1995, P.L., No. 60, as amended.
B. Secondary authority. The Board of Supervisors of West Lampeter
Township also is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
51.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 230-3 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-4
197:130
§ 230-5. Applicability.
The provisions, regulations, limitations, and restrictions of this chapter shall
apply to regulated activities, as defined in this chapter.
§ 230-6. Repeals and continuation of prior regulations.
§ 230-7. Severability.
Should any section, provision or part thereof of this chapter be declared
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 230-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,52 as amended.
A. Except as otherwise required by law, this chapter is intended as a
continuation of, and not a repeal of, existing regulations governing the
subject matter. To the extent that this chapter restates regulations
contained in ordinances previously enacted by the Board of
Supervisors, this chapter shall be considered a restatement and not a
repeal of such regulations. It is the specific intent of the Board of
Supervisors that all provisions of this chapter shall be considered in full
force and effect as of the date such regulations were initially enacted.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter are hereby repealed. It is expressly provided that the
provisions of this chapter shall not affect any act done, contract
executed or liability incurred prior to its effective date, or affect any suit
or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any rights, rule,
regulation or ordinance, or part thereof, or to punish any violation
which occurred under any prior stormwater regulation or ordinance. In
the event any violation has occurred under any prior stormwater
regulation or ordinance of West Lampeter Township, prosecution may
be initiated against the alleged offender pursuant to the provisions of
said prior stormwater regulation or ordinance, and the provisions and
penalties provided in said prior stormwater regulation or ordinance
shall remain effective as to said violation.
B. Any plan (hereinafter defined) pending at the time of the effective date
of this chapter shall be allowed to proceed with revisions, finalization
and implementation in accordance with any chapter in effect prior
hereto.
52.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 230-4 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-9
197:131
§ 230-9. Erroneous permits.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful.
No action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the Township
purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 230-10. Municipal liability.
Except as specifically provided by the Storm Water Management Act, the
making of any administrative decision by the Township or any of its officials
or employees shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty
of any kind by the Township of the practicability or safety of any proposed
structure or use with respect to damage from erosion, sedimentation,
stormwater runoff, flood, or any other matter, and shall create no liability
upon or give rise to any cause of action against the Township and its officials
and employees. The Board of Supervisors, by enacting and amending this
chapter, does not waive or limit any immunity granted to the Township and
its officials and employees by the Governmental Immunity Act, 42 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 8541 et seq., and does not assume any liabilities or obligations.
§ 230-11. Duty of persons engaged in development of land.
Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any
landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of land
which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such
measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety,
or other property. Such measures also shall include actions as are required
to manage the rate, volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater
runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property,
and water quality.
§ 230-12. through § 230-20. (Reserved)
§ 230-9 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-12
197:132
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 230-21. Interpretation and word usage.
The language set forth in this chapter shall be interpreted in accordance
with the following rules of construction:
§ 230-22. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes at a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
A. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses or
derivative forms.
B. Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
words in the plural number shall include the singular number.
C. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. The
feminine gender shall include the masculine and neuter. The neuter
gender shall include the masculine and feminine.
D. The word "person" includes individuals, firms, partnerships, joint
ventures, trusts, trustees, estates, corporations, associations and any
other similar entities.
E. The word "lot" includes the words "plot," "tract," and "parcel."
F. The words "shall," "must" and "will" are mandatory in nature and
establish an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision.
The words "may" and "should" are permissive.
G. The time within which any act required by this chapter is to be
performed shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last day. However, if the last day is a Saturday or Sunday or a
holiday declared by the United States Congress or the Pennsylvania
General Assembly, it shall also be excluded. The word "day" shall mean
a calendar day, unless otherwise indicated.
H. Any words not defined in this chapter or in Section 107 of the MPC shall
be construed as defined in standard dictionary usage.
I. References to officially adopted regulations, standards, or publications
of DEP or other governmental agencies shall include the regulation,
publication, or standard in effect on the date when a SWM site plan is
first filed. It is the intent of the Board of Supervisors in enacting this
section to incorporate such changes to statutes, regulations, and
publications to the extent authorized by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
§ 230-21 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-22
197:133
ACCESS EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing entry for the purpose of inspecting, maintaining and repairing
SWM facilities.
ACT 167 PLAN — A plan prepared under the authority of the Stormwater
Management Act.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture such as
agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy use areas.
This includes the work of producing crops and raising livestock including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops, or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation
practices. Construction of new buildings or impervious areas is not
considered an agricultural activity.
AGRICULTURAL USE OF LAND — The use of land exclusively for the
cultivation of soil, the production of crops or livestock, or the science of
forestry; also land which has been diverted from agricultural use by an
active federal program, provided that the land has a conservation cover of
grass, legumes, trees or wildlife shrubs.
AGRICULTURE — The cultivation of the soil and the raising and harvesting
of the products of the soil, including but not limited to nursery, horticulture,
forestry and animal husbandry activities.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; earth disturbance activity.
ANIMAL HEAVY USE AREAS — A barnyard, feedlot, loafing area, exercise
lot, or other similar area on an agricultural operation where, due to the
concentration of animals, it is not possible to establish and maintain
vegetative cover of a density capable of minimizing accelerated erosion
and sedimentation by usual planting methods. The term does not include
entrances, pathways and walkways between areas where animals are
housed or kept in concentration.
APPLICANT — A landowner and/or developer, including his heirs,
successors and assigns, who has filed an application to the Township for
approval to engage in any regulated activity at a development site located
within the Township.
AS-BUILT PLANS — Sets of prints of the original facilities showing those
changes made during the construction process.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities, control
measures, planning or procedures used to minimize accelerated erosion and
sedimentation and manage stormwater to protect, maintain, reclaim, and
restore the quality of waters and the existing and designated uses of waters
within this commonwealth before, during, and after earth disturbance
activities. See also "nonstructural BMP" and "structural BMP."
BMP MANUAL — The Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual of December 2006, or most recent version thereof.
§ 230-22 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-22
197:134
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The governing body of the Township.
BUILDING — Any enclosed or open structure, other than a boundary wall
or fence, occupying more than four square feet of area and/or having a roof
supported by columns, piers, or walls.
CARBONATE GEOLOGY — Limestone or dolomite bedrock. Carbonate
geology is often associated with karst topography.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION — Documentation verifying that all
permanent SWM facilities have been constructed according to the plans and
specifications and approved revisions thereto.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water.
CHAPTER 102 — 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment Control.
CHAPTER 105 — 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105, Dam Safety and Waterway
Management.
CHAPTER 106 — 25 Pa. Code Chapter 106, Floodplain Management.
CISTERN — A reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The 1972 Amendments to the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, P.L. 92-500 of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Lancaster County Conservation District
or any agency successor.
CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan written by an NRCS-certified planner
that identifies conservation practices and includes site specific BMPs for
agricultural plowing or tilling activities and animal heavy use areas.
CONSERVATION PRACTICES — Practices installed on agricultural lands to
improve farmland, soil and/or water quality which have been identified in a
current conservation plan.
CONVEYANCE —
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works which can convey a stream
under or through an embankment or fill.
DEP (also PA DEP or PADEP) — The Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or any agency successor to the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of SWM systems.
A. Any structure that carries a flow.
The ability of a pipe, culvert, swale or similar facility to carry the peak
flow from the design storm.
B.
§ 230-22 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-22
197:135
DESIGNEE — The agent of the Township involved with the administration,
review or enforcement of any provisions of this chapter by appointment by
the Board of Supervisors.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes any regulated activity.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — The specific area of land where regulated
activities in the Township are planned, conducted or maintained.
DISAPPEARING STREAM — A stream in an area underlain by limestone or
dolomite that flows underground for a portion of its length.
DISTURBED AREA — A land area where an earth disturbance activity is
occurring or has occurred.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of a property line of a parent
tract located at the topographically lowest point of the parent tract such
that some or all overland, swale, or pipe flow from a development site would
be directed toward it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transmit stormwater runoff and shall include streams, channels,
swales, pipes, conduits, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — Rights to occupy and use another person's real
property for the installation and operation of stormwater management
facilities, or for the maintenance of natural drainageways to preserve and
maintain a channel for the flow of stormwater therein, or to safeguard
health, safety, property, and facilities.
E&S — Erosion and sediment.
E & S MANUAL — The Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program
Manual, Number 363-2134-008, prepared by DEP.
E&S PLAN (also EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN) — A sitespecific
plan consisting of both drawings and a narrative that identifies
BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation before, during
and after earth disturbance activities.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; land development;
agricultural plowing or tilling; operation of animal heavy use areas; timber
harvesting activities; road maintenance activities; oil and gas activities;
well drilling; mineral extraction; building construction; and the moving,
depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.
§ 230-22 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-22
197:136
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA — Slopes greater than 15%,
shallow bedrock (located within six feet of ground surface2), wetlands,
Natural Heritage Areas and other areas designated as "conservation" or
"preservation" in Greenscapes, the Green Infrastructure Element of the
County Comprehensive Plan, where encroachment by land development or
land disturbance results in degradation of the natural resource.
EPHEMERAL STREAM — A transient stream, one that flows for a relatively
short time.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn
away by water, wind, or chemical action. See also "accelerated erosion" as
defined above.
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency or any agency
successor thereto.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers,
and other waters of this commonwealth.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN — As defined by Chapter 285, Zoning.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ACT — Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 851, No.
166, as amended, 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year frequency floodway, it
is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from
the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
FLOOR ELEVATION — The elevation of the lowest level of a particular
building, including the basement.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forest land. These include conducting a
timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the maximum design highwater
elevation and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge.
FREQUENCY — The probability or chance that a given storm event/flood
will be equaled or exceeded in a given year.
§ 230-22 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-22
197:137
GRADE —
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct
surface water from cropland.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The process by which water from above the
ground surface is added to the saturated zone of an aquifer, either directly
or indirectly.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Refers to soils grouped according
to their runoff-producing characteristics by NRCS. There are four runoff
potential groups ranging from A to D.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — Surfaces which prevent
the infiltration of water into the ground. All structures, buildings, parking
areas, driveways, roads, streets, sidewalks, and any areas of concrete,
asphalt, packed stone, and compacted soil shall be considered impervious
surface if they prevent infiltration.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention facility designed to retain
stormwater runoff and infiltrate it into the ground (in the case of a retention
basin) or release it at a controlled rate (in the case of a detention basin).
(n) A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground specified in
percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
A.
(v) To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of
excavation.
B.
(Low runoff potential) Soils having high infiltration rates even when
thoroughly wetted and consisting chiefly of deep, well to excessively
drained sands or gravels. These soils have a high rate of water
transmission (greater than 0.30 inches/hour).
A.
Soils having moderate infiltration rates when thoroughly wetted and
consisting chiefly of moderately deep to deep, moderately well drained
to well drained soils with moderately fine to moderately coarse
textures. These soils have a moderate rate of water transmission (from
0.15 to 0.30 inches/hour).
B.
Soils having slow infiltration rates when thoroughly wetted and
consisting chiefly of soils with a layer that impedes downward
movement of water, or soils with moderately fine to fine texture. These
soils have a slow rate of water transmission (from 0.05 to 0.15 inches/
hour).
C.
(High runoff potential) Soils having very slow infiltration rates when
thoroughly wetted and consisting chiefly of clay soils with a high
swelling potential, soils with a permanent high water table, soils with
a clay pan or clay layer at or near the surface, and shallow soils over
nearly impervious material. These soils have a very slow rate of water
transmission (from 0 to 0.05 inches/hour).
D.
§ 230-22 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-22
197:138
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench, rain gardens,
vegetated swales, pervious paving, infiltration basins, etc.).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. The upstream end of any
structure through which water may flow.
INTERMITTENT — A natural, transient body or conveyance of water that
exists for a relatively long time, but for weeks or months of the year is
below the local water table and obtains its flow from both surface runoff and
groundwater discharges.
INVASIVE VEGETATION (INVASIVE) — Plants which grow quickly and
aggressively, spreading, and displacing other plants. Invasives typically are
introduced into a region far from their native habitat. See "Invasive Plants
in Pennsylvania" by the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by features
including but not limited to surface depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/
uneven bedrock surface, underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed
on carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any activity meeting the definition of "land
development" in Chapter 240, Subdivision and Land Development.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading, tilling, digging, or
filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or any other activity that causes
an alteration to the natural condition of land.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
MAJOR LAND DISTURBANCE — The use of land for any purpose
involving:
Installation of new impervious or semi-impervious surface that is
either in excess of 5,000 square feet or 2/3 of the total lot area;
(1)
(2) Diversion of piping of any natural or man-made watercourse; or
Removal of ground cover, grading filing, or excavation in excess of
five acres, except for the agricultural use of land when operated
in accordance with a farm conservation plan approved by the
conservation district.
(3)
A.
SMALL PROJECTS — The use of land for any purpose involving:
Regulated activities that, measured on a cumulative basis from
May 2014, create new impervious areas of more than 1,000 square
feet and less than 5,000 square feet or involve earth disturbance
activity of an area less than 5,000 square feet and do not involve
the alteration of stormwater facilities or watercourses.
(1)
B.
§ 230-22 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-22
197:139
LIMITING ZONE — A rock formation, other stratum, or soil condition
which is so slowly permeable that it effectively limits downward passage
of effluent12. Season high water tables, whether perched or regional also
constitute a limiting zone.
LINEAMENT — A linear feature in a landscape which is an expression of an
underlying geological structure such as a fault.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the applicable Act 167 plan
hydrological model.
MANNING'S EQUATION — An equation for calculation of velocity of flow
(e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per second) in open
channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope.
Manning's Equation assumes steady, gradually varied flow.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP) — Applies when the applicant
demonstrates to the Township's satisfaction that the performance standard
is not achievable. The applicant shall take into account the best available
technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other competing
interests such as protection of human safety and welfare, protection of
endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of historic
properties in making the assertion that the performance standard cannot be
met and that a different means of control is appropriate.
MPC — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31,
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains),
which is all of the following:
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — All separate
storm sewers that are defined as "large" or "medium" or "small" municipal
separate storm sewer systems pursuant to 40 CFR 122.26(b)(18), or
designated as regulated under 40 CFR 122.26(a)(1)(v).
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) —
A permit issued under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a (relating to National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permitting, monitoring and
Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, township, county,
district, association or other public body (created under state law)
having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes,
stormwater or other wastes;
A.
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Not a combined sewer; and
Not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40 CFR
122.2.
D.
§ 230-22 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-22
197:140
compliance) for the discharge or potential discharge of pollutants from a
point source to surface waters.
NATIVE VEGETATION — Plant species that have evolved or are indigenous
to a specific geographical area. These plants are adapted to local soil and
weather conditions as well as pests and diseases.
NATURAL DRAINAGEWAY — An existing channel for water runoff that was
formed by natural processes.
NATURAL GROUND COVER — Ground cover which mimics the infiltration
characteristics of predominant hydrologic soil group found at the site.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Any source of water pollution that
does not meet the legal definition of "point source" in Section 502(14) of the
Clean Water Act.
NONSTRUCTURAL BMPs — Planning and design approaches, operational
and/or behavior-related practices which minimize stormwater runoff
generation resulting from an alteration of the land surface or limit contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff.
NRCS — Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously Soil
Conservation Service, or SCS).
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an
open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural
and man-made drainage ways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes
flowing partly full. Open channels may include closed conduits so long as
the flow is not under pressure.
OUTFALL — Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, pipe, or drain.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater or
artificial drain.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or any
agency successor thereto.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any material/surface that allows water to pass through
at a rate equal to or greater than natural ground cover.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of West Lampeter
Township Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
PLANS — The SWM and erosion and sediment control plans and narratives.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Water that comes in contact with any raw
material, product, by-product, or waste during any production or industrial
process.
§ 230-22 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-22
197:141
QUALIFIED PERSON — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by this chapter.
RATE CONTROL — SWM controls used to manage the peak flows for the
purposes of channel protection and flood mitigation.
RATIONAL FORMULA (RATIONAL METHOD) — A rainfall-runoff relation
used to estimate peak flow.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any physical improvement to a previously developed
lot that involves earthmoving, removal, or addition of impervious surfaces.
REGIONAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan to manage
stormwater runoff from an area larger than a single development site. A
regional stormwater management plan could include two adjacent parcels,
an entire watershed, or some defined area in between. Regional stormwater
management plans can be prepared for new development, or as a retrofit to
manage runoff from already developed areas.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Activities, including earth disturbance
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that
may affect stormwater runoff. Regulated activities shall include, but not be
limited to:
RELEASE RATE — For a specific design storm or list of design storms,
the percentage of peak flow rate for existing conditions which may not be
exceeded for the proposed conditions.
RELEASE RATE MAP — A graphical representation of the release rates for
a specific area.
RETENTION BASIN — A stormwater management facility that includes a
permanent pool for water quality treatment and additional capacity above
the permanent pool for temporary runoff storage.
Land development subject to the requirements of Chapter 240,
Subdivision and Land Development;
A.
B. Removal of ground cover, grading, filling or excavation;
Construction of new or additional impervious or semi-impervious
surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.), and associated improvements;
C.
D. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings;
Installation or alteration of stormwater management facilities and
appurtenances thereto;
E.
F. Diversion or piping of any watercourse; and
Any other regulated activities where the Township determines that
said activities may affect any existing watercourse's stormwater
management facilities, or stormwater drainage patterns.
G.
§ 230-22 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-22
197:142
RIPARIAN — Pertaining to a stream, river or other watercourse. Also, plant
communities occurring in association with any spring, lake, river, stream or
creek through which waters flow at least periodically.
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A BMP that is an area of permanent vegetation along
a watercourse.
RIPARIAN CORRIDOR — A narrow strip of land, centered on a stream
or river that includes the floodplain as well as related riparian habitats
adjacent to the floodplain.
RIPARIAN CORRIDOR EASEMENT — An easement created for the purpose
of protecting and preserving a riparian corridor.
RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFER — A type of riparian buffer that consists of
permanent vegetation that is predominantly native trees, shrubs and forbs
along a watercourse that is maintained in a natural state or sustainably
managed to protect and enhance water quality, stabilize stream channels
and banks, and separate land use activities from surface waters.
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used
to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto roof surfaces by incorporating controlledflow
roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SCS — U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service (now
known as NRCS).
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by stormwater as a
product of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION — The action or process of forming or depositing
sediment in waters of this commonwealth.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located
and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported
by water.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth occurring
from the failure to design, construct, implement or maintain control
measures and control facilities in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed
for infiltration into the ground.
SEMI-IMPERVIOUS/SEMI-PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which
prevents some infiltration of water into the ground.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff which flows over the ground surface as a thin, even
layer, not concentrated in a channel.
§ 230-22 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-22
197:143
SMALL PROJECT — See "land disturbance."
SMALL STORM EVENT — A storm having a frequency of recurrence of once
every two years or smaller.
SOIL-COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the SCS (now NRCS) that is based on relating soil type and
land use/cover to a runoff parameter called Curve Number (CN). For more
information, see "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds," Second edition,
Technical Release No. 55, SCS, June 1986 (or most current edition).
SOIL GROUP, HYDROLOGIC — See "hydrologic soil group."
SPILLWAY — A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which is
used to pass a postdevelopment one-hundred-year storm peak flow rate.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law and the Clean Water Act.
STORAGE — A volume above or below ground that is available to hold
stormwater.
STORM EVENT — A storm of a specific duration, intensity, and frequency.
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels designed to
convey stormwater.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ACT — Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, No.
167, as amended, 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SWM
BMP) — See "BMPs."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY (SWM FACILITY) — Any
structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or
construction, conveys, stores, infiltrates/evaporates/transpires, cleans or
otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical SWM facilities include, but are
not limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels, watercourses,
road gutters, swales, storm sewers, pipes, BMPs, and infiltration structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN
(O&M PLAN) — A plan, including a narrative, to ensure proper functioning
of the SWM facilities in accordance with Article VI of this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN (SWM SITE PLAN) — The plan
prepared by the developer or his representative indicating how stormwater
runoff will be managed at a particular development site according to this
chapter.
STREAM — A watercourse.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a regulated
water of this commonwealth.
§ 230-22 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-22
197:144
STRUCTURAL BMPs — Physical devices and practices that capture and
treat stormwater runoff. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the development site.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — Any activity meeting the definition of "subdivision" in the
MPC.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
SWM — Stormwater management.
SWM SITE PLAN — A stormwater management site plan.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time for surface runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of
interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland
flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TOP OF STREAMBANK — First substantial break in slope between the edge
of the bed of the stream and the surrounding terrain. The top of streambank
can either be a natural or constructed (that is, road or railroad grade)
feature, lying generally parallel to the watercourse.
TOWNSHIP — West Lampeter Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
TREATMENT TRAIN — The sequencing of structural best management
practices to achieve optimal flow management and pollutant removal from
urban stormwater.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture or any agency successor
thereto.
VOLUME CONTROL — SWM controls, or BMPs, used to remove a
predetermined amount of runoff or the increase in volume between the preand
post-development design storm.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a watercourse.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of Pennsylvania.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
§ 230-22 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-22
197:145
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, ferns, and similar areas.
WOODLAND — Land predominantly covered with trees and shrubs. Without
limiting the foregoing, "woodlands" include all land areas of 10,000 square
feet or greater, supporting at least 100 trees per acre, so that either:
§ 230-23. through § 230-30. (Reserved)
At least 50 trees are two inches or greater in diameter at breast height
(DBH); or
A.
B. Fifty trees are at least 12 feet in height.
§ 230-22 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-23
197:146
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 230-31. General requirements.
A. Preparation of a SWM site plan is required for all regulated activities,
unless preparation and submission of the SWM site plan is specifically
exempted according to § 230-51 or the activity qualifies as a small
project.
B. No regulated activities shall commence until the Township issues
unconditional written approval of a SWM site plan or stormwater
permit.
C. SWM site plans approved by the Township, in accordance with
§ 230-55, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
D. The Township may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures for
meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in this
chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do
not conflict with, state law including, but not limited to, the Clean
Streams Law. The Township shall maintain a record of consultations
with DEP pursuant to this subsection. Where an NPDES permit for
stormwater discharges associated with construction activities is
required, issuance of an NPDES permit shall constitute satisfaction of
consultation with DEP.
E. For all regulated activities, erosion and sediment control and
stormwater management BMPs shall be designed, implemented,
operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of
this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their
design standards are listed in the E&S Manual and the BMP Manual.
F. Developers have the option to propose a regional stormwater
management plan or participate in a regional stormwater management
plan developed by others. A regional stormwater management plan may
include offsite volume and rate control, as appropriate and supported
by a detailed design approved by the Township in accordance with
§ 230-31D. A regional stormwater management plan must meet all of
the volume and rate control standards required by this chapter for the
area defined by the regional stormwater management plan, but not
necessarily for each individual development site, Appropriate
agreements must be established to ensure the requirements of this
chapter and the requirements of the regional stormwater management
plan are met.
G. Unless prohibited by Chapter 285, Zoning, or any ordinance which
regulates construction and development within the areas of the
Township subject to flooding, and any other applicable requirements of
§ 230-31 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-31
197:147
the Floodplain Management Act, stormwater management facilities
located in the floodplain are permitted when designed and constructed
in accordance with the provisions of the BMP Manual, regulatory
requirements and the requirements of this chapter.
H. Impervious areas:
(1) The measurement of impervious area shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages or phases.
(2) For development taking place in stages or phases, the entire
development plan must be used in determining conformance with
this chapter.
(3) Any areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be
assumed to be impervious.
I. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property;
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Protect and/or improve the function of floodplains, wetlands,
and wooded areas.
(b) Protect and/or improve native plant communities including
those within the riparian corridor.
(c) Protect and/or improve natural drainageways from erosion.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
J. The design of all SWM facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of
measures to minimize adverse effects.
K. Infiltration BMPs shall be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while
still meeting the other requirements of this chapter. Infiltration BMPs
shall include pretreatment BMPs unless shown to be unnecessary.
L. Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed areas shall
be selected based on suitability of soils and development site conditions
and shall be constructed on soils that have the following
characteristics:
(1) A minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the facility
and the limiting zone, unless it is demonstrated to the satisfaction
§ 230-31 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-31
197:148
of the Township that the selected BMP has design criteria which
allow for a smaller separation.
(2) A stabilized infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional
stormwater load and drain completely as determined by field tests
conducted by the applicant's professional designer.
(a) The stabilized infiltration rate is to be determined in the same
location and within the same soil horizon as the bottom of the
infiltration facility.
(b) The stabilized infiltration rate is to be determined as specified
in the BMP Manual.
M. The calculation methodology to be used in the analysis of volume and
peak rates of discharge shall be as required in § 230-35.
N. A planting plan is required for all vegetated stormwater BMPs.
(1) Native or naturalized/non-invasive vegetation suitable to the soil
and hydrologic conditions of the development site shall be used
unless otherwise specified in the BMP Manual.
(2) Invasive vegetation may not be included in any planting schedule.
(3) The limit of existing, native vegetation to remain shall be
delineated on the plan along with proposed construction protection
measures.
(4) Prior to construction, a tree protection zone shall be delineated at
the dripline of the tree canopy. All trees scheduled to remain during
construction shall be marked; however, where groups of trees exist,
only the tress on the outside edge need to be marked. A forty-eightinch-
high snow fence or forty-eight-inch-high construction fence
mounted on steel posts located eight feet on center shall be placed
along the tree protection boundary. No construction, storage of
material, temporary parking, pollution of soil, or regrading shall
occur within the tree protection zone.
(5) All planting shall be performed in conformance with good nursery
and landscape practice. Plant materials shall conform to the
standards recommended by the American Association of
Nurseryman, Inc. in the American Standard of Nursery Stock.
(a) Planting designs are encouraged to share planting space for
optimal root growth whenever possible.
(b) No staking or wiring of trees shall be allowed without a
maintenance note for the stake and/or wire removal within one
year of planting.
O. Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to
§ 230-31 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-31
197:149
§ 230-32. Volume controls.
Volume control BMPs are intended to maintain existing hydrologic
conditions for small storm events by promoting groundwater recharge and/
or evapotranspiration as described in this section. Runoff volume controls
shall be implemented using the design storm method described in
Subsection A below, or through continuous modeling approaches or other
means as described in the BMP Manual. Small projects may use the method
described in § 230-32B to design volume control BMPs.
maintain maximum infiltration capacity. Staging of earthmoving
activities and selection of construction equipment should consider this
protection.
P. Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff from
disturbed areas until the entire contributory drainage area to the
infiltration BMP has achieved final stabilization.
Q. A minimum ten-foot-wide access easement shall be provided for all
stormwater facilities with tributary areas equal or greater than 1,000
square feet and not located within a public right-of-way. Easements
shall provide for ingress and egress to a public right-of-way.
R. Drainage easements shall be provided where the conveyance,
treatment, or storage of stormwater, either existing or proposed, is
identified on the SWM site plan. Drainage easements shall be provided
to contain and convey the one-hundred-year frequency flood.
S. The Township may require additional stormwater control measures for
stormwater discharges to special management areas including but not
limited to:
(1) Water bodies listed as "impaired" on Pennsylvania's Clean Water
Act 303(d)/305(b) Integrated List.
(2) Any water body or watershed with an approved total maximum
daily load (TMDL).
(3) Critical areas with sensitive resources (e.g., state-designated
special protection waters, cold water fisheries, carbonate or other
groundwater recharge areas highly vulnerable to contamination,
drainage areas to water supply reservoirs, source water protection
zones, etc.).
T. Roof drains and sump pumps shall be tributary to infiltration or
vegetative BMPs. Use of catchment facilities for the purpose of reuse is
also permitted.
U. Nonstructural BMPs shall be utilized for all regulated activities unless
proven to be impractical.
§ 230-31 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-32
197:150
A. The design storm method is applicable to major land disturbance
activity. This method requires detailed modeling based on site
conditions.
(1) Do not increase the post development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year twenty-four-hour storm
event.
(2) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be
considered meadow in good condition.
(b) When the existing project site contains impervious area, 20%
of existing impervious area to be disturbed shall be considered
meadow in good condition in the model for existing conditions.
(c) The maximum loading ratio for volume control facilities in
Karst areas shall be 3:1 impervious drainage area to
infiltration area and 5:1 total drainage area to infiltration area.
The maximum loading ratio for volume control facilities in non-
Karst areas shall be 5:1 impervious drainage area to
infiltration area and 8:1 total drainage area to infiltration area.
A higher ratio may be approved by the Township if justification
is provided. Hydraulic depth may be used as an alternative to
an area based loading ratio if the design hydraulic depth is
shown to be less than the depth that could result from the
maximum area loading ratio.
B. Volume control for small projects.
(1) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces or
an equivalent volume shall be permanently removed from the
runoff flow; i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of
this commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration and infiltration.
(2) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 1/2 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
C. A detailed geologic evaluation of the development site shall be
performed in areas of carbonate geology to determine the design
parameters of recharge facilities. A report shall be prepared in
accordance with § 230-45A.
D. Storage facilities, including normally dry, open top facilities, shall
completely drain the volume control storage over a period of time not
less than 24 hours and not more than 72 hours from the end of the
design storm. Any designed infiltration at such facilities is exempt from
the minimum twenty-four-hour standard, i.e., may infiltrate in a shorter
§ 230-32 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-32
197:151
§ 230-33. Rate controls.
Rate control for large storms, up to the one-hundred-year event, is essential
to protect against immediate downstream erosion and flooding.
period of time, provided that none of this water will be discharged into
waters of this commonwealth.
E. Any portion of the volume control storage that meets all of the following
criteria may also be used as rate control storage:
(1) Volume control storage that depends on infiltration is designed
according to the infiltration standards in § 230-31.
(2) The volume control storage which will be used for rate control is
that storage which is available within 24 hours from the end of the
design storm based on the stabilized infiltration rate and/or the
evapo-transpiration rate.
F. Volume control storage facilities designed to infiltrate shall avoid the
least permeable hydrologic soil group(s) at the development site to the
greatest extent practicable.
A. Match predevelopment hydrograph. Applicants shall provide
infiltration facilities or utilize other techniques which will allow the
post-development one-hundred-year hydrograph to match the
predevelopment one-hundred-year hydrograph, along all parts of the
hydrograph, for the development site. To match the predevelopment
hydrograph, the post development peak rate must be less than or equal
to the predevelopment peak rate, and the post development runoff
volume must be less than or equal to the predevelopment volume for
the same storm event. A shift in hydrograph peak time of up to five
minutes and a rate variation of up to 5% at a given time may be
allowable to account for the timing affect of BMPs used to manage the
peak rate and runoff volume. "Volume control" volumes as given in
§ 230-32 above may be used as part of this option.
B. Where the predevelopment hydrograph cannot be matched, one of the
following shall apply:
(1) For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act
167 Plan:
Post development discharge rates shall not exceed the
predevelopment discharge rates for the two-, ten-, twenty-five-,
fifty-, and one-hundred-year twenty-four-hour storm events*. If it
is shown that the peak rates of discharge indicated by the post
development analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates of
discharge indicated by the predevelopment analysis for two-, ten-,
twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year twenty-four-hour storms*,
then the requirements of this section have been met. Otherwise,
§ 230-32 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-33
197:152
§ 230-34. Stormwater management performance standards.
the applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary to
satisfy the peak rate of discharge requirement.
*A twenty-four-hour SCS type II storm or an IDF Curve Rational
Method storm. See Table III-1 in § 230-35.
(2) For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
Plan:
For the two-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year storm
events*, the post development peak discharge rates will follow the
applicable approved release rate maps.
A twenty-four-hour SCS type II storm or an IDF Curve Rational
Method storm. See Table III-1 in § 230-35.
C. Normally dry, open top, storage facilities shall completely drain the rate
control storage over a period of time less than or equal to 24 hours from
the peak one-hundred-year water surface design elevation.
D. A variety of BMPs should be employed and tailored to suit the
development site. The following is a partial listing of BMPs which can
be utilized in SWM systems for rate control where appropriate:
(1) Decreased impervious surface coverage.
(2) Routed flow over grass.
(3) Grassed channels and vegetated strips.
(4) Bio-retention areas (rain gardens).
(5) Concrete lattice block or permeable surfaces.
(6) Seepage pits, seepage trenches or other infiltration structures.
(7) Rooftop detention.
(8) Parking lot detention.
(9) Cisterns and underground reservoirs.
(10) Retention basins.
(11) Detention basins.
(12) Other methods as may be found in the BMP Manual, as approved
by Township.
A. Runoff from impervious areas shall be drained to pervious areas within
the development site, unless the site has 85% or more impervious cover
and is a redevelopment, in which case the portion of the site that
discharges to pervious areas shall be maximized.
§ 230-33 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-34
197:153
§ 230-35. Calculation methodology.
B. Stormwater runoff from a development site to an adjacent property
shall flow directly into a natural drainageway, watercourse, or into an
existing storm sewer system, or onto adjacent properties in a manner
similar to the runoff characteristics of the predevelopment flow. The
applicant must provide proof to the Township Engineer that he or his
agent has informed the immediate downstream property owner of the
effects of the stormwater discharge from the proposed development.
C. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification of the adjacent property owner(s) by the developer. Such
stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter,
including the establishment of a drainage easement. Copies of all such
notifications shall be included in SWM site plan submissions.
D. Existing on-site natural and man-made SWM facilities shall be used to
the maximum extent practicable.
E. Stormwater runoff shall not be transferred from one sub-watershed to
another unless they are sub-watersheds of a common watershed that
join together within the perimeter of the development site and the
effect of the transfer does not alter the peak discharge onto adjacent
lands.
F. Minimum floor elevations for all structures that would be affected by a
basin, other temporary impoundments, or open conveyance systems
where ponding may occur shall be two feet above the one-hundred-year
water surface elevation. If basement or underground facilities are
proposed, detailed calculations addressing the effects of stormwater
ponding on the structure and waterproofing and/or floodproofing
design information shall be submitted for approval.
G. All stormwater conveyance facilities (excluding detention, retention,
and wetland basin outfall structures) shall be designed to convey a
twenty-five-year storm event*. All stormwater conveyance facilities
(excluding detention, retention, and wetland basin outfall structures)
conveying water originating from offsite shall be designed to convey a
fifty-year storm event*. Safe conveyance of the one-hundred-year runoff
event* to appropriate peak rate control BMPs must be demonstrated in
the design.
*A twenty-four-hour SCS Type II storm or an IDF Curve Rational
Method storm.
H. Erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels, and at all
points of discharge. Flow velocities from any storm sewer may not
result in erosion of the receiving channel.
I. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches.
§ 230-34 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-35
197:154
A. Any stormwater runoff calculations involving drainage areas greater
than 200 acres and time of concentration (Tc) greater than 60 minutes,
including on- and off-site areas, shall use generally accepted calculation
techniques based on the NRCS soil-cover complex method.
B. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the modified rational method, a soil-cover-complex methodology,
or other method acceptable to the Township. Table III-1 summarizes
acceptable computation methods. It is assumed that all methods will be
selected by the design professional based on the individual limitations
and suitability of each method for a particular development site.
Table III-1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method
Method
Developed By Applicability
TR-20 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is
desirable or necessary
Win TR-55 (or
commercial computer
package based on
TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans within
limitations described in TR-55
HEC-1/HEC-HMS US Army Corps
of Engineers
Applicable where use of full
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary
Rational Method (or
commercial computer
package based on
Rational Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For development sites less
than 200 acres, Tc<60
minutes or as approved by the
Township
EFH2 USDA NRCS Applicable in rural and
undeveloped areas subject to
the program limits
Other methods Varies Other methodologies
approved by the Township
C. If the SCS method is used, Antecedent Moisture Condition 1 is to be
used in areas of carbonate geology, and Antecedent Moisture Condition
2 is to be used in all other areas. A type II distribution shall be used in
all areas.
D. If the Rational Method is used, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14 data (see Subsection B above) or
PennDOT Publication 584 "PennDOT Drainage Manual," 2008 Edition,
or latest, shall be used to determine the rainfall intensity in inches per
§ 230-35 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-35
197:155
hour based on the information for the five-through sixty-minute
duration storm events.
E. Hydrographs may be obtained from NRCS methods such as TR-55,
TR20, or from use of the "modified" or "unit hydrograph" rational
methods. If "modified" or "unit hydrograph" rational methods are used,
the ascending leg of the hydrograph shall have a length equal to three
times the time of concentration (3xTc) and the descending leg shall
have a length equal to seven times the time of concentration (7xTc) to
approximate an SCS Type II hydrograph.
F. Runoff calculations shall include a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
indicating volume and velocities of flow and the grades, sizes, and
capacities of water-carrying structures, sediment basins, retention and
detention structures and sufficient design information to construct such
facilities. Runoff calculations shall also indicate both predevelopment
and post-development rates for peak discharge of stormwater runoff
from all discharge points.
G. For the purpose of calculating predevelopment peak discharges, all
runoff coefficients, both on-site and off-site, shall be based on actual
land use assuming summer or good land conditions. Post-development
runoff coefficients for on-site discharges used to design conveyance
facilities shall be based on actual land use assuming winter or poor land
conditions.
H. Criteria and assumptions to be used in the determination of stormwater
runoff and design of management facilities are as follows:
(1) Runoff coefficients shall be based on the information contained in
Appendix B-1 and B-253 if the actual land use is listed in those
appendices. If the actual land use is not listed in these appendices,
runoff coefficients shall be chosen from other published
documentation, and a copy of said documentation shall be
submitted with the SWM site plan.
(2) A sample worksheet for calculating Tc is provided in Appendix B-4.
Times of concentration (Tc) shall be based on the following design
parameters:
(a) Sheet flow: The maximum length for each reach of sheet or
overland flow before shallow concentrated or open channel
flow develops is 150 feet. Flow lengths greater than 100 feet
shall be justified based on the actual conditions at each
development site. Sheet flow may be determined using the
nomograph in Appendix B-3,54 or the Manning's kinematic
solution shown in the sheet flow section of Worksheet No. 1 in
Appendix B-4.55
53.Editor's Note: Said appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
54.Editor's Note: Said appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
55.Editor's Note: Said appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 230-35 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-35
197:156
§ 230-36. Riparian corridors.
(b) Shallow concentrated flow: Travel time for shallow
concentrated flow shall be determined using Figure 3-1 from
TR-55, Urban Hydrology for small watersheds, as shown in
Appendix B-5.56
(c) Open channel flows: At points where sheet and shallow
concentrated flows concentrate in field depressions, swales,
gutters, curbs, or pipe collection systems, the travel times to
downstream end of the development site between these design
points shall be based upon Manning's Equation and/or
acceptable engineering design standards as determined by the
Township Engineer.
(3) The developer may use stormwater credits for nonstructural BMPs
in accordance with the BMP Manual. The allowable reduction will
be determined by the Township.
(4) Peak rate control is not required for off-site runoff. Off-site runoff
may be by-passed around the site provided all other discharge
requirements are met. If offsite runoff is routed through rate
control facilities, runoff coefficients for off-site discharges used to
design those rate control facilities shall be based on actual land use
assuming winter or poor land conditions.
I. Times of concentration shall be calculated based on the methodology
recommended in the respective model used. Times of concentration for
channel and pipe flow shall be computed using Manning's Equation.
Supporting documentation and calculations must be submitted for
review and approval.
J. The sizing of stormwater management facilities for residential
subdivisions shall be based on the maximum impervious coverage
permitted by Chapter 285, Zoning, for those lots that are 15,000 square
feet or less in size. Within residential subdivisions where lots are
greater than 15,000 square feet in size the design for the stormwater
management facilities must specifically identify the square footage of
impervious coverage assumed for each lot and a note must be provided
on the plan to be recorded that indicates the amount used for the
design of the SWM facilities within the subdivision.
A. In order to protect and improve water quality, a riparian corridor
easement shall be created and recorded as part of any subdivision or
land development that encompasses a riparian corridor.
B. Except as otherwise required by Chapter 102, the width of the riparian
corridor easement shall be established as the greatest of the following:
56.Editor's Note: Said appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 230-35 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-36
197:157
(1) A specified distance from the top of each stream bank, based on
stream order, as given in Table 1, as determined by PaDEP.
(2) The limit of the one-hundred-year floodplain. Twenty-five feet from
riparian wetland boundary, if present.
Table 1
Minimum Buffer Widths by Stream Order
Stream Order
Buffer Width
(feet)
1 to 2 35
3 to 4 50
Over 4 75
C. Minimum management requirements for riparian corridors.
(1) Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within
the riparian corridor easement.
(2) Whenever practicable invasive vegetation shall be actively
removed and the riparian corridor easement shall be planted with
native trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse native
plant community appropriate to the intended ecological context of
the site.
D. The riparian corridor easement shall be enforceable by the Township
and shall be recorded in the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds
Office, so that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the
property located therein. The easement shall allow for the continued
private ownership and shall count toward the minimum lot area as
required by Chapter 285, Zoning, unless otherwise specified in Chapter
285.
E. Any permitted use within the riparian corridor easement shall be
conducted in a manner that will maintain the extent of the existing onehundred-
year floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability, and
preserve and protect the ecological function of the floodplain.
F. The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private
recreation trails are permitted within riparian corridors:
(1) Trails shall be for nonmotorized use only.
(2) Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant
species and other sensitive environmental features.
G. Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted
within the Riparian Corridor Easement and shall comply with setback
requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
§ 230-36 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-37
197:158
§ 230-37. Stormwater management facility design standards.
A. Aboveground storage facilities. Aboveground storage facilities consist
of all SWM facilities which store, infiltrate/evaporate/transpire, clean or
otherwise affect stormwater runoff and the top of which is exposed to
the natural environment. Aboveground storage facilities are located
above the finished ground elevation. Aboveground storage facilities do
not include SWM facilities designed for conveyance or cisterns.
(1) Design criteria. Aboveground storage facilities shall comply with
the design criteria in the following table:
Aboveground storage facility design criteria
Facility Depth
Less than
2 feet
2 feet to
8 feet
Greater
than 8
feet
(a) Embankment Geometry
[1] Top width
(minimum)
2 feet 5 feet 8 feet
[2] Interior side slope
(maximum)
2:1 3:1 5:1
[3] Exterior side slope
(maximum)
2:1 3:1 3:1
(b) Embankment
construction
[1] Key trench Not
required
Required Required
[2] Pipe collar Not
required
Required Required
[3] Compaction
density
Not
required
Required Required
(c) Internal Construction
[1] Dewatering
feature
N/A Required Required
[2] Pretreatment
elements
Not
required*
Required Required
(d) Outlet Structure
[1] Pipe size
(minimum)
6 inches 12 inches 15 inches
[2] Pipe material SLHDPE,
PVC, RCP
SLHDPE,
RCP
RCP
[3] Anticlogging
devices
Required Required Required
§ 230-37 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-37
197:159
Aboveground storage facility design criteria
Facility Depth
Less than
2 feet
2 feet to
8 feet
Greater
than 8
feet
[4] Antivortex design Not
required
Required Required
[5] Watertight joints in
piping?
No Yes Yes
(e) Spillway Requirements
[1] Spillway freeboard
(minimum)
Not
required
3 inches 6 inches
[2] Width (minimum) Not
required
10 feet 20 feet
[3] Width (maximum) Not
required
50 feet 50 feet
[4] Spillway channel
design
Not
required
Required Required
[5] Routing of onehundred-
year
storm
Permitted Permitted Permitted
*Pretreatment required for infiltration BMPs unless shown to be
unnecessary.
N/A = Not applicable
SLHDPE = Smooth lined high density polyethylene pipe; PVC =
Polyvinyl chloride;
RCP = Reinforced concrete pipe
(2) Facility depth.
(a) For the purposes of the design criteria, the facility depth is
defined to be the depth between the bottom invert of the
lowest orifice and the invert of the spillway. If there is no
spillway, the top of the berm shall be used. For basins with no
orifices or outlet structure, the bottom elevation of the basin
shall be used.
(b) Facilities with a facility depth greater than eight feet shall not
be permitted in residential areas.
(c) Facilities with a facility depth greater than 15 feet require a
dam permit from DEP.
(3) Embankment construction.
§ 230-37 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-37
197:160
(a) Impervious core/key trench. An impervious core/key trench,
when required, shall consist of a cutoff trench (below existing
grade) and a core trench (above existing grade). A key trench
may not be required wherever it can be shown that another
design feature, such as the use of an impermeable liner,
accomplishes the same purpose.
[1] Materials. Materials used for the core shall conform to the
Unified Soil Classification GC, SC, CH, or CL and must
have at least 30% passing the No. 200 sieve.
[2] Dimensions.
[a] The dimensions of the core shall provide a minimum
trench depth of two feet below existing grade,
minimum width of four feet and side slope of 1H:1V or
flatter.
[b] The core should extend up both abutments to the tenyear
water surface elevation or six inches below the
emergency spillway elevation, whichever is lower.
[c] The core shall extend four feet below any pipe
penetrations through the impervious core. The core
shall be installed along or parallel to the centerline of
the embankment.
[3] Compaction.
[a] Compaction requirements shall be the same as those
for the embankment to assure maximum density and
minimum permeability.
[b] The core shall be constructed concurrently with the
outer shell of the embankment.
[c] The trench shall be dewatered during backfilling and
compaction operations.
(b) Pipe collars. All pipe collars, when required, shall be designed
in accordance with Chapter 7 of the E&S Manual. The material
shall consist of concrete or otherwise non-degradable material
around the outfall barrel and shall be watertight.
(c) Embankment fill material. The embankment fill material shall
be taken from an appropriate borrow area which shall be free
of roots, stumps, wood, rubbish, stones greater than six inches,
frozen or other objectionable materials.
(d) Embankment compaction. When required, embankments shall
be compacted by sheepsfoot or pad roller. The loose lift
thickness shall be nine inches or less, depending on roller size,
and the maximum particle size is six inches or less (2/3 of the
§ 230-37 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-37
197:161
lift thickness). Five passes of the compaction equipment over
the entire surface of each lift is required. Embankment
compaction to visible nonmovement is also required.
(4) Internal construction.
(a) Bottom slope. The minimum bottom slope of facilities not
designed for infiltration shall be 1%. A flatter slope may be
used if an equivalent dewatering mechanism is provided.
(b) Dewatering features. When required, dewatering shall be
provided through the use of underdrain, surface device, or
alternate approved by the Township Engineer. If the facility is
to be used for infiltration, the dewatering device should be
capable of being disconnected and only be made operational if
the basin is not dewatering within the required timeframe.
(c) Pretreatment elements. When required, pretreatment
elements shall consist of forebays, or alternate approved by the
Township Engineer, to keep silt to a smaller portion of the
facility for ease of maintenance.
(d) Infiltration basins. Within basins designed for infiltration,
existing native vegetation shall be preserved, if possible. For
existing unvegetated areas or for infiltration basins that
require excavation, a planting plan shall be prepared in
accordance with § 230-31N and the BMP Manual which is
designed to promote infiltration.
(5) Outlet configuration.
(a) For facilities with a depth of two feet or greater, a type D-W
endwall or riser box outlet structure shall be provided.
(b) For facilities with a depth less than two feet, no outlet
structure is required.
(c) All discharge control devices with appurtenances shall be
made of reinforced concrete and stainless steel. Bolts/
fasteners shall be stainless steel.
(6) Spillway.
(a) Material. The spillway shall be designed to provide a nonerosive,
stable condition when the project is completed.
(b) Non-emergency use. Use of the spillway to convey flows
greater than the fifty-year design storm is permitted.
(c) Emergency use. The spillway shall be designed to convey the
one-hundred-year peak inflow.
(d) When required, freeboard shall be measured from the top of
the water surface elevation for emergency use.
§ 230-37 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-37
197:162
(7) Breach analysis. The Township may require a breach analysis
based on site-specific conditions and concern of threat for
downstream property. When required, the breach analysis shall be
conducted in accordance with the NRCS methodology, the US Army
Corps of Engineers methodology (HEC-1) or other methodologies
as approved by the Township.
B. Subsurface storage facilities. Subsurface storage facilities consist of all
stormwater facilities which store, infiltrate/evaporate/transpire, clean
or otherwise affect stormwater runoff and the top of which is not
exposed to the natural environment. Subsurface facilities are located
below the finished ground elevation. Subsurface facilities do not
include stormwater management facilities designed for conveyance.
(1) Design criteria. Subsurface storage facilities shall comply with the
design criteria in the following table:
Subsurface storage facility design criteria
Facility Type
Infiltration and
Storage
Storage without
Infiltration
(a) Facility Geometry
[1] Depth from
surface
(maximum)
2 feet less than
limiting zone
N/A
[2] Loading ratio
(maximum)
Per BMP Manual* N/A
(b) Distribution System
Requirements
[1] Pipe size
(minimum)
4 inches 4 inches
[2] Pretreatment Required Required
[3] Loading/
balancing
Required Not required
[4] Observation/
access ports
Required Required
*Unless otherwise determined by professional geologic evaluation.
(2) Distribution system requirements.
(a) Pretreatment requirements. The facility shall be designed to
provide a method to eliminate solids, sediment, and other
debris from entering the subsurface facility.
(b) Loading/balancing. The facility shall be designed to provide a
means of evenly balancing the flow across the surface of the
facility to be used for infiltration.
§ 230-37 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-37
197:163
(c) Observation/access ports.
[1] For facilities with the bottom less than five feet below the
average grade of the ground surface, a clean-out shall be
an acceptable observation port.
[2] For facilities with the bottom five feet or more below the
average grade of the ground surface, a manhole or other
means acceptable to the Township shall be provided for
access to and monitoring of the facility.
[3] The number of access points shall be sufficient to flush or
otherwise clean out the system.
(3) Materials.
(a) Pipe material. Distribution system piping may be PVC,
SLHDPE, or RCP.
(b) Stone for infiltration beds. The stone used for infiltration beds
shall be clean washed, uniformly graded coarse aggregate
(AASHTO No. 3 or equivalent approved by the Township). The
void ratio for design shall be assumed to be 0.4.
(c) Backfill material. Material consistency and placement depths
for backfill shall be (at a minimum) per all applicable pipe
manufacturer's recommendations, further providing it should
be free of large (not exceeding six inches in any dimension)
objectionable or detritus material. Select non-aggregate
material should be indigenous to the surrounding soil material
for nonvehicular areas. Backfill within vehicular areas shall
comply with this section unless otherwise specified in
governing municipal road/street or Chapter 240, Subdivision
and Land Development. Furthermore, if the design concept
includes the migration of runoff through the backfill to reach
the infiltration facility, the material shall be well drained, free
of excess clay or clay-like materials and generally uniform in
gradation.
(d) Lining material. Nonwoven geotextiles shall be placed on the
sides and top of subsurface infiltration facilities. No geotextiles
shall be placed on the bottom of subsurface infiltration
facilities.
(4) Cover.
(a) When located under pavement, the top of the subsurface
facility shall be a minimum of three inches below the bottom of
pavement subbase.
(b) Where located under vegetative cover, the top of the
subsurface facility shall be a minimum of 12 inches below the
surface elevation or as required to establish vegetation.
§ 230-37 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-37
197:164
(5) Subsurface facilities shall be designed to safely convey and/or
bypass flows from storms exceeding the design storm.
C. Conveyance facilities. Conveyance facilities consist of all SWM facilities
which carry flow, which may be located either above or below the
finished grade. Conveyance facilities do not include SWM facilities
which store, infiltrate/evaporate/transpire, or clean stormwater runoff.
(1) Design criteria. Conveyance facilities shall comply with the design
criteria in the following table:
Conveyance facility design criteria
Location
Within
Public
Street
Right-of-
Way
Outside Public Street
Right-of-Way
Loading All
Vehicular
Loading
Non-
Vehicular
Loading
(a) Pipe design
[1] Material SLHDPE,
RCP
PVC,
SLHDPE,
RCP
PVC
SLHDPE,
RCP
[2] Slope
(minimum)
0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
[3] Cover 1 foot to
stone
subgrade
1 foot to
stone
subgrade
1 foot to
surface
[4] Diameter
(minimum)
15 inches 15 inches 8 inches
[5] Street
crossing
angle
75° to 90° N/A N/A
[6] Access/
maintenance
port
frequency
(maximum)
400 feet 400 feet 600 feet
(b) Inlet design
[1] Material Concrete Concrete N/A
[2] Grate
depression
2 inches 2 inches 1 inch
minimum
(c) Manhole design
[1] Material Concrete Concrete Concrete
§ 230-37 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-37
197:165
Conveyance facility design criteria
Location
Within
Public
Street
Right-of-
Way
Outside Public Street
Right-of-Way
Loading All
Vehicular
Loading
Non-
Vehicular
Loading
(d) Swale design
[1] Freeboard
(minimum)
6 inches N/A 6 inches
[2] Velocity
(maximum)
Stability
check
N/A Stability
check
[3] Slope
(minimum)
1% N/A 1%
[4] Side slopes
(residential
area)
4:1 max N/A 4:1 max
[5] Side slopes
(nonresidential
area)
4:1 max N/A 3:1 max
[6] Bottom width
to flow depth
ratio
12:1 N/A 12:1
(e) Outlet design
[1] End
treatment
Headwall/
endwall
N/A Headwall/
endwall or
flared end
section
[2] Energy
dissipater
Required N/A Required
N/A = Not applicable or no criteria specified
SLHDPE = Smooth lined high density polyethylene pipe; PVC =
Polyvinyl chloride;
RCP = Reinforced concrete pipe
(2) Conveyance pipes, culverts, manholes, inlets and endwalls within
the public street right-of-way or proposed for dedication shall
conform to the requirements of PennDOT Standards for Roadway
Construction, Publication No. 72M. Conveyance pipes, culverts,
manholes, inlets and endwalls which are otherwise subject to
vehicular loading shall be designed for the HS-25 loading
condition.
§ 230-37 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-37
197:166
(3) Conveyance pipes.
(a) Backfill requirements. Backfill material. Material consistency
and placement depths for backfill shall be (at a minimum) per
all applicable pipe manufacturer's recommendations, further
providing it should be free of large (not exceeding six inches in
any dimension) objectionable or detritus material. Select nonaggregate
material should be indigenous to the surrounding
soil material for nonvehicular areas. Backfill within vehicular
areas shall comply with this section unless otherwise specified
in governing municipal road/street or Chapter 240, Subdivision
and Land Development.
(b) Inlets or manholes shall be placed at all points of changes in
the horizontal or vertical directions of conveyance pipes.
Curved pipe sections are prohibited.
(c) Access/maintenance ports. An access/maintenance port is
required; may either be an inlet or manhole.
(d) Watertight joints shall be provided where pipe sections are
joined, except for perforated pipe installed as pavement base
drain.
(e) The street crossing angle shall be measured between the pipe
centerline and the street centerline.
(f) Elliptical pipe of an equivalent cross-sectional area may be
substituted in lieu of circular pipe where cover or utility
conflict conditions exist.
(g) The roughness coefficient (Manning "n" values) used for
conveyance pipe capacity calculations should be determined in
accordance with PennDOT Publication 584, PennDOT Drainage
Manual, or per the manufacturer's specifications.
(4) Inlets.
(a) All pipes must enter inlets completely through one of the sides.
No corner entry of pipes is permitted.
(b) Within the public street right-of-way, the gutter spread based
on the twenty-five-year storm shall be no greater than 1/2 of
the travel lane and have a maximum depth of three inches at
the curb line. A parking lane shall not be considered as part of
the travel lane. In the absence of pavement markings
separating a travel lane from the parking lane, the parking
lane shall be assumed to be seven feet wide if parking is
permitted on the street.
(c) Flow depth within intersections. Within intersections of
streets, the maximum depth of flow shall be 1.5 inches based
on the twenty-five-year storm.
§ 230-37 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-37
197:167
(d) Curbed streets.
[1] Inlets in streets shall be located along the curb line.
[2] Top units shall be PennDOT Type "C". The hood shall be
aligned with the adjacent curb height.
(e) All inlets placed in paved areas shall have heavy-duty bicyclesafe
grating consistent with PennDOT Publication 72M, latest
edition. A note to this effect shall be added to the SWM site
plan or inlet details therein.
(f) Inlets, junction boxes, or manholes greater than five feet in
depth shall be equipped with ladder rungs and shall be
detailed on the SWM site plan.
(5) Swales.
(a) A swale shall be considered as any man-made ditch designed to
convey stormwater directly to another SWM facility or surface
waters.
(b) Inlets within swales shall have PennDOT Type "M" top units or
equivalent approved by the municipal engineer.
(c) Swale capacities and velocities shall be computed using the
Manning equation using the following design parameters:
[1] Vegetated swales.
[a] The first condition shall consider swale stability based
upon a low degree of retardance ("n" = 0.03);
[b] The second condition shall consider swale capacity
based upon a higher degree of retardance ("n" =
0.05); and
[c] All vegetated swales shall have a minimum slope of 1%
unless otherwise approved by the Township Engineer.
[2] The "n" factors to be used for paved or riprap swales or
gutters shall be based upon accepted engineering design
practices, as approved by the Township Engineer.
(d) All swales shall be designed to maximize infiltration and
concentrate low flows to minimize siltation and meandering,
unless geotechnical conditions do not permit infiltration.
(6) Culverts. In addition to the material requirements in this section,
culverts designed to convey waters of this commonwealth may be
constructed with either a corrugated metal arch or a precast
concrete culvert.
(7) Level spreaders.
§ 230-37 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-37
197:168
§ 230-38. Capture and reuse facilities.
(a) Shall discharge at existing grade onto undisturbed vegetation.
(b) Discharge at a depth not exceeding 3.0 inches for a fifty-year,
twenty-four-hour design storm.
(8) Energy dissipaters. Energy dissipaters shall be designed in
accordance with the requirements in the E&S Manual.
(9) End treatments.
(a) Where the connecting pipe has a diameter of 18 inches or
greater, headwalls and endwalls shall be provided with a
protective barrier device to prevent entry of the storm sewer
pipe by unauthorized persons. Such protection devices shall be
designed to be removable for cleaning.
(b) Headwalls and endwalls shall be constructed of concrete.
(c) Flared end sections shall be of the same material as the
connecting pipe and be designed for the size of the connecting
pipe.
D. SWM facilities which qualify as a dam under DEP regulations or
facilities deemed a potential threat to the life, safety or welfare of the
general public shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) Facilities which qualify as a dam under DEP regulation shall obtain
the required permit through DEP and design the facility in
accordance with DEP standards.
(2) Additional requirements and analysis may be required by the
Township to prove that the proposed facility has been designed to
limit the potential risk to the life, safety or welfare of the general
public.
A. Capture and reuse facilities include those SWM facilities which capture
stormwater within a site and store the water for reuse through
rainwater harvesting, which includes, but is not limited to, irrigation
reuse, potable water reuse, and toilet flushing reuse. Water storage
facilities for use with capture and reuse facilities include, but are not
limited to, cisterns and rain barrels.
B. Design requirements. Capture and reuse facilities shall meet all of the
following design standards.
(1) Calculations shall be provided for all of the following:
(a) Reuse of water to insure adequate capacity is available for
storage of follow-up rainfall events.
(b) Verification of conveyance pipe capacity for water to enter the
facility, including roof leaders.
§ 230-37 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-38
197:169
§ 230-39. Other design requirements.
Amended soils. Areas with amended soils shall be restricted for use within
the bottom of rain gardens and stormwater management basins that are
within a stormwater or drainage easement identified on a recorded plan to
ensure that the future owners of such facilities are aware of the restrictions
associated with the amended soil areas.
§ 230-40. (Reserved)
(c) The water storage facility shall be designed to store the runoff
volume of a one-hundred-year storm event for the area which it
serves.
(2) The reuse of water shall require not less than 5% of the total
storage volume to be drawn out of the tank on a daily basis. The
applicant shall specifically identify the use and/or method for
withdrawal of the stored volume and shall provide the estimated
volume of water which will be used by the proposed method.
(3) The water storage container shall be protected from direct sunlight
to minimize algae growth.
(4) Water storage containers shall be watertight with smooth interior
surfaces.
(5) Every water storage facility shall be provided with an overflow or
emergency spillway. The overflow shall be designed to discharge
away from buildings and other structures and toward existing
natural or man-made channels, other stormwater facilities or
vegetated slopes.
(6) Plans proposing a water storage facility shall include the following:
(a) All calculations and assumptions used in the design;
(b) Sufficient detail showing the proposed method of dewatering
(i.e., pump); and
(c) Structural details.
(7) Maintenance responsibilities for water storage and reuse facilities
shall include flushing the storage units to remove any accumulated
sediment, and the inside surfaces shall be brushed and thoroughly
disinfected.
(8) Water shall not be allowed to freeze in the devices.
§ 230-38 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-40
197:170
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management Site Plans Requirements for Major Land
Disturbance Activities
§ 230-41. General plan requirements.
§ 230-42. Drafting standards.
§ 230-43. SWM site plan information.
The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
A. The SWM site plan shall consist of a narrative and all applicable
calculations, maps, plans and supplemental information necessary to
demonstrate compliance with this chapter.
B. All landowners of land included in the SWM site plan shall be required
to execute all applications and final documents.
C. All SWM site plans shall be prepared by a qualified person.
D. Where the regulated activity constitutes subdivision or land
development as hereinabove defined, the SWM site plan shall be
submitted with and form an integral part of the plans required under
the Chapter 240, Subdivision and Land Development.
A. The plan should be clearly and legibly drawn.
B. If the plan is prepared in two or more drawing sheets, a key map
showing the location of the sheets and a match line shall be placed on
each sheet.
C. Each sheet shall be numbered to show the relationship to the total
number of sheets in the plan (e.g., Sheet 1 of 5).
D. Drawings or maps of the project area shall be drawn at one inch equals
fifty feet or larger scale (i.e., one inch equals forty feet, one inch equals
thirty feet, etc.) and shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch-by-thirtysix-
inch sheets.
E. SWM site plans shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements
for recording for the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lancaster
County.
F. The total development site boundary and size with distances marked to
the nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
A. The date of the SWM site plan and latest revision, graphic scale, written
scale and North arrow.
B. The name of the development, the name and address of the owner of the
property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the plan.
C. The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared the plan.
§ 230-41 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-43
197:171
D. A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the SWM
facilities to be permanent fixtures that cannot be altered or removed
unless a revised plan is approved by the Township.
E. The following signature block for the Township:
West Lampeter Township SWM Site Plan Approval Certification
At a meeting on __________, 20_____, the West Lampeter Township
Board of Supervisors approved this project, and all conditions have
been met. This approval includes the complete set of plans and
information that are filed with the Township in File No. __________,
based upon its conformity with the standards of the West Lampeter
Township Stormwater Management Ordinance.
Chairman Secretary
F. For SWM facilities located off-site.
(1) A note on the plan referencing a recorded stormwater operation
and maintenance (O&M) agreement that indicates the location and
responsibility for maintenance of the off-site facilities.
(2) All off-site SWM facilities shall meet the performance standards
specified in this chapter.
G. A note informing the owner that the Township shall have the right of
entry for the purposes of inspecting all stormwater conveyance,
treatment, or storage facilities.
H. A location map, drawn to a scale of a minimum of one inch equals 2,000
feet, relating the plan to municipal boundaries, at least two
intersections of road centerline or other identifiable landmarks.
I. Existing features.
(1) In areas of disturbance, contours at intervals of one or two feet. In
areas of steep slopes (greater than 15%) and areas undisturbed,
five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(2) The locations of all existing utilities (including on lot disposal
systems and wells), sanitary sewers, and water lines and associated
easements within 50 feet of property lines.
(3) Physical features including flood hazard boundaries, wetlands,
sinkholes, streams, lakes, ponds and other waterbodies, existing
drainage courses, karst features, areas of native vegetation
including trees greater than six inches in diameter at breast height,
woodlands, other environmentally sensitive areas and the total
extent of the upstream area draining through the development site.
(4) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
§ 230-43 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-43
197:172
§ 230-44. Additional information.
(5) All existing man-made features within 200 feet of the development
site boundary.
(6) Names of all owners of all immediately adjacent land, the names of
all proposed or existing developments immediately adjacent, and
the locations of dimension of any street or easements shown
thereon.
J. Proposed features.
(1) Changes to the land surface and vegetative cover, including final
proposed contours at intervals of one or two feet in areas of
disturbance. In areas of steep slopes (greater than 15%) and areas
undisturbed, five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(2) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, buildings and other
impervious and semi-impervious areas.
(3) The location of any proposed on-lot disposal systems, replacement
drainfield easements, and water supply wells.
(4) A note indicating existing and proposed land use(s).
(5) Plan and profile drawings of all proposed SWM facilities, including
BMPs, drainage structures, pipes, open channels, and swales.
(6) Where pervious pavement is to be installed, pavement material and
construction specifications shall be included.
(7) The location of all existing and proposed easements, including
drainage easements, access easements and riparian corridor
easements.
(8) A planting plan shall be provided for all vegetated BMPs in
accordance with Section 230-31N.
(9) The maximum impervious surface coverage for which the SWM
facilities have been designed for each lot on the SWM site plan.
K. The location of all E&S control facilities.
A. General description of the development site, including a description of
existing natural and hydrologic features and any environmentally
sensitive areas.
B. General description of the overall SWM concept for the project,
including a description of permanent SWM techniques, nonstructural
BMPs to be employed and construction specifications of the materials to
be used for structural SWM facilities. The narrative shall include a
description of any treatment trains and how the facilities are meant to
function with each other to manage stormwater runoff.
§ 230-43 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-44
197:173
§ 230-45. Supplemental information.
C. The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality and
peak flows) on adjacent properties and on any existing municipal
stormwater management facilities that may receive runoff from the
development site.
D. Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
SWM facilities.
E. Expected project time schedule.
F. A statement signed by the landowner, acknowledging the stormwater
management system to be a permanent fixture that can be altered or
removed only after approved of a revised plan by the Township.
G. When plan applications, whether preliminary or final, are submitted in
sections, a generalized stormwater management plan for the entire
development site shall be submitted in addition to the detailed
stormwater management site plan for the proposed section. This
generalized plan shall demonstrate how the stormwater of the proposed
section will relate to the entire development. The amount and velocity
at the discharge point of the section shall be included in the data
submitted. If temporary facilities are required for construction of a
section, such facilities shall be included in the submitted plans.
H. A note on the plan indicated any area that is not to be offered for
dedication along with a statement that the Township is not responsible
for maintenance of any area not dedicated to and accepted for public
use, and that no alteration to swales, or basins, or placement of
structures shall be permitted within easements.
I. For stormwater management facilities that would be located off site, a
note on the plan referencing a recorded stormwater maintenance
agreement which indicates that location and responsibility for
maintenance of the off-site facilities. All off-site facilities shall meet the
performance standards and design criteria specified in this chapter. See
Appendix D, Maintenance Agreement,57 for privately owned stormwater
facilities, for maintenance of on-site facilities.
J. Any other information deemed necessary or relevant by the Township of
the Township Engineer for the purposes of protecting the public health,
safety and welfare.
A. A written description of the following information shall be submitted:
(1) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(2) Calculations, assumptions, criteria and references used in the
design of stormwater management facilities, the establishment of
57.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 230-44 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-45
197:174
capacities, and the predevelopment and postdevelopment peak
discharge.
(3) For all basins, a plotting or tabulation of the storage volumes and
discharge curves with corresponding water surface elevations,
inflow hyrographs, and outflow hydrographs.
(4) For all proposed detention and retention basins that hold two acrefeet
or more of water and have an embankment that is six feet or
more in height, solid structures and characteristics shall be proved.
Plans and data prepared by a registered professional experienced
and educated in soil mechanics shall be submitted. These
submissions shall provide design solutions for frost-heave
potential, sping-swell potential, soil-bearing strength, water
infiltration, soil-settling characteristics, fill and backfilling
procedures and soil treatment techniques as required to protect
the improvements or structures.
(5) Stormwater management techniques and BMPs to be applied both
during and after development.
(6) Description of all erosion and sedimentation control measures,
temporary as well as permanent, including the staging of landmoving
activities, sufficient in detail to clearly indicate their
function. All erosion and sedimentation control measures shall
conform to the requirements of the PaDEP.
(7) Expected project time schedule.
B. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, including all reviews and
approvals, as required by PaDEP or the conservation district.
C. In areas of carbonate geology, a detailed geologic evaluation prepared
by a registered professional geologist (PG) must be submitted as part of
the SWM site plan. The report shall include, but not limited to the
following:
(1) The location of the following karst features;
(a) Sinkholes.
(b) Closed depressions.
(c) Lineaments in carbonate areas.
(d) Fracture traces.
(e) Caverns.
(f) Intermittent lakes.
(g) Ephemeral disappearing streams.
(h) Bedrock pinnacles (surface or subsurface).
§ 230-45 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-45
197:175
§ 230-46. through § 230-50. (Reserved)
(2) A plan for remediation of any identified karst features.
(3) Impacts of SWM facilities on adjacent karst features, and impacts
of karst features on adjacent SWM facilities.
D. An E&S Plan, including all approvals, as required by 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102, shall be provided to the Township prior to unconditional
final SWM site plan approval.
E. For any activities that require a DEP joint permit application and are
regulated under Chapter 105 or Chapter 106, require a Penn DOT
highway occupancy permit, or require any other permit under
applicable state or federal regulations, the permit(s) shall be part of the
SWM site plan and must be obtained prior to unconditional final plan
approval.
F. An operation and maintenance (O&M) plan that addresses the
requirements of § 230-63.
§ 230-45 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-46
197:176
ARTICLE V
Plan Processing Procedures
§ 230-51. Exemption from plan submission requirements.
A. The following regulated activities are specifically exempt from the
SWM site plan preparation and submission requirements articulated in
§ 230-31A and Articles IV and V of this chapter:
(1) Agricultural activity (see definitions) provided the activities are
performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter
102.
(2) Forest management and timber operations (see definitions)
provided the activities are performed according to the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
(3) Conservation practices being installed as part of the
implementation of a conservation plan written by an NRCScertified
planner.
(4) The installation of 1,000 or fewer square feet of impervious surface
coverage proposed after May 12, 2014, provided that the activities
meet the criteria of § 230-51C below and are conducted in
accordance with all requirements of this chapter.
(5) Domestic landscape and/or vegetable gardening.
(6) Installation of additional impervious surface coverage on a lot
where all of the following conditions have been met:
(a) The lot has a previously approved SWM site plan which
included SWM facilities to handle such future impervious
surface coverage.
(b) The SWM facilities on the approved SWM site plan were
installed and inspected and approved by the Township
Engineer.
(c) The Township approved the SWM site plan no more than five
years before the application to add the impervious surface
coverage was submitted to the Township or, if the Township
approved the SWM site plan more than five years before the
application to add the impervious surface coverage was
submitted to the Township, there have been no amendments to
the design standards of this chapter between the date of
approval of the SWM site plan and the submission of the
application to add impervious surface coverage.
B. The Township may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the Township believes may pose
a threat to public health, safety, property or the environment.
§ 230-51 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-51
197:177
C. An applicant proposing the cumulative installation of 1,000 square feet
or less of impervious surface coverage may be exempt from the design
plan submittal, and processing requirements of Articles IV and V of this
chapter if the proposed meets the criteria of § 230-51C. No person or
activity is exempted from compliance with § 230-65 and Articles VII,
VIII and IX of this chapter. Exemptions do not relieve the application of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance. Exemptions
shall not relieve an applicant from implementing such measures as
necessary to meet compliance with any NPDES permitting
requirements.
(1) Any applicant desiring exemption from design, plan submission,
and plan processing requirements shall complete an application for
exemption in the form set forth in Attachment A-158 and pay any
application filing fee.
(2) The applicant for exemption under this § 230-51C shall provide the
Township with all information necessary for the Township to
determine that:
(a) There shall be no disturbance of land within floodplains,
wetlands, environmentally sensitive areas, riparian forest
buffers, or slopes greater than 15%.
(b) No impervious surface coverage shall be installed and no earth
disturbance activity shall be conducted within any existing
drainage or stormwater easement created by or shown on any
recorded plan.
(c) The applicant shall minimize soil disturbance, take steps to
minimize erosion and sedimentation during construction
activity, and promptly reclaim all disturbed areas with topsoil
and vegetation.
(d) The applicant shall take steps that runoff be directed to
pervious areas on the subject property. No runoff shall be
directed onto an abutting street or neighboring property.
(e) The proposed impervious surface shall not adversely impact
any existing known problem areas or downstream property
owners or the quality of runoff entering any municipal separate
storm sewer system.
(f) The proposed impervious surface shall not create accelerated
erosion and sedimentation.
(3) If the proposed activity does not meet all of the criteria set forth in
§ 230-51C(2) above, the applicant shall follow the small project
processing procedure in § 230-52A.
58.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 230-51 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-51
197:178
§ 230-52. Applications not requiring SWM site plan.
(4) If the proposed activity is located in a high quality (HQ) or
exceptional value (EV) watershed, the applicant shall be
responsible for compliance with all federal and state requirements.
This exemption does not provide relief from any other applicable
state or federal requirements.
(5) No applicant and no activity shall violate or cause to be violated:
the Federal Clean Water Act, Clean Streams Law, or any regulation
issued thereunder, an NPDES permit, any recorded stormwater
management or operations and maintenance agreement, or any
requirement applicable to the municipal separate storm system.
A. Small projects.
(1) Anyone proposing a small project shall submit four copies of the
small project application to the Township. A complete small project
application shall include:
(a) Small project application form (form provided by Township).
(b) Small project sketch plan including the following:
[1] Name and address of landowner (and/or) developer.
[2] Date of small project application submission.
[3] Name of individual and/or firm that prepared the sketch if
different than the landowner and/or developer.
[4] Location and square footage of proposed impervious area
or land disturbance.
[5] Approximate footprint and location of all structures on
adjacent properties if located within 50 feet of the
proposed impervious area or land disturbance.
[6] Approximate location of existing stormwater management
facilities if present.
[7] Location and description of proposed SWM facilities.
[8] Direction of proposed stormwater discharge (e.g., with
arrows).
[9] Scale and North arrow.
(c) Filing fee (in accordance with the Township's current fee
schedule).
(2) The small project application shall be submitted in a format that is
clear, concise, legible, neat and well organized.
§ 230-51 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-52
197:179
§ 230-53. Pre-application meeting.
Applicants are encouraged to schedule a pre-application meeting to review
the overall stormwater management concept plan with Township staff/
engineer. The pre-application meeting is not mandatory and shall not
constitute formal filing of a plan with the Township. Topics discussed may
include the following:
(3) Landowner where the small project is located will be required to
execute an agreement with the Township to ensure compliance
with this chapter.
B. Development sites containing agricultural activities with conservation
plan.
(1) Where a development site is located within the Agricultural District
(A) and has an implemented conservation plan verified by the
conservation district, the submission of proof of the implemented
conservation plan shall be considered compliance with this chapter
for installation of impervious surface coverage where all of the
following criteria are met.
(2) For a parent tract containing not less than 10.5 acres to 20 acres,
cumulative new impervious areas of 10,000 square feet or less if
the minimum distance between the proposed impervious area and/
or SWM facility discharge point to the downslope property line of
the parent tract is at least 100 feet. In lieu of meeting the minimum
distance criteria, the applicant may provide documentation from a
qualified person that the stormwater flows from the parent tract
leave the parent tract in the same manner as the predevelopment
condition and that there will be no adverse effects to adjacent
property or that the flows reach a natural drainageway or existing
SWM facility before affecting adjacent property.
(3) For a parent tract containing not less than 20 acres, cumulative
new impervious areas of 20,000 square feet or less if the minimum
distance between the proposed impervious area and/or SWM
facility discharge point to the downslope property line of the parent
tract is at least 250 feet. In lieu of meeting the minimum distance
criteria, the applicant may provide documentation from a Qualified
Person that the stormwater flows from the parent tract leave the
parent tract in the same manner as the predevelopment condition
and that there will be no adverse effects to adjacent property or
that the flows reach a natural drainageway or existing SWM facility
before affecting adjacent property.
(4) An applicant for processing under this § 230-52B shall provide the
Township with information to demonstrate there shall be no
disturbance of land within floodplains, wetlands, environmentally
sensitive areas, riparian forest buffers, or slopes greater than 15%.
§ 230-52 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-53
197:180
§ 230-54. Stormwater management site plan submission.
A. Available geological maps, plans and other available data.
B. Findings of the site analysis including identification of any
environmentally sensitive areas, wellhead protection areas, riparian
corridors, hydrologic soil groups, existing natural drainageways, karst
features, areas conducive to infiltration to be utilized for volume
control, etc.
C. Results of infiltration tests.
D. Applicable subdivision and land development and/or zoning ordinance
provisions.
E. The conceptual project layout, including proposed structural and
nonstructural BMPs.
A. When a SWM site plan is required, the applicant shall submit the
following to the Township:
(1) Six copies of the SWM site plan prepared in accordance with the
requirements of Article IV of this chapter.
(2) Two copies of all supplemental data.
(3) An application form (provided by the Township).
(4) A filing fee (in accordance with the Township's current fee
schedule).
(5) A digital copy of the SWM site plan and supplemental data.
B. The SWM site plan shall be submitted in a formal that is clear, concise,
legible, neat and well organized.
C. The applicant is responsible for submitting plans to any other agencies
such as the Lancaster County Conservation District, PennDOT, DEP,
etc., when permits from these agencies are required. Final approval
shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining all necessary permits.
D. Incomplete submissions, as determined by the governing body or its
designee, shall be returned to the applicant within seven days, along
with a statement that the submission is incomplete, and stating the
deficiencies found. Otherwise, the application shall be deemed
accepted for filing as of the date of submission. Acceptance of the
application shall not, however, constitute an approval of the plan or a
waiver of any deficiencies or irregularities. The applicant may appeal
the Township's decision not to accept a particular application in
accordance with § 230-85 of this chapter.
E. At its sole discretion and in accordance with this article, when a SWM
site plan is found to be deficient, the Township may either disapprove
§ 230-53 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-54
197:181
§ 230-55. Township review.
§ 230-56. Revision of plans.
the submission and require a resubmission, or in the case of minor
deficiencies, the Township may accept submission of revisions.
A. When the regulated activity constitutes a subdivision or land
development, the SWM site plan and subdivision/land development plan
shall be processed concurrently according to the plan processing
procedure outlined in Chapter 240.
B. When the regulated activity constitutes a small project, the Township
shall review and take action on the small project application within 30
days of filing.
C. When the regulated activity does not constitute a subdivision or land
development or small project, the Township Engineer shall review the
SWM site plan for conformance with the provisions of this chapter
within 30 days of filing.
D. Following receipt of the Municipal Engineer's report and within 90 days
following the date of the first regular meeting of the Board of
Supervisors after the date the application is filed, the Board of
Supervisors will schedule the SWM site plan application for action at a
regularly scheduled public meeting.
E. Within 15 days of the meeting at which the SWM site plan application is
acted upon by the Board of Supervisors, written notice of the Board of
Supervisors' action shall be sent to the following individuals:
(1) Landowner or his agent.
(2) Applicant.
(3) Firm that prepared the plan.
(4) Lancaster County Conservation District.
F. If the Township disapproves the SWM site plan, the Township will state
the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The Township also may
approve the SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide the
acceptable conditions for approval in writing. Such conditional
approval shall be contingent upon the applicant's written acceptance of
the conditions.
A. Revisions to a SWM site plan after submission but before municipal
action shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan
consistent with § 230-54 and be subject to review as specified in
§ 230-55.
B. For the purposes of review deadlines, each resubmission required
under § 230-56A (after submission but before approval) shall constitute
§ 230-54 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-56
197:182
§ 230-57. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
Approval of a SWM site plan shall be valid for a period not to exceed
five years. This time period shall commence on the date that the Township
approves the SWM site plan. If a certificate of completion as required by
§ 230-58 has not been submitted within the specified time period, then the
Township may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke
any and all permits issued by the Township. SWM site plans that are
considered disapproved by the Township may be resubmitted in accordance
with § 230-54.
§ 230-58. Financial security.
a new submission for the purposes of time limits as set forth in the MPC
and this chapter.
C. Any substantial revisions to a SWM site plan after approval shall be
submitted as a new plan to the Township, accompanied by the
applicable fee.
A. A financial security (bond, restricted account or letter of credit) for
stormwater-related improvements shall be supplied by the developer in
conjunction with the subdivision/land development approval, or in
conjunction with the SWM site plan approval if no subdivision/land
development plan is required.
B. The applicant shall provide a financial security to the Township for the
timely installation and proper construction of all SWM facilities,
including E&S BMPs, as required by the approved SWM site plan and
this chapter and, as applicable, in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 509, 510, and 511 of the MPC.
C. The developer shall file with the Board of Supervisors financial security
in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of all stormwater management
facilities required by this chapter. Such financial security shall provide
for, and secure to the public, completion of all stormwater management
facilities within one year of the date fixed on the final approved plan for
such facilities. The amount of the financial security shall be equal to
110% of the cost of the required facilities for which financial security is
to be posted. The cost of the facilities shall be established by
submission to the Board of Supervisors of a bona fide bid or bids from
the contractor or contractors chosen by the developer to complete the
facilities, or in the absence of such bona fide bids, the cost shall be
established by estimate and approved by the Township. If the developer
requires more than one year from the date of posting of the financial
security to complete the required facilities, the amount of financial
security may be increased by an additional 10% for each one-year
period beyond the first anniversary date from posting of financial
security, or to an amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing
the required facilities, as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above procedures.
§ 230-56 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-58
197:183
D. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
Board of Supervisors may authorize submission of stormwater
management plan applications by section or stages of development
subject to such requirements or guarantees as to stormwater
management facilities in future sections or stages of development as it
finds essential for the protection of any finally approved section of the
development.
E. As the work of installing the required SWM facilities proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Board of
Supervisors to release or authorize the release of, from time to time,
such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the
contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall
be in writing addressed to the Board of Supervisors, and the Board of
Supervisors shall have 45 days from receipt of such request within
which to allow the Township Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Board
of Supervisors that such portion of the work upon the SWM facilities
has been completed in accordance with the approved SWM site plan.
Upon such certification the Board of Supervisors shall authorize release
by the bonding company or lending institution of an amount as
estimated by the Township Engineer fairly representing the value of the
SWM facilities completed. The Board of Supervisors may, prior to final
release at the time of completion and certification by its Engineer,
require retention of 10% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid SWM
facilities.
F. Schedule of inspections.
(1) During the construction of the development, the Township
Engineer or other authorized Township official may inspect the
premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance
with the information provided on the approved stormwater
management plan and with all applicable Township laws and
ordinances.
(2) The cost for conducting of inspections by the Township Engineer or
other authorized Township official shall be borne by the developer
in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
(3) In the event the Township Engineer or authorized official discovers
that the work does not comply with the approved plan or any
applicable laws and ordinances, the Township shall suspend any
existing zoning permits related to the development until the
required corrections have been made. Any portion of the work that
does not comply with the approved plan must be corrected by the
developer within 10 days. No work may proceed on any subsequent
phase of the stormwater management, the subdivision or land
development, or the building construction, until the related zoning
permits have been reinstated.
§ 230-58 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-58
197:184
§ 230-59. As-built plans.
(4) If, at any stage of the work, the Township Engineer or authorized
official determines that the soil or other conditions are not as
stated or shown in the approved application, or that there has been
a false statement or misrepresentation by the developer, the
Township Engineer or authorized official may refuse to approve
further work and the Township may revoke existing zoning permits
until a revised plan is submitted and approved, as required by
§ 230-41.
G. Final inspection.
(1) When the developer has completed all the required facilities, he
shall notify the Township in writing. The Township shall, within 10
days after receipt of such notice, authorize the Township Engineer
to inspect the required facilities. The Township Engineer shall
promptly file a report, in writing, with the Township and shall mail
a copy of the report to the developer. The report shall be made and
mailed within 30 days after receipt by the Township Engineer of the
aforesaid authorization by the Township.
(2) Based on the report of the Township Engineer, the Township shall
indicate approval or rejection of the stormwater management
facilities, either in whole or in part; and if not approved, state
reasons for the rejection. The Township shall immediately notify
the developer, in writing, of its actions.
(3) If the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer fails to
comply with the time limitation provisions contained herein, all
stormwater management facilities will be deemed to have been
approved, and the developer shall be released from all liability,
pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or other security
agreement.
(4) If any portion of said improvements are not approved or are
rejected by the Township, the developer shall proceed to compete
the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification
outlined herein shall be followed.
H. In the event that any SWM facilities which may be required have not
been installed as provided in the approved SWM site plan the Board of
Supervisors is hereby granted the power to enforce any corporate bond,
or other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If
proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the cost
of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the SWM facilities
covered by said security, the Board of Supervisors may, at its option,
install part of such SWM facilities and may institute appropriate legal
or equitable action to recover the monies necessary to complete the
remainder of the SWM facilities.
§ 230-58 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-59
197:185
§ 230-60. (Reserved)
A. Upon completion of the plan improvements and prior to the release of
financial security, the applicant shall submit an as-built plan to the
Township. The as-built plan must show the final design specifications
for all stormwater management facilities and be sealed by a registered
professional engineer.
B. Review by Township Engineer.
(1) The as-built plan shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer to
verify the plan includes all of the stormwater management facilities
on the subject property and the facilities are shown at the correct
location.
(2) The Township Engineer shall either approve the as-built plan or
identify corrections required.
(3) If the Township Engineer identifies corrections required to the asbuilt
plan, the applicant shall submit a revised as-built plan to the
Township addressing the corrections.
C. Following approval of the as-built plan by the Township Engineer, the
applicant shall submit the SWM site plan for recordation in the Office of
the Recorder of Deeds.
D. Digital inventory.
(1) When required. A digital inventory shall be submitted following
approval of the as-built plan by the Township Engineer if the
project includes any of the following:
(a) SWM facilities which are offered for dedication to the
Township.
(b) SWM facilities which connect to or alter any portion of the
Township's MS4.
(c) BMPs included on a NPDES permit for which the Township is
required to keep an inventory under the Township's MS4
permit.
(2) Digital inventory requirements.
(a) The digital inventory shall be in an electronic format
acceptable to the Township Engineer.
(b) The digital inventory shall include all information included and
shown on the approved as-built plan.
(c) All coordinates as depicted on the plan shall be based on the PA
South Zone State Plan Coordinate System (NAD83 for
horizontal and NAVD88 for vertical).
§ 230-59 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-60
197:186
ARTICLE VI
Operation and Maintenance (O&M)
§ 230-61. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 230-62. Operation and maintenance agreements.
The operation and maintenance agreement shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Township Solicitor and Board of Supervisors.
§ 230-63. Operation and maintenance (O&M) plan contents.
A. The landowner, successor and assigns shall maintain all SWM facilities
in good working order in accordance with the approved O & M plan.
B. The landowner shall convey to the Township easements to assure
access for inspections and maintenance, if required.
C. The landowner shall keep on file with the Township the name, address
and telephone number of the person or company responsible for
maintenance activities; in the event of a change, new information will
be submitted to the Township within 10 days of the change.
D. The landowner shall enumerate permanent SWM facilities as
permanent real estate appurtenances and record as deed restrictions or
easements that run with the land.
E. The record owner of the development site shall sign and record an
operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement covering all SWM
facilities, including riparian buffers and riparian forest buffers, which
are to be privately owned. Said agreement, designated as Appendix D,
is attached and made part hereto.59 The O&M plan and agreement shall
be recorded as a restrictive covenant agreement that runs with the
land.
A. The O&M plan shall clearly establish the operation and maintenance
necessary to ensure the proper functioning of all temporary and
permanent SWM facilities and erosion and sedimentation control
facilities.
B. The following shall be addressed in the O&M plan:
(1) Description of maintenance requirements, including, but not
limited to, the following:
(a) Regular inspection of the SWM facilities. To assure proper
implementation of BMPs, maintenance and care SWM BMPs
should be inspected by a qualified person, which may include
the landowner, or the owner's designee, according to the
following minimum frequencies:
59.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 230-61 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-63
197:187
§ 230-64. Maintenance of facilities accepted by Township.
[1] Annually for the first five years.
[2] Once every three years thereafter.
[3] During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or
greater storm.
[4] As specified in the O&M agreement pursuant to § 230-62.
(b) All pipes, swales and detention facilities shall be kept free of
any debris or other obstruction and in original design
condition.
(c) Removal of silt from all permanent structures which trap silt or
sediment in order to keep the material from building up in
grass waterways, pipes, detention or retention basins,
infiltration structures, or BMPs, and thus reducing their
capacity to convey or store water.
(d) Re-establishment of vegetation of scoured areas or areas
where vegetation has not been successfully established.
Selection of seed mixtures shall be subject to approval by the
Township.
(2) Riparian forest buffer management plan prepared in accordance
with 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, § 14(b)(4), if required.
(3) Identification of a responsible individual, corporation, association
or other entity for ownership and maintenance of both temporary
and permanent stormwater management and erosion and
sedimentation control facilities.
(4) Establishment of suitable easements for access to all facilities.
(5) Two copies of inspection reports, as required by § 230-63B(1)(a)
above, shall be provided to the Township within 90 days following
completion of reports.
A. The Township reserves the right to accept or reject any proposal to
dedicate ownership and operating responsibility of any SWM facilities
to the Township.
B. If SWM facilities are accepted by the Township, the landowner/
developer shall be required to pay a specified amount to the Municipal
Stormwater Maintenance Fund to defray costs of periodic inspections
and maintenance expenses. This fee shall be provided to the Township
prior to acceptance of the SWM facilities. The amount of the deposit
shall be determined as follows subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors:
§ 230-63 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-64
197:188
§ 230-65. Maintenance of existing facilities/BMPs.
SWM facilities existing on the effective date of this chapter, which have not
been accepted by the Township or for which maintenance responsibility has
not been assumed by a private entity such as a homeowners' association,
shall be maintained by the individual landowners. Such maintenance shall
include at a minimum those items set forth in § 230-63B(1) above. If the
Township determines at any time that any permanent SWM facility has
been eliminated, altered, blocked through the erection of structures or the
deposit of materials, or improperly maintained, the condition constitutes
a nuisance and the Township shall notify the landowner of corrective
measures that are required, and provide for a reasonable period of time, not
to exceed 30 days, within which the landowner shall take such corrective
action. If the landowner does not take the required corrective action, the
Township may either perform the work or contract for the performance of
the work and bill the landowner for the cost of the work plus a penalty of
10% of the cost of the work. If such bill is not paid by the landowner within
30 days, the Township may file a municipal claim against the property upon
which the work was performed in accordance with the applicable laws. The
Township shall have the right to choose among the remedies and may use
one or more remedies concurrently.
(1) The deposit shall cover the estimated costs for maintenance and
inspections for 25 years. The Township will establish the estimated
costs according to the O&M requirements outlined in the approved
O&M plan.
(2) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to present
worth of the annual series values.
(3) If a storage facility is proposed that also serves as a recreation
facility (e.g., ballfield, lake), the Township may reduce or waive the
amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the value of
the land for public recreation purpose.
C. If at any time a dedicated storage facility is eliminated due to the
installation of storm sewers or other storage facility such as a regional
detention facility, the unused portion of the maintenance fund deposit
will be applied to the cost of abandoning the facility and connecting to
the storm sewer system or other facility. Any amount of the deposit
remaining after the costs of abandonment are paid will be returned to
the depositor.
D. Maintenance shall be conducted as necessary to provide for the
continued functioning of the SWM facility. Costs of inspections,
maintenance and repairs are recoverable from the Municipal
Stormwater Maintenance Fund.
§ 230-64 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-66
197:189
§ 230-66. Maintenance of stormwater management facilities during
development.
Maintenance of SWM facilities during development shall be the
responsibility of the developer and shall include, but not be limited to:
§ 230-67. through § 230-70. (Reserved)
A. Removal of silt from all debris basins, traps or other structures or
measures when 60% of capacity is filled with silt.
B. Periodic maintenance of temporary control facilities such as
replacement of straw bale dikes, straw filters or similar measures.
C. Establishment or reestablishment of vegetation by seeding and
mulching or sodding of scoured areas or areas where vegetation has not
been established.
D. Installation of necessary controls to correct unforeseen problems
caused by storm events within design frequencies.
E. The contractor or developer shall be responsible for removal of all
temporary measures and installation of permanent measures upon
completion of the development.
§ 230-66 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-67
197:190
ARTICLE VII
Fees and Expenses
§ 230-71. General.
The Township may include all costs incurred in the fee charged to an
applicant.
§ 230-72. Expenses covered by fees.
The fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for the following:
§ 230-73. through § 230-80. (Reserved)
A. Administrative and clerical costs.
B. Review of the SWM site plan by Engineer and Township staff.
C. Review of the stormwater operation and maintenance plan and
stormwater agreement by the Township Engineer/Solicitor/staff.
D. Inspections by Township Engineer and Township staff.
E. Any additional work required by the Township Engineer, Township
Solicitor or Township staff to enforce any permit provisions regulated
by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper completion of
stipulated remedial actions.
§ 230-71 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-73
197:191

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 230-81. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in
§ 230-81D below.
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
that allows any non-stormwater discharge including sewage,
process wastewater, and wash water to enter a municipal separate
storm sewer (if applicable), or waters of this commonwealth, and
any connections to the storm sewer from indoor drains and sinks;
and
(2) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the municipal separate storm sewer (if
applicable) which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records, and approved by the Township.
(3) (a) Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm
sewers or roadside ditches, except as provided in
§ 230-81A(3)(b).
(b) When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or
storm sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside
ditches may be permitted by the Township.
(c) Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative
BMPs to the maximum extent practicable.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into surface waters
of this commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater,
except:
(1) As provided in § 230-81D below; and
(2) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a SWM facility or within a drainage easement that will limit or diminish
the functioning of the SWM facility in any manner.
D. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of this
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources including water line flushing.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air conditioning condensate.
§ 230-81 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-81
197:193
§ 230-82. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter SWM facilities which
have been installed on a property unless such person has obtained all
required Township approvals to permit such modification, removal, filling,
landscaping or alteration. No person shall place any structure, fill,
landscaping or vegetation into a SWM facility or within a drainage
easement which will limit or alter the functioning of the SWM facility or
easement in any manner.
§ 230-83. through § 230-90. (Reserved)
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space pumps.
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) De-chlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(12) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(13)Water from individual residential car washing.
(14) Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(15) Diverted stream flows.
(16) Rising ground waters.
E. In the event that the Township or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in § 230-81D above significantly contribute to
pollution of the waters of this commonwealth, the Township or DEP will
notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
§ 230-81 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-83
197:194
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 230-91. Right-of-entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of
the Township may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the
Township to investigate or ascertain the condition of the subject property in
regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 230-92. Enforcement.
The Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 230-93. Violations and penalties; remedies.
A. Any permit or approval issued by the Township pursuant to this chapter
may be suspended by the Township for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
(2) A violation of any provisions of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development that constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance, pollution or endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended permit may be reinstated by the Township when:
(1) The Township has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violation that caused the suspension;
(2) The Township is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter to commit or permit any other
person to commit any of the following acts:
(1) To commence regulated activities prior to obtaining unconditional
approval of a SWM site plan or in violation of the terms or
conditions of a SWM site plan approved under this chapter.
(2) To install, repair, modify or alter SWM facilities prior to obtaining
approvals under this chapter, or in a manner which violates the
terms and conditions of any approval issued under this chapter.
(3) To misuse or fail to maintain any SWM facility installed upon a
property.
(4) To construct any improvements upon, grade, fill or take any other
action which will impair the proper functioning of any SWM facility.
§ 230-91 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-93
197:195
§ 230-94. Appeals.
§ 230-95. Modification of provisions.
(5) To place false information on, or omit relevant information from, an
application for approval under this chapter.
(6) To fail to comply with any other provisions of this chapter.
B. For each violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner, agent,
lessee, or contractor or any other person who commits, takes part in, or
assists in any such violation shall be liable upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding to pay a fine of not less than $200 nor more than
$1,000 for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution. Each
day or portion thereof in which a violation exists shall be considered a
separate violation of this chapter, and each section of this chapter
which is violated shall be considered a separate violation.
C. The Township may also institute suits to restrain, prevent, or abate a
violation of this chapter in equity or at law. Such proceedings in equity
or at law may be initiated before any court of competent jurisdiction. In
cases of emergency where, in the opinion of the court, the
circumstances of the case require immediate abatement of the unlawful
conduct, the court may, in its decree, fix a reasonable time during which
the person responsible for the unlawful conduct shall correct or abate
the same. The expense of such proceedings shall be recoverable from
the violator in such manner as may now or hereafter be provided by
law.
D. The Board of Supervisors may also take actions relating to suspension
or revocation of permits set forth in § 230-92.
E. The Board of Supervisors may, by resolution, appoint a code
enforcement officer to enforce this chapter and may authorize such
code enforcement officer to institute summary criminal proceedings
without prior action by the Board of Supervisors.
A. Any person aggrieved by any administrative action of West Lampeter
Township may appeal to the Board of Supervisors within 30 days of that
action. Any such appeal shall be governed by the procedures of Article
V of the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 501 et seq.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Supervisors may
appeal to the Lancaster County Court of Common Pleas, in accordance
with Article VII of Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq., the Local
Agency Law, within 30 days of that decision.
A. The provisions of this chapter not relating to water quality are intended
as minimum standards for the protection of the public health, safety,
and welfare. The Township reserves the right to modify or to extend
them conditionally in individual cases as may be necessary in the public
interest; provided, however, that such variation shall not have the effect
§ 230-93 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-95
197:196
of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter, and that the
applicant shows that to the satisfaction of the Township that the
applicable regulation is unreasonable, or will cause undue hardship, or
that an alternative proposal will allow for equal or better results. The
list of such modifications, along with an explanation of and justification
for each modification, shall be included on the plan. This section does
not apply during an enforcement action.
B. In granting waivers/modifications for provisions of this chapter not
relating to water quality, the Township may impose such conditions as
will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards and requirements of this chapter.
§ 230-95 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-95
197:197
Chapter 235
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals running at large — See Ch. 94, Art. I.
Loitering — See Ch. 163.
Parks and public property — See Ch. 185.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 197.
Traffic regulations — See Ch. 262.
§ 230-95 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 230-95
235:198
ARTICLE I
Permit to Construct Drains, Driveways and Other Means of Egress
[Adopted 3-3-1969 by Ord. No. 22]
§ 235-1. Permit required.
No person, firm, or corporation shall grade, construct, install or erect a
drain, culvert, footwalk, drive or driveway, or other means of ingress or
egress, or affecting discharge or passage of drainage water, onto or along a
Township road unless and until the Township has granted a permit for such
grading, construction, installation or erection.
§ 235-2. Application requirements.
Application for such permit shall be made by the owner or occupier, or by
his contractor or agent, in writing, on forms provided by the Township and
in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be established by the
Township. There shall be appended to each application a drawing or plan
showing the outlines of the property affected with existing improvements
thereon, existing drains, culverts, footwalks, drives and driveways, with the
proposed drain, culvert, footwalk, drive or driveway proposed to be added,
and the relationship of the foregoing to the Township road, particularly with
relationship to the effect on the drainage of said road.
§ 235-3. Fees.
The costs of filing such application and permit to be issued thereon, and
the cost of any inspection deemed necessary by the Supervisors, shall be
determined according to a schedule of fees which will be adopted by the
Supervisors by resolution and all such fees and costs shall be paid into the
Township treasury.
§ 235-4. Alteration of plans.
The Supervisors may alter plans filed with the application, and specify any
changes or modifications of any kind which they may deem necessary and
make their approval of the granting of any permits subject to any such
alterations, changes, or modifications.
§ 235-5. Compliance with permit requirements.
All grading, construction, installation, and erection shall be in strict
compliance with the plans and specifications on the basis of which the
permit is granted.
§ 235-6. Violations and penalties.60
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates or permits a violation
of this article or of any of the terms and conditions of any permit issued
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 235-6
235:199
hereto, including any regulations applicable thereto, shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the Township
in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be imposed until the
date of the determination of the violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure.
Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to
seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 235-6 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 235-6
235:200
ARTICLE II
Street Openings
[Adopted 6-17-1974 by Ord. No. 36]
§ 235-7. Permit required.61
In accordance with the provisions of 53 P.S. § 67322, as amended, no
railroad or street railway shall hereafter be constructed upon any Township
road, nor shall any railroad or street railway crossings, nor any gas pipe,
water pipe, electric conduits, or other piping, be laid upon or in, nor shall
any telephone, telegraph, or electric light or power poles, or any coal tipples
or any other obstructions be erected upon or in any portion of a Township
road except under such conditions, restrictions and regulations relating to
the installation and maintenance thereof, as may be prescribed in permits
granted by the Township for such purpose.
§ 235-8. Application requirements; fees.62
The application for a permit shall be on a form prescribed by the Township
and submitted to the Township in duplicate. The application shall be
accompanied by a fee in accordance with the schedule of fees set forth
by the Department of Transportation for highway occupancy permits and
restoration charges. In addition, the applicant shall submit three copies of
a sketch showing such dimensions as the location of the intended facility,
width of the traveled roadway, right-of-way lines and a dimension to the
nearest intersecting street.
§ 235-9. Issuance of permit.
A permit shall be issued to the applicant after all the aforementioned
requirements have been filed.
§ 235-10. Notice upon completion of work.
Upon completion of the work, the applicant shall give written notice thereof
to the Township.
§ 235-11. Inspections; correction of defects.63
Upon completion of the work authorized by the permit, the Township shall
inspect the work and, when necessary, enforce compliance with the
conditions, restrictions and regulations prescribed by the permit. In
addition to that inspection, the Board of Supervisors or its agents may
reinspect the work not more than two years after its completion, and if any
settlement of the road surface or other defect appears in the work contrary
to the conditions, restrictions and regulations of the Township, the Board
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 235-11
235:201
of Supervisors may enforce compliance therewith. Where any settlement
or defect in the work occurs, if the applicant shall fail to rectify a defect
which presents an immediate or imminent safety or health problem within
48 hours or any other defect within 60 days after written notice from the
Township to do so, the Township may do the work and impose upon the
applicant the cost thereof, together with an additional 20% of such cost.
§ 235-12. Violations and penalties.64
Any person, firm, corporation or utility which violates or permits a violation
of this article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township before a District Justice, pay a
fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney's fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this article.
No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-11 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 235-12
235:202
ARTICLE III
Installation and Maintenance of Sidewalks and Curbs
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 235-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicted,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, public or private
corporation, whether for-profit or not-for-profit, trust, estate or other legally
recognized entity. Whenever the term "person" is used in connection with
any clause providing for the imposition of a fine or penalty or the ordering
of the action to comply with the terms of this article, the term "person" shall
include the members of an association, partnership or firm and the officers
of any public or private corporation, whether for-profit or not-for-profit.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — For unoccupied or multiple-unit properties, the
person or person who is/are the owner(s) of such property. For occupied
single-unit properties, all owners and occupants of the property.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Lampeter, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 235-14. Responsibility of property owners.
The owner or owners of all lots fronting or abutting upon any public street
or alley shall construct, lay, set and maintain in good repair and condition
free of hazard, satisfactory to the Township Board of Supervisors or its
designee, the respective sidewalks and curbs in front of or alongside their
respective lots according to the elevations, grade, width, height and slope
which are now or hereafter established by the Township, and of the
materials and specifications hereinafter prescribed.
§ 235-15. Permit required; fees.
Notification and permits.
A. Prior to the laying, construction, reconstruction or alteration of either
curbs or sidewalks by property owners, a property owner shall apply for
a permit from the Township to do so according to the regulations set
forth herein, together with the appropriate fee as may be established
from time to time by resolution. The Township shall issue the permit if
the application conforms to the ordinances of the Township. No person,
whether a property owner or a contractor, shall lay, construct,
reconstruct or alter either curbs or sidewalks prior to obtaining a
permit.
B. The property owner and his contractor are responsible for notification
of all utilities using the Pennsylvania One-Call System and other means
as necessary prior to the start of work.
§ 235-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 235-16
235:203
§ 235-16. General requirements.
A. Location, line and grade. Location, line and grade will be given by the
Township where applicable upon request. Curbs and sidewalks shall be
constructed in accordance with approved development and/or
Township plans and specifications and to lines and grades established
by the Township. No curb or sidewalk grade shall adversely impact
upon any building foundation.
B. Safety. The contractor shall leave the work area clean and neat at the
end of each day. The contractor shall place suitable barricades around
the work area in such a manner as to protect both pedestrians and
vehicular traffic. Such barricades shall be properly lighted during night
hours. The contractor shall maintain the work zone in compliance with
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Work Zone Traffic Control
requirements.
C. Obstructions. Where existing structures such as light standards, utility
poles and fire hydrants are within the limits of curb or sidewalk
construction, an asphalt-impregnated fiber expansion joint, not less
than 1/2 inch in width, shall be placed completely around said
obstruction for the full depth of the concrete and brick. Expansion joint
material shall be placed to form a square 12 inches from each side of
the obstruction. No obstruction other than those listed above shall be
permitted to be placed within a sidewalk. No structure shall be
constructed within the limits of the curb. When obstructions including,
but not limited to, railroad ties, concrete gutter and brick crosswalks
are encountered during excavation, such obstructions shall be
completely removed by the contractor and the excavated area
backfilled in compliance with § 235-18E of this article. Tree stumps and
roots shall be completely removed by the contractor in compliance with
Subsection H of this section.
D. Downspouts and rain gutters. Downspouts may be placed within the
sidewalk and curb along Township roads in SCH-40 polyvinyl chloride
(PVC) pipe or other such material approved by the Township. A one-inch
reveal shall be maintained between the paved street surface and the
bottom of the downspout pipe. A construction joint shall be placed over
the pipe. If insufficient grade and/or cover exists for placement of
downspouts within the sidewalk and curb, rain gutters within the
sidewalks and curb are permitted. Gutters shall be formed within the
concrete of the sidewalk and curb and be not less than 3 1/2 inches nor
exceed five inches in width and not be more than 3/4 inch deep.
E. Street signs. The property owners contractor is responsible for knowing
and marking the location of existing street signs before construction
begins. Where existing street signs are within the limits of sidewalk
construction a four-inch thinwall polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe sleeve
shall be installed by the property owner's contractor. This pipe sleeve
shall extend the entire depth of the concrete. In addition, the sleeve
shall be installed so that the edge of the sign being installed will be
§ 235-16 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 235-16
235:204
§ 235-17. Construction, repair and replacement methods and
specifications.
even with the sidewalk side (back) of the curb. The contractor shall
contact the Township in the event of questions about the installation of
sign sleeves. In the event that a stop sign or other traffic control sign
is involved, temporary provisions shall be made to keep such sign erect
and visible to motorists. No sign sleeves shall be installed within the
limits of the curb. This installation shall not interfere with compliance
with United States Americans with Disabilities Act (P.L. 101-33665) or
regulations adopted pursuant thereto for clear area.
F. Handicapped ramps. One ramp shall be provided at each corner. Curb
ramps shall have a minimum width of four feet at the street surface
unless otherwise approved by the Township. All ramps shall comply
with the United States Americans with Disabilities Act and all
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
G. Monuments. No monuments or property corners shall be covered or
disturbed by the construction of a sidewalk or curb.
H. Tree stumps and roots. When tree stumps and/or roots are encountered
in excavation for curbs or sidewalks, they shall be removed by stump
grinder and/or excavation. Grindings shall be completely removed.
Spaces adjacent to the sidewalk shall be filled with acceptable material
placed in six-inch layers and each layer shall be thoroughly compacted
before the next layer is placed. The final layer of backfill shall consist of
previously stripped or new topsoil placed to meet the final grade. On
the street side of the curb, the contractor shall comply with all
requirements of § 235-18E of this article.
A. Sidewalks.
(1) Where existing sidewalks extend from the building line to the curb
or are of a greater width than provided below, any repair or
construction shall be completed in accordance with this article,
unless waived by the Board of Supervisors.
(2) The entire width of the sidewalk area shall be graded according to
the established grade.
(3) All concrete sidewalks shall have a minimum thickness of four
inches of concrete except across driveway aprons where the
concrete shall have a minimum thickness of six inches and have
reinforcing mesh placed within the driveway area.
(4) Excavations for sidewalks shall be made to the required depth and
a layer of 2B crushed stone not less than four inches thick shall be
placed and thoroughly compacted prior to the laying of the
sidewalk.
65.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 235-16 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 235-17
235:205
(5) Where a sidewalk is placed adjacent to the curb, the sidewalk shall
be pinned to the curb by drilling in the curb a five-eighths-inchdiameter
hole, two inches deep, three inches from top of curb and
placing a six-inch-long, one-half-inch-diameter rebar pin, at
intervals of five feet on center across the sidewalk area, into the
drilled pin hole. There also shall be an expansion joint placed
between the curb and sidewalk for the entire length.
(6) Where a grass strip is provided, it shall be planted with grass and
shall at all times be kept closely trimmed. Planting of any trees in
this grass strip area shall be in accordance with approved tree
species as listed and provided at the Township office. Root barrier
material shall be installed, in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications, to prevent tree roots from heaving sidewalk and
curb. Planting of shrubs or hedges shall be prohibited. Placement
of nonplant matter shall be approved by the Township.
(7) Planting of specified tree species shall be permitted within
sidewalks without grass strip areas only if provisions are made for
an adequate tree opening. This area shall be at least two feet by
four feet in dimension. Root barrier material shall be installed, in
accordance with the manufacturer's specifications, to prevent tree
roots from heaving sidewalk and curb. Clearance to the rear of the
tree opening shall comply with the United States Americans With
Disabilities Act66 and all regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
(8) Wherever possible, property owners shall maintain a uniform
design for curb and sidewalk replacement within the block. If a
grass strip exists between the curb and sidewalk, the grass strip
shall be preserved when the sidewalk is replaced, particularly
when the majority of sidewalks within a block contain grass strips.
If a sidewalk without a grass strip is replaced and a majority of
sidewalks within the block have a grass strip, a grass strip shall be
provided.
(9) Sidewalks shall have a uniform fall of 1/4 inch to the foot from the
back edge of the sidewalk toward the curb. The grass strip between
the sidewalk and the curb shall conform to the same slope.
(10) Asphalt impregnated fiber expansion joint material shall be placed
no more than every 20 linear feet, at the beginning and end of the
radius, and at a change in horizontal alignment of property lines.
Utility boxes including, but not limited to, water shutoff, sanitary
sewer vent, natural gas shutoff and electric meter shall be within a
section of concrete measuring five linear feet between expansion
joints. Construction joints shall be placed at a maximum distance of
five linear feet. Construction joints may be hand-tooled or saw-cut
to a depth of 1/2 inch.
66.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 235-17 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 235-17
235:206
(11) Sidewalks across driveways shall be constructed without any step
or break in grade from the abutting sidewalk or, at a minimum,
shall conform to the requirements of the United States Americans
With Disabilities Act67 and the regulations adopted pursuant
thereto. The sidewalk across the driveway and driveway apron
shall be six-inch-thick concrete and on a four-inch-thick layer of 2B
crushed stone with reinforcing mesh.
B. Curbs.
(1) Curbs to be installed shall be constructed of concrete with a seveninch
dressed surface on top, an eight-inch exposed surface or
reveal along the street side, which shall likewise be dressed and
extend a minimum of 10 inches below the street surface and have
an eight-inch base. The exposed surface or reveal on the street side
shall include a one-inch batter from the street surface to the top of
the curb. Portions of the curb which are replaced between two
satisfactory sections shall have the same exposed surface or reveal
as the existing curb.
(2) Construction joints shall be placed at a maximum of 15 linear feet.
The construction joints may be hand-tooled or saw-cut to a
minimum depth of 1 1/2 inches. The construction joint shall
traverse the top of the curb and continue down the face of the curb
at a minimum of 10 inches on the street side. Expansion joint
material may be substituted for construction joints.
(3) Expansion joint material shall be placed in curbs at the end of each
workday, at the beginning and end of a radius, at a change in
horizontal alignment or property line.
(4) Excavations shall be made to the required depth and the material
upon which the curb is to be constructed shall have a layer of 2B
crushed stone not less than four inches thick which shall be placed
and thoroughly compacted prior to the laying of the curb.
(5) Street excavation for curb installation shall be parallel to the
finished curb not less than 12 inches nor more than 24 inches from
the face of the curb and shall be saw-cut in a straight line. All
material excavated from the street area shall be replaced with
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation approved 2A modified
stone and compacted to within four inches of the existing road
surface.
(6) A depressed curb shall be constructed across every private
driveway. The curb shall remain at least 1 1/2 inches above the
finished street surface.
C. Brick sidewalks.
67.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 235-17 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 235-17
235:207
§ 235-18. Supplemental regulations.
(1) Property owners may install brick paving in place of concrete
sidewalk as provided in this subsection.
(2) Construction of brick sidewalks shall consist of a three-inch layer of
crushed 1B or 2A stone (compacted), three-and-one-half-inch layer
of concrete base, a one-inch mortar pad and a layer of brick.
Mortar-filled joints shall be used following the brick layer.
(3) Where the brick paving abuts a curb, expansion joints should be
provided and installed in accordance with Subsection A(11) herein.
(4) Replacement of a portion or all of an existing sidewalk shall be
done using the construction methods and material specifications
contained throughout this article.
(5) Handicap ramps which are adjacent to or an extension of brick
sidewalk shall be constructed of concrete as required by this
article.
(6) A design that combines both brick and concrete shall be approved
by the Township Board of Supervisors.
(7) The transition between brick paving and concrete sidewalk shall be
smooth with no more than a one-half-inch grade change.
A. Material specifications. All materials shall conform to Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication 408, latest edition. All
sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed of 3,750 pound concrete with
a 4% to 6% air entrapment ingredient and a maximum slump of three
inches, constructed level on stone backfill with a minimum thickness of
four inches. The use of calcium chloride is prohibited from the concrete
used for repair or construction, where slip forms are used a maximum
slump of 1 1/2 inches shall be permitted. No concrete shall be placed
when the air temperature is below 40° Fahrenheit. Curing compound
may be applied to retain moisture to allow for the complete hydration of
the concrete. No material such as asphalt, macadam or blacktop shall
be substituted for these specifications.
B. Forms. Forms shall be wood or metal, straight, free from warp, and of
sufficient strength to resist the pressure of the concrete without
springing. If of wood, they shall be two-inch planks, surfaced on the
inside and the top. Forms shall be of a depth equal to the depth of the
concrete. A front and back form shall be used for curbs except where a
good concrete sidewalk, which is not to be removed, abuts the new
curb. Forms shall be accurately set to line and grade in such a manner
as to prevent settlement or displacement.
C. Finishing. All forms shall be removed within 24 hours after the concrete
has been placed and minor defects shall be filled with mortar composed
of one part portland cement and two parts of fine aggregate. The top
§ 235-17 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 235-18
235:208
and face of the curb from the top of 10 inches below or to the top of
the street surface, when in place, shall be finished while the concrete is
still green by rubbing the surface with a carborundum stone, soft brick,
or wood blocks and water until a smooth, even surface is produced.
All joints in the curb shall be promptly opened from top to bottom and
edges adjacent to the joints shall be sharp and clean cut. Sidewalks
shall be finished after pouring before the concrete sets.
D. Curing. Concrete curbs and sidewalks shall be protected from
rainstorms with paper, burlap, canvas, or similar materials. Curing
compound may be applied to retain moisture in concrete to allow
complete hydration of the cement. Plastic, burlap, straw or other types
of moisture barrier shall be used to maintain concrete wet during the
drying process for at least seven days after pouring if curing compound
is not used. No concrete shall be placed when the temperature is below
40° Fahrenheit. To help prevent spalling and deterioration of concrete
surface from winter damage, a concrete hardener may be applied 28
days after concrete is poured.
E. Backfilling and trench restoration. After the concrete has cured
sufficiently, spaces adjacent to the curb and sidewalk shall be refilled
with acceptable material in layers of not more than four inches in depth.
Each layer shall be thoroughly compacted to the required elevation on
the roadway side of all curbs, backfill shall consist of Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation approved 2A modified stone placed and
compacted in six-inch layers to within four inches of the existing road
surface. In the event that this excavated area extends more than two
feet from the face of the curb, the contractor shall temporarily fill the
area with cold patch asphalt until such time as permanent trench
restoration is completed. All roadway restoration shall conform to
Township standards.
F. Expansion joints. Where a sidewalk abuts the curb, a building, wall or
other permanent structure, a premolded expansion joint 1/4 inch in
thickness shall be placed between the curb and sidewalk for the full
length of such permanent structure. The slabs shall be constructed in
twenty-foot maximum lengths with premolded expansion material
having a minimum thickness of 1/4 inch separating slabs transversely.
G. Scoring. For sidewalks, scoring shall be done transversely at evenly
spaced intervals of not more than five feet. The depth shall be 1/5 the
thickness of concrete and in no case less than one-half-inch deep. For
curbs, scoring shall be done at no greater than fifteen-foot intervals.
The scoring shall be done transversely and, extend continuously down
the face of the curb 10 inches. The score shall be 1 1/2 inches deep.
Expansion joints may be substituted for scoring.
H. Concrete color. Coloring of concrete for curbs and/or sidewalks shall be
of an earth tone and shall be thoroughly and uniformly mixed
throughout the concrete. Colored concrete shall not be mixed or
splattered onto noncolored areas. If colored concrete becomes mixed or
§ 235-18 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 235-18
235:209
§ 235-19. Authorization for other curbs and sidewalks.
The Township Board of Supervisors may, by resolution or by motion,
authorize the construction of curbs and sidewalks other than specified
herein upon written request from the property owner.
§ 235-20. Mandatory installation or reconstruction of curb and
sidewalk.
splattered onto noncolored areas, it shall be cleaned so that no change
in color is noticeable.
I. Stamped decorative patterned concrete. Where sidewalk areas are to
be constructed of stamped decorative patterned concrete, it shall be
constructed of 4,000 psi concrete with one-half-inch stone, 4% to 6% air
entrapment, four inch slump with no additives. Beauty strips using
stamped patterned concrete shall be a minimum of 16 inches in width
or a maximum of 24 inches in width for sidewalks of eight feet or
greater. All stamped decorative patterned concrete shall be of a texture
that will not cause a tripping or slipping hazard in dry or wet
conditions. Coloring shall conform to Subsection H of this section.
J. Inspections. After all forms and stone have been set and prior to
pouring of any concrete, the property owner or his contractor shall
contact the Township office for an inspection, The property owner shall
provide the Township with a minimum 24 hours' prior notice to the onsite
expected concrete delivery time. The property owner and his
contractor shall complete all corrective actions outlined by the
inspector and shall notify the Township that the site is ready for a
reinspection as above, which reinspection shall be completed prior to
the pouring of concrete. Concrete pour tickets verifying the concrete
mixture shall be made available to the inspector upon request. A final
inspection shall be completed after concrete and/or roadway asphalt
has set and cleanup has been completed.
A. Prior to street improvements, including bituminous asphalt overlay, the
Township shall require, upon 120 days' written notification to the
property owner, that curb and/or sidewalk be replaced that does not
have a normal life expectancy of more than five years or curb does not
have a minimum exposed surface or reveal of 5 1/2 inches. If, in the
opinion of the Township Manager or Engineer, milling of the existing
street surface can be satisfactorily achieved, the minimum reveal may
be reduced to the extent of the proposed milling depth.
B. Vertical separation of 1/2 inch or greater within the sidewalk or
between slabs of sidewalk and/or curb is hereby declared a hazard to
public safety and shall be corrected in accordance with the
specifications contained herein.
C. The Township Manager or Engineer shall determine which curbs and
sidewalks meet the specifications required above and shall notify the
§ 235-18 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 235-20
235:210
§ 235-21. Failure to comply.
Whenever the owner or owners of any property in the Township shall
fail to comply with any of the requirements in this article, the Township
Board of Supervisors may cause notice to be served upon such owner or
owners, their agent or tenant, in the manner prescribed by law, setting forth
specifically in what respect such owner or owners have failed to comply
with any of the above requirements and what work such owner or owners
are required to do in order to effect such compliance. In the event of the
failure or neglect of any such owner or owners to comply with the terms and
conditions of such notice within 20 days from the date of service of such
notice in the case of new work, or within 10 days from the date of service
thereof in the case of repair work, the Board of Supervisors shall cause such
work to be done at the cost of the owner or owners of such property, and the
cost thereof and 10% additional, together with all charges and expenses,
shall be collected from such owner or owners by the Township, which may
file a municipal claim therefor or collect the same by action in assumpsit, as
the Board of Supervisors may direct.
§ 235-22. Abatement of nuisance constituting danger.
Where a nuisance results from the condition of a sidewalk, curb, or gutter to
such an extent that, in the judgment of the Township, it constitutes a danger
of injury to persons or property, the Township shall have the authority to
repair such dangerous condition after 48 hours' notice to make such repairs
has been served upon the property owner; provided, however, that the
cost of such repairs shall not exceed $500. The cost of such work shall be
recoverable through a civil action, or the Township may file a municipal
claim. This section is intended to provide an additional remedy for the
Township in connection with emergency repairs and shall not limit any
other remedy the Township may have under this article or under applicable
law.
§ 235-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the Township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are
respective owner of necessary action; however, not receiving notice
shall not relieve the property owner from maintaining sidewalk and
curb on their respective property(ies) in good repair and condition free
of hazard.
§ 235-20 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 235-23
235:211
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
§ 235-24. Cumulative rights and remedies.
The Township's rights and remedies under this article and as otherwise
provided by law shall be cumulative, and the pursuit of one shall not be
deemed to preclude the subsequent pursuit of any other right or remedy.
§ 235-23 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 235-24
235:212
ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 235-25. Removal from sidewalks.
The responsible party for a property fronting upon or along any street
within the Township is hereby required to remove or cause to be removed
from all of the sidewalks in front of or along side such property all snow
and ice which has fallen or formed thereon within 24 hours after such snow
and ice has ceased to fall or to be formed so that there shall be a clear
walk along the entire length thereof at least three feet in width. In the event
that snow and/or ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it cannot be
removed without the likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the responsible
party shall, within 24 hours after the snow or ice has ceased to fall or
form, cause enough sand or other abrasive to be placed upon the sidewalk
to make travel reasonably safe and shall, as soon thereafter as weather
permits, cause to be cleared a path in said sidewalk of at least three feet in
width.
§ 235-26. Removal from fire hydrants.
Every responsible party shall remove and clear away, or cause to be
removed and cleared away, any accumulation of snow or ice surrounding a
fire hydrant located along the frontage of the property of the responsible
party. Such work shall be completed within a reasonable time, but not later
than 24 hours after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain.
§ 235-27. Depositing restricted.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice on or
immediately next to a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, travel lanes of a
street or loading or unloading area of a public transportation system, except
that the Township may mound snow and ice on public cartways incident to
the clearing thereof or on curbs and persons may mount snow and ice on
curbs incident to the clearing of sidewalks.
§ 235-28. Failure to comply; removal by Township.
In any case where the responsible party shall fail, neglect or refuse to
comply with any of the provisions of this article within the time limit
prescribed herein, the Township may proceed immediately to clear all snow
and/or ice from the sidewalk, roof or around the fire hydrant on the property
for which such person is a responsible party and to collect the expenses
of such removal, with an additional penalty of 10% of such costs, from the
responsible party or to file a municipal lien against such property.
§ 235-25 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 235-29
235:213
§ 235-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the Township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
§ 235-29 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 235-29
235:214
ARTICLE V
Obstructions and Encroachments
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 235-30. Cellar doors opening onto sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain any cellar
door, opening upon or into any sidewalk in the Township.
§ 235-31. Posts and poles on sidewalk area.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any post or pole
upon any sidewalk or sidewalk area in the Township, for the purpose of
supporting any awning, canopy, marquee or portico.
§ 235-32. Display or storage of merchandise on sidewalk.
It shall be unlawful for any person to display or store any merchandise upon
any sidewalk in the Township unless such merchandise, including any stand,
table or support therefor, shall extend not more than one foot from back
edge of sidewalk toward the curb or outer line of the sidewalk, and shall be
not less than six feet in height.
§ 235-33. Scaffolding; storage of building material or equipment on
sidewalk.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any scaffolding upon or over
any sidewalk in the Township or to store upon any sidewalk or street any
material or equipment used in construction or repairs to the sidewalk or
in the construction of any vault thereunder, unless there shall be left a
passageway for pedestrians at least three feet in width alongside such
scaffolding or other obstruction.
§ 235-34. Building materials and dumpsters; permit fee.
A. When any person shall be about to erect or repair any house, building,
wall or other structure within the Township and desires to occupy a part
of the public street or sidewalk for placement of building materials,
mortar boxes, dumpsters or similar items thereon, he shall make
application to the Township stating the number and extent of such
building materials, dumpsters and/or other items for the
accommodation of which he desires to occupy said street or sidewalk,
the specific location where such person will place the building
materials, dumpsters and/or other items and why it is not possible to
place such items upon the property to which they relate. If the
placement of the requested materials will interfere with the safe
passage of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, the Township shall deny the
permit. If the applicant demonstrates that safe vehicular and pedestrian
passage may be maintained, the Township shall issue a permit to
§ 235-30 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 235-34
235:215
§ 235-35. Depositing materials on streets or other properties.
occupy said part of any public street or sidewalk for the purpose stated
in the application. In case it is desired to mix mortar and place any
mortar boxes upon any of the public streets or highways during the
erection and repair of buildings, walls or other structures, it shall be
required that a watertight box be used. A permit shall identify the dates
of the permitted occupancy of the street or sidewalk and the permit
shall not be valid for more than 30 days.
B. All building materials and other items shall be neatly maintained.
Reflectorized or lighted barricades shall be used. The cartway shall at
all times be left unencumbered between said materials or mortar boxes
and the opposite curb for the passage of vehicles.
C. The placement of any dumpster shall be in accordance with all
requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle
Code and Chapter 262, Vehicles and Traffic, of the Code of the
Township of West Lampeter. The dimensions of the dumpster shall not
exceed eight feet in width by 20 feet in length. The dumpster shall be
lighted or reflectorized or lighted barricades shall be used. The
dumpster shall not inhibit vehicle sight distance visibility. The applicant
shall provide the Township with the name and telephone number of the
company furnishing the dumpster. Should it be proven subsequent to
the placement of a dumpster in the right-of-way that said dumpster
creates a hazard, even though a permit has been issued, the Township
Manager or Chief of Police shall have the right to require the permittee
to have the dumpster removed within 24 hours.
D. No building materials, dumpster or other item shall be placed within 15
feet of any fire hydrant or within 50 feet of a railroad track.
E. If any damage or injury to the cartway, curb or sidewalk shall be caused
or done by the use or occupancy of any street or road hereunder, the
party to whom such permit shall have been issued shall be responsible
and liable for the same and shall restore the cartway, curb and/or
sidewalk to its original condition. If the permittee refuse to properly
restore the cartway, curb and/or sidewalk to its original condition, the
Township may do so and collect the cost of the same from the permittee.
F. The cost of a permit shall be set forth, from time to time, by resolution
of the Township Board of Supervisors.
A. It is hereby declared a pubic nuisance for any person, when hauling
soil, bedrock, concrete, waste material or other material over any
public street, road, alley or public property, to allow such material to
blow or spill over and upon such street, road, alley, sidewalk or public
property or adjacent private property.
B. It is hereby declared a public nuisance for any person, being the owner
of real property or operator of any vehicle, to permit a vehicle entering
§ 235-34 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 235-35
235:216
§ 235-36. Removal of materials.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall cause any deposited
material to be removed from the street, road, alley, sidewalk or public
property within six hours from the occurrence. In the event of an immediate
danger to the public health or safety, the material shall be removed
immediately. In the event that deposited material is not so removed, the
Township shall cause such removal and the cost thereof shall be charged to
the person responsible.
§ 235-37. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to the
following nonexclusive fines and penalties, one or more of which may be
pursued by the Township concurrently:
from upon a public street, road or alley or upon public property to
deposit or track dirt, mud, rock or other material from such property.
C. In accordance with 53 P.S. § 67326, any person who obstructs any
public road or commits any nuisance thereon by felling trees, making
fences, turning the road, diverting water onto or in any other way and
who does not, on notice given by the Board of Supervisors, immediately
remove the obstruction or nuisance and repair the damages done to the
road commits a summary offense. Nothing in this subsection shall debar
a prosecution for any nuisance as in case of misdemeanor at common
law.
A. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's
fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this article. No
judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to
seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance
herewith.
B. The Township Manager may suspend or revoke any permit issued by the
Township to a person responsible for the violation of this article if the
materials unlawfully deposited are a product of work authorized by
such permit, such suspension or revocation to continue:
(1) Until the Township has been compensated for any charges incurred
by Township in cleaning up or removing the unlawfully deposited
material.
§ 235-35 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 235-37
235:217
(2) Until the person responsible has paid or deposited in escrow any
fines or penalties which a District Justice determines to be due by
reason of a violation of this article.
(3) Until such time as the Township determines that the person
responsible has taken adequate precautions to assure that the
unlawful depositing of materials will not reoccur.
C. Any person whose permit shall have been revoked by the Township
Manager may, within 30 days of such suspension or revocation, appeal
such decision to Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 235-37 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 235-37
235:218
Chapter 240
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 57.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 120.
Sewers and sewerage — See Ch. 211.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 230.
Street and sidewalk construction and
maintenance — See Ch. 235.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 235-37 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 235-37
240:219

ARTICLE I
Title; Legislative Scope and Purpose
§ 240-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "West Lampeter
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
§ 240-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the harmonious development
of the Township by:
§ 240-3. Adoption; authority.
A. Assisting in the orderly and efficient integration of land developments
within the Township.
B. Ensuring conformance of development plans with the Comprehensive
Plan, and public improvements plans.
C. Ensuring the provision of adequate public facilities including roadways,
walkways, streetlighting, water supply, storm and sanitary sewerage
facilities, recreation sites, open spaces and other improvements for the
public health, safety and welfare.
D. Ensuring coordination of intermunicipal and intramunicipal public
improvement plans and programs.
E. Securing the protection of water resources, drainageways and other
environmental resources.
F. Facilitating the safe and efficient movement of traffic.
G. Securing equitable handling of all development plans by providing
uniform standards and procedures.
H. In general, promoting greater health, safety, and welfare of the citizens
of the Township.
I. Securing adequate sites for recreation, conservation, scenic and other
open space purposes.
A. The Board of Supervisors of West Lampeter Township, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.,
hereby enacts and ordains the following chapter governing subdivisions
and land developments within the limits of West Lampeter Township.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall administer and enforce this chapter and
does hereby designate the West Lampeter Township Planning
Commission as the agency of the Board of Supervisors:
§ 240-1 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-3
240:221
§ 240-4. Jurisdiction.
(1) With which applicants may hold all preapplication consultations
relating to the plans.
(2) To which all applications relating to either preliminary or final
approval of subdivision and land development plans are referred
upon submission to the Township.
(3) Which makes recommendations to the Board of Supervisors
concerning approval, disapproval, modification and conditions of
approval of such plans.
(4) Which makes recommendations to the Board of Supervisors
concerning the interpretation of and the granting of waivers to
provisions and standards of this chapter.
A. This chapter shall apply to all subdivision and land development plans
submitted after the effective date of this chapter.
B. This chapter shall apply to all subdivision and land development plans
previously approved in accordance with any law or regulation then
applicable, the development of which has not been completed in
accordance with the terms of such approval within five years of such
approval. However, this section shall not affect the vested rights of the
developer as provided in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
C. This chapter shall not affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted to enforce any provision of the West Lampeter Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 1984, Ordinance No.
72, or its applicable predecessor regulations, on an act done, contract
executed, or liability incurred prior to the effective date of this chapter,
nor shall any provisions of this chapter be construed to waive the
obligations imposed upon an applicant to complete a previously
approved preliminary or final plan, including the installation of all
improvements required hereunder, in strict compliance with the
requirements of the West Lampeter Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance of 1984, Ordinance No. 72, or any applicable
predecessor regulations.
D. No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract, or parcel of land in
West Lampeter Township shall be effected; no street, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, water main, or other facilities in connection therewith
shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or
travel or for the common use of occupants of buildings thereon unless
and until authorized by this chapter.
E. No lot in a subdivision may be sold, no permit to erect or alter any
building upon land in a subdivision or land development may be issued,
and no building may be erected or altered in a subdivision or land
development, unless and until a final subdivision or land development
§ 240-3 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-4
240:222
plan has been approved by the Board of Supervisors and recorded, and
until the improvements required in connection therewith have been
either constructed or guaranteed in a manner prescribed herein.
F. All subdivision and land development plans are subject to Chapter 285,
Zoning, of the Code of the Township of West Lampeter, and all other
applicable ordinances, regulations, and requirements of the Township.
§ 240-4 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-4
240:223

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 240-5. General construction of terms.
Words and phrases shall be presumed to be used in their ordinary context
unless such word or phrase is defined or interpreted differently within this
article.
§ 240-6. Word usage.
In this chapter when not inconsistent with the context:
§ 240-7. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the particular meaning
assigned by this section in the appropriate sections of this chapter.
ACCESS DRIVE — An improved cartway designed and constructed to
provide for vehicular movement between a public road and a tract of land
containing any use other than one single-family dwelling unit.[Amended
12-9-1992 by Ord. No. 119]
AGENT — Any person other than the developer who, acting for the
developer, submits land development plans to the Township for the purpose
of obtaining approval thereof.
AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES — The use of land for farming, dairying,
pasturage, beekeeping, horticulture, viticulture, or animal or poultry
husbandry including the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or
storing the produce and equipment or housing and feeding the animals
and/or the use of dwellings for families headed by a full-time farm worker.
Includes land devoted to and meeting the requirements and qualifications
for payments or other compensation pursuant to a soil conservation
program under an agreement with an agency of the federal government.
ALLEY — See "street."
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
A. Words in the present tease imply also the future tense.
B. The singular includes the plural.
C. The male gender includes the female gender.
D. The word "person" includes a partnership or corporation as well as an
individual.
E. The term "shall" or "must" is always mandatory.
§ 240-5 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-7
240:225
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents and exhibits required for a preliminary or final
application in accordance with this chapter.
BLOCK — A tract of land which is entirely bounded by streets, public parks,
cemeteries, railroads, watercourses, or any other barrier to the continuity
to development.
BUILDING — Any structure or edifice designed or intended for use as an
enclosure, a shelter, or for protection of persons, animals, or property.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The portion of a lot which is proposed to be
covered by buildings.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line within a lot, designated on a plan as the
minimum required distance between any structure and the adjacent street
right-of-way or property line.
CARTWAY — The surface of a street, drive, or alley available for vehicular
traffic, including travel lanes and parking lanes but not including shoulders,
curbs, sidewalks or swales.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land
established at street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed,
planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight
distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The plan, or parts thereof, which has been
adopted by the Board of Supervisors showing its recommendations for
such systems as land uses, parks and recreation facilities, water supply,
sewerage and sewage disposal, garbage disposal, transportation, highways,
civic centers and other public improvements which affect the development
of the Township.
CORNER LOT — A lot abutting upon two streets at their intersection.
CURB — The raised edge of a pavement to confine surface water to the
pavement and to protect the abutting land from vehicular traffic.
CURBLINE — The outside edge of the cartway.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner to
another party.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A detached, subordinate building, the use
of which is customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the
principal building, which is located on the same lot as that occupied by
the principal building. Farm buildings not intended for habitation are
considered to be accessory buildings.
A.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building which is enclosed within exterior
walls or fire walls, which is built, erected, and framed of component
structural parts, which is designed for housing, shelter, enclosure, and
support of individuals, or property of any kind, and which is a main
structure on a given lot.
B.
§ 240-7 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-7
240:226
DEED — A written instrument whereby an estate in real property is
conveyed.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units and/or lots per acre, exclusive of
streets right-of-way, but including the area of any easement.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, equitable owner,
or tenant with the permission of the landowner, for whom subdivision or
land development plans are being or have been made.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or
which front upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of a
lot.
DRIVEWAY — An improved cartway designed and constructed to provide
vehicular movement between a public road and a tract of land serving one
single-family dwelling unit.[Amended 12-9-1992 by Ord. No. 119]
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted for limited use of private land for a
public or quasi-public or private purpose, and within which the owner of the
property shall not have the right to make use of the land in a manner that
violates the right of the grantee.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
FLOODPLAIN — The area inundated by the regulatory flood as described in
the Official Floodplain Ordinance of West Lampeter Township.68
FRONTAGE — The linear measurement taken along a property's common
boundaries with adjoining street rights-of-way, other than a limited access
highway.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY —
GRADE — The slope expressed in a percent which indicates the rate of
change of elevation in feet per hundred feet.
GUTTER — That portion of a right-of-way carrying surface drainage.
IMPORTANT NATURAL HABITAT — Any land area characterized by any or
all of the following;
The right-of-way width required for the expansion of existing streets to
accommodate anticipated future traffic loads.
A.
A right-of-way established to provide future access to or through
undeveloped land.
B.
Wetlands as defined by criteria of the United States Department of
Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service;
A.
Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory (PNDI) confirmed extant
plant and animal species and communities that are listed as
"Pennsylvania Threatened or Pennsylvania Endangered"; and
B.
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. 285, Zoning, Art. VI, Floodplain Zone (FP).
§ 240-7 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-7
240:227
IMPROVEMENTS — Physical changes to the land (including but not limited
to, grading, paving, curbs, gutters, storm sewers and drains, improvements
to existing watercourses, sidewalks, street signs, monuments, water supply
facilities, and sewage disposal facilities) that may be necessary to produce
usable and desirable developments.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LANDOWNER — The legal, beneficial, equitable owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not
such option or contract is subject to any conditions), a lessee (if he is
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner), or
another person having a proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to be
a landowner for the purposes of this chapter.
LATERAL — A utility line between a trunk or interceptor line that is located
within a utility easement, and the single building which the line serves.
PNDI confirmed extant plant and animal species and communities that
have a state rank of S1 or S2.
C.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
The following shall not be considered a land development:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is defined
as a tract or area used principally as a location for permanent
amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to
newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans
for the expanded area have been approved by proper authorities.
(3)
C.
§ 240-7 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-7
240:228
LOT — A parcel of land considered as a unit 1) for a principal use and/or
2) from the standpoint of ownership. It may be vacant, devoted to a certain
use, occupied by a structure or occupied by a group of structures that are
united by a common interest or use.
LOT AREA (NET LOT AREA) — The area contained within the property lines
of an individual lot, excluding any area within a street right-of-way, but
including the area of any easement.
LOT COVERAGE — A percentage of the lot area which may be covered by
impervious surfaces such as, but not limited to, buildings, parking areas,
driveways, sidewalks, etc.
LOT DEPTH — The horizontal distance measured between the street rightof-
way line and the closest rear property line. On corner and reverse
frontage lots, the depth shall be measured from the street right-of-way line
of the street of address to the directly opposite property line.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance measured between side property
lines, parallel to the street line, at the building setback line. On corner lots,
the right-of-way line for the nonaddress street shall be considered a side
property line for the purpose of calculating lot width.
MOBILE HOME — See definition of "mobile home" in § 240-41C of Article
VII, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks, of this chapter.69
MOBILE HOME LOT — See definition of "mobile home lot" in § 240-41C of
Article VII, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks, of this chapter.70
MOBILE HOME PARK — See definition of "mobile home park" in § 240-41C
of Article VII, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks, of this chapter.71
MULTIPLE-DWELLING BUILDING — A building providing separate living
quarters for three or more families.
PEDESTRIAN EASEMENT — A right-of-way, municipally or privately owned,
at least 10 feet wide, which cuts across a block to furnish access for
pedestrians to adjacent streets or properties.
PLAN — The map representing a tract of land including all supplementary
data specified in Article IV of this chapter. The following are the types of
plans specified by this chapter:
AS-BUILT — A corrected final plan, showing dimensions and locations
of all streets and other public improvements as actually constructed.
A.
FINAL PLAN — A complete and exact subdivision and/or land
development plan prepared for official recording as required by statute
to define property rights, propose streets and other public
improvements.
B.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 240-7 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-7
240:229
PROFESSIONAL BIOLOGIST — An individual with at least a graduate
degree in aquatic and/or terrestrial biology and/or ecology, and with a depth
of knowledge in organisms and the processes of ecological systems.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Public parks, playgrounds and other public areas;
and sites for school, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicowned
or -operated facilities.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any improvement facility or service together
with its associated public site or right-of-way necessary to provide
transportation, drainage, public or private utilities, energy or similar
essential services.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and having frontage
on a minor street and either an arterial street or collector street with
vehicular access solely from the minor street.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land opened for use as a street, alley, crosswalk, utilities
or other public or private use.
ROADWAY — The portion of a street right-of-way which is paved, improved,
designated or intended for vehicular traffic. Sometimes referred to as
"cartway."
SCREEN or BUFFER PLANTING — A method of visually shielding or
obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by fencing,
walls, berms, or densely planted vegetation.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane,
alley, viaduct and any other dedicated and adopted public right-of-way used
or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians. Streets are
further classified as follows:
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A complete and exact subdivision and/or land
development plan, the purpose of which is to authorize the construction
of public improvements and the preparation of final plans.
C.
SKETCH PLAN — An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale,
indicating salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings, with
the general layout of a proposal for consideration prior to the formal
submission of a plan.
D.
ARTERIAL STREET — A street which provides for intercommunity
travel connecting population centers and carrying large volumes of
traffic at speeds higher than desirable on other types of streets.
Existing arterial streets are established by resolution of the Township
Board of Supervisors. A list of existing arterial streets is available at the
Township Building.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which 1) provides access to a
residential land use with a density in excess of four dwelling units
per acre, industrial land use, or a commercial land use; and/or 2)
carries traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets,
including but not limited to the principal entrance streets of a
residential development. Existing collector streets are established by
B.
§ 240-7 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-7
240:230
STREET GRADE — The elevation of a street along the center line of the
existing or proposed cartway.
STREET LINE (RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE) — A line defining the edge of a
street right-of-way and separating the street from abutting property or lots.
The street line shall be the same as the legal right-of-way line currently
in existence. However, where a future right-of-way width for a Townshipowned
road or street has been established by the West Lampeter Township
Comprehensive Plan, then that width shall determine the location of the
street line.
STREET, PRIVATE — A street not offered for dedication or whose dedication
was not accepted by the municipality.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to
heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building, or lot development;
provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new streets
or easements of access or residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SURVEYOR — A surveyor registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SWALE — A wide shallow ditch which gathers or carries surface water.
TOWNSHIP — West Lampeter Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Land in parcels sufficiently large for future land
development which is presently in agriculture, woodland or lying fallow.
WAIVER — A process for alleviating specific requirements imposed by this
chapter and provided under § 240-57.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, creek,
channel, or swale, whether natural or man-made, for gathering or carrying
surface water.
resolution of the Township Board of Supervisors. A list of existing
collector streets is available at the Township Building.
CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A street with a single common ingress and
egress with a turnaround at the end.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A street, one side of which is parallel
and in close proximity to a major street, and the other side of which
provides access to abutting properties.
D.
MINOR STREET — A street which provides access to a residential land
use with a density of four or fewer units per acre or an institutional land
use.
E.
SERVICE STREET or ALLEY — A minor right-of-way on which no
property fronts, which provides the secondary means of access for two
or more properties.
F.
§ 240-7 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-7
240:231
ZONING ORDINANCE — Chapter 285, Zoning, as amended, of the Code of
the Township of West Lampeter.
§ 240-7 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-7
240:232
ARTICLE III
Plan Processing Procedures
§ 240-8. General provisions. [Amended 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 143]
§ 240-9. Preapplication review. [Amended 4-14-1997 by Ord. No.
143]
A. The procedures set forth in this article shall be followed for all
subdivision and/or land development plans.
B. The Township Planning Commission, Park and Recreation Board,
Township Engineer, and County Planning Commission are advisory to
the Township Board of Supervisors.
C. The preapplication review specified in § 240-9 is optional. The purpose
of the procedure is to provide the developer with the advice and
assistance of the Planning Commission, and the Park and Recreation
Board.
D. The preliminary plan application specified in § 240-10 is mandatory for
all land developments, subdivision and/or land developments involving
new streets, and subdivisions involving 10 or more lots. In general, the
purpose of the preliminary plan is to review detailed design and
construction plans. Approval of the preliminary plan authorizes the
construction of public improvements and the preparation of final plans.
E. The final plan application specified in § 240-11 is mandatory for all
subdivision and/or land development plans. In general, the purpose of
the procedure is to review detailed design and construction plans, and
receive assurance of public improvements. Approval of the final plan
authorizes the recording of the plan, the construction of buildings, and
the selling of land.
A. Applicants are urged, but not required, to discuss possible development
sites and plans with the Planning Commission and the Park and
Recreation Board prior to submission of the preliminary or final plans.
The purpose of the preapplication meeting is to afford the applicant in
opportunity to receive the advice and assistance of the Planning
Commission and the Park and Recreation Board. Request for a
preapplication review shall not constitute formal filing of a plan.
B. A request for a preapplication review shall include 19 copies of a sketch
plan which includes those items listed in § 240-14, one application form
(see Appendix No. 6 72) and a filing fee as set by resolution of the
Township Board of Supervisors (see Fee Schedule available at the
Township Building). The request shall be submitted to the Township
Secretary at the Township Building, on any business day.
72.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 240-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-9
240:233
§ 240-10. Preliminary plan application. [Amended 4-14-1997 by
Ord. No. 143]
C. The Township staff shall distribute the sketch plan to the Township
Planning Commission, Park and Recreation Board, Township Engineer
and Township Board of Supervisors.
D. First, the sketch plan is reviewed by the Park and Recreation Board and
second, by the Township Planning Commission.
E. The Park and Recreation Board will review a sketch plan at a particular
meeting only if the sketch plan was filed with the Township at least 15
days prior to that meeting. The Park and Recreation Board shall
complete its review and provide written comments to the Township
Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors within 12 days after
the meeting.
F. The Township Planning Commission will only review the Sketch Plan at
a meeting if:
(1) It has received written comments from the Park and Recreation
Board at least seven days prior to that meeting; or
(2) The Park and Recreation Board has failed to provide written
comments on the sketch plan within the time frame specified within
this section.
A. Preliminary plan applications are required for all land developments,
subdivision and/or land developments involving new streets, and
subdivisions involving 10 or more lots.
B. Subdivisions involving fewer than 10 lots and no new street may be
submitted as final plans in accordance with § 240-11.
C. Preliminary plans shall be submitted to the Township Secretary at the
Township Building, on any business day.
D. First, the preliminary plan is reviewed by the Park and Recreation
Board and second, by the Township Planning Commission.
E. The Park and Recreation Board will review a preliminary plan at a
particular meeting only if the preliminary plan was filed with the
Township at least 19 days prior to that meeting. The Park and
Recreation Board shall complete its review and provide written
comments to the Township Planning Commission and the Board of
Supervisors within 12 days after the meeting.
F. The Township Planning Commission will only review the preliminary
plan at a meeting if:
(1) It has received written comments from the Park and Recreation
Board at least seven days prior to that meeting; or
§ 240-9 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-10
240:234
(2) The Park and Recreation Board has failed to provide written
comments on the preliminary plan within the time frame specified
within this section.
G. Applicants are urged to submit a sewer facilities plan revision or
supplement in conjunction with the preliminary plan to avoid
unnecessary delays at the final plan stage.
H. Application requirements.
(1) All preliminary plan applications shall include the following:
(a) Nineteen copies of the preliminary plan and all reports,
notifications and certification which are specified in § 240-15.
(b) One application form (see Appendix No. 6 73).
(c) Filing fee as set by resolution of the Township Board of
Supervisors (see Fee Schedule available at the Township
Building).
(2) The Township staff shall first determine that the preliminary plan
application is substantially complete in accordance with Subsection
H(1)(a), (b), and (c). This determination does not constitute
approval or disapproval of the plan but is provided to assure the
submission of sufficient data for the Township Board of Supervisors
to make a formal action on the plan. If the application is found to be
incomplete, the Township will notify the applicant in writing that
the submitted data does not constitute a formal filing of the
preliminary plan and specify the deficiencies.
I. Distribution. The Township staff shall distribute the preliminary plan to
the Township Planning Commission, Park and Recreation Board,
Township Engineer, Township Zoning Officer, Board of Supervisors and,
if deemed necessary, Solicitor, or other officials.
J. Review of the preliminary plan.
(1) The preliminary plan is reviewed by the Township staff, Township
Engineer, County Planning Commission, Park and Recreation
Board, and Township Planning Commission.
(2) Attendance at both the Township Park and Recreation Board and
the Planning Commission meetings by the applicant or authorized
agent is mandatory to answer technical questions and establish the
acceptance of any possible recommended conditions of approval. If
there exist uncertainty of the acceptance of conditions of approval,
the plan may be recommended for disapproval. The applicant will
be advised of the scheduled Township meeting dates.
73.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 240-10 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-10
240:235
(3) The Park and Recreation Board review shall be based upon the
provisions of §§ 240-15E(3)(h) and 240-36 of this chapter.
(4) All plan reviews shall determine conformance with the standards
contained in this chapter as well as other applicable ordinances,
and recommend to the Board of Supervisors such changes and
modifications as it deems necessary.
(5) Any recommendation which involves engineering consideration
shall be subject to review and comment by the Township Engineer,
which shall be incorporated and separately set forth with the
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors.
(6) The Township staff, Township Engineer, County Planning
Commission, and Township Planning Commission shall render a
decision on the plan and submit copies of their recommendations to
the Board of Supervisors within 45 days of the required meeting of
the Park and Recreation Board. The Park and Recreation Board
shall submit its recommendations to the Township Planning
Commission and the Board of Supervisors within 12 days after its
required meeting.
K. Ruling on the preliminary plan.
(1) The applicant will be advised of the scheduled meeting date for
consideration of the preliminary plan by the Board of Supervisors.
Attendance at this meeting by the applicant or authorized agent is
mandatory to establish the acceptance of any possible conditions of
approval. If there exist uncertainty of the acceptance of conditions
of approval, the plan may be disapproved.
(2) The Board of Supervisors shall approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove the preliminary plan and shall communicate said
decision to the applicant within 90 days following the date of the
regular meeting of the Board of Supervisors or the Planning
Commission (whichever first reviews the application), next
following the date the application is filed. Provided that should the
said next regular meeting occur more than 30 days following the
filing of the application the said ninety-day period shall be
measured from the 30th day following the day the application has
been filed.
(3) The ruling of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing,
specifically cite any conditions of approval and/or any plan defects,
and shall be communicated in writing to the applicant not later
than 15 days following the decision. Refusal by the applicant to
accept conditions shall constitute disapproval of the plan.
(4) In the event that any waiver of requirements from this chapter is
requested by the applicant or is deemed necessary by the Board of
Supervisors, the waiver and the reasons for its necessity shall be
entered in the minutes of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 240-10 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-10
240:236
(5) When the preliminary plan is not approved in terms as presented to
the Board of Supervisors, the decision shall specify the defects
found in the application and describe the requirements which have
not been met and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of the
ordinance.
(6) Approval of the preliminary plan constitutes approval of the design
for streets, lots, structures and other planning facilities.
Preliminary approval binds the developer to the plan as approved.
Preliminary approval does not authorize the recording, sale or
transfer of lots, nor shall this plan be recorded with the Lancaster
County Recorder of Deeds, but shall, when combined with other
necessary approvals and permits, grant the authority to install the
public improvements required as part of this chapter.
(7) Preliminary approval shall expire within five years after being
granted unless an extension is requested by the applicant and
approved by the Board of Supervisors. Requests for extensions
shall be submitted to the Township at least 30 days prior to any
prevailing expiration date.
L. Approval subject to conditions.
(1) If the Board of Supervisors approves the preliminary plan subject
to conditions, the applicant shall either personally at a public
meeting or in writing approve or reject such conditions within 10
business days after the applicant has received notice of such
conditions. For purposes of this subsection, notice to a person
presenting the preliminary plan on behalf of the applicant, whether
such person is the applicant himself, a relative of the applicant, an
officer of the applicant, an attorney, a surveyor, an engineer, a
landscape architect or otherwise, shall be notice to the applicant.
The person presenting the plan on behalf of the applicant shall be
deemed to have authority to, on behalf of applicant, accept or reject
the conditions. Rejection of the conditions of approval shall serve to
automatically rescind the approval of the preliminary plan. The
failure to accept or reject such conditions within the ten-businessday
period shall be considered to be a rejection of the conditions,
and the conditional approval of the preliminary plan shall be
automatically revoked. In that event the applicant shall be notified
in writing within 10 days following the expiration of the tenbusiness-
day period to accept or reject the conditions that the
preliminary plan approval has been deemed revoked; provided,
however, that failure to notify the applicant of such revocation shall
not constitute a deemed approval. If the Board of Supervisors
conditions its preliminary plan approval upon receipt of additional
information, alterations, changes or notifications, such data shall
be submitted and/or alterations noted on three copies to be
submitted to the Township. The conditions of approval must be
satisfied to obtain preliminary plan approval. The Board of
Supervisors will acknowledge the satisfactory compliance with all
§ 240-10 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-10
240:237
§ 240-11. Final plan application. [Amended 4-14-1997 by Ord. No.
143]
conditions, if any, of the preliminary plan approval at a public
meeting. [Amended 10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 170]
(2) There is no time limitation on attaining compliance with the
conditions of approval; however, conditional approval does not
extend the five-year period stated above. [Amended 10-14-2002
by Ord. No. 170]
(3) At the option of the applicant, and upon receipt of an unconditional
preliminary plan approval, a preliminary plan may be presented to
the Township for signature. (See Appendix Nos. 3 and 4 for
certificate.74)
A. A final plan application is required for all subdivisions and land
development plans. When a preliminary plan is required in accordance
with § 240-10, an application for final plan approval can be submitted
only after obtaining an unconditional preliminary plan approval.
B. Final plans shall be submitted to the Township Secretary at the
Township Building, on any business day.
C. First, the final plan is reviewed by the Park and Recreation Board and
second, by the Township Planning Commission.
D. The Park and Recreation Board will review a final plan at a particular
meeting only if the final plan was filed with the Township at least 15
days prior to that meeting. The Park and Recreation Board shall
complete its review and provide written comments to the Township
Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors within 12 days after
the meeting.
E. The Township Planning Commission will only review the final plan at a
meeting if:
(1) It has received written comments from the Park and Recreation
Board at least seven days prior to that meeting; or
(2) The Park and Recreation Board has failed to provide written
comments on the final plan within the time frame specified within
this section.
F. Application requirements.
(1) All final plan applications shall include the following:
(a) Nineteen copies of the final plan and all reports, notifications
and certificates which are specified in § 240-16.
74.Editor's Note: Said Appendixes are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 240-10 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-11
240:238
(b) One application form (see Appendix No. 6 75).
(c) Filing fee as set by resolution of the Township Board of
Supervisors (see Fee Schedule available at the Township
Building).
(2) The Township staff shall first determine that the preliminary plan
application is substantially complete in accordance with Subsection
F(1)(a), (b) and (c). This determination does not constitute approval
or disapproval of the plan but is provided to assure the submission
of sufficient data for the Township Board of Supervisors to make a
formal action on the plan. If the application is found to be
incomplete, the Township will notify the applicant in writing that
the submitted data does not constitute a formal filing of the final
plan and specify the deficiencies.
G. Distribution. The Township staff shall distribute the final plan to the
Township Planning Commission, Park and Recreation Board, Township
Engineer, Township Zoning Officer, Board of Supervisors and, if deemed
necessary, Solicitor, or other officials.
H. Review of the final plan.
(1) The final plan is reviewed by the Township staff, Township
Engineer, County Planning Commission, Park and Recreation
Board, and Township Planning Commission.
(2) Attendance at both the Township Park and Recreation Board and
the Planning Commission meetings by the applicant or authorized
agent is mandatory to answer technical questions and establish the
acceptance of any possible recommended conditions of approval. If
there exist uncertainty of the acceptance of conditions of approval,
the final plan may be recommended for disapproval. The applicant
will be advised of the scheduled Township meeting dates.
(3) The Park and Recreation Board review shall be based upon the
provisions of §§ 240-15E(3)(h) and 240-36 of this chapter.
(4) All plan reviews shall determine conformance with the standards
contained in this chapter as well as other applicable ordinances,
and recommend to the Board of Supervisors such changes and
modifications as it deems necessary.
(5) Any recommendation which involves engineering consideration
shall be subject to review and comment by the Township Engineer,
which shall be incorporated and separately set forth with the
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors.
(6) The Township staff, Township Engineer, County Planning
Commission, and Township Planning Commission shall render a
75.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 240-11 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-11
240:239
decision on the final plan and submit copies of their
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors within 45 days of
the required meeting of the Park and Recreation Board. The Park
and Recreation Board shall submit its recommendations to the
Township Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors
within 12 days after its required meeting.
I. Ruling on the final plan.
(1) The applicant will be advised of the scheduled meeting date for
consideration of the final plan by the Board of Supervisors.
Attendance at this meeting by the applicant or authorized agent is
mandatory to answer technical questions and establish the
acceptance of any possible conditions of approval. If there is
uncertainty on the acceptance of conditions of approval, the plan
may be disapproved.
(2) The Board of Supervisors shall approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove the final plan and shall communicate said decision to
the applicant within 90 days following the date of the regular
meeting of the Board of Supervisors or the Planning Commission
(whichever first reviews the application), next following the date
the application is filed. Provided that should the said next regular
meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of the
application, the said ninety-day period shall be measured from the
30th day following the day the application has been filed.
(3) The ruling of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing,
specifically cite any conditions of approval and/or any plan defects,
and shall be communicated to the applicant not later than 15 days
following the decision. Refusal by the applicant to accept
conditions shall constitute disapproval of the plan.
(4) In the event that any waiver of requirements from this chapter is
requested by the applicant or is deemed necessary by the Board of
Supervisors, action on the waiver shall be entered in the minutes of
the Board of Supervisors.
(5) When the final plan is not approved in terms as presented to the
Board of Supervisors, the decision shall specify the defects found in
the application and describe the requirements which have not been
met and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of the ordinance.
(6) No final plan will receive approval by the Board of Supervisors
unless the applicant has completed all required public
improvements, as specified in this chapter, or has filed with the
Board of Supervisors an improvements guarantee in the manner
prescribed in Article V.
J. Approval subject to conditions. If the Board of Supervisors approves the
final plan subject to conditions, the applicant shall either personally at a
public meeting or in writing approve or reject such conditions within 10
§ 240-11 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-11
240:240
business days after the applicant has received notice of such conditions.
For purposes of this subsection, notice to a person presenting the final
plan on behalf of the applicant, whether such person is the applicant
himself, a relative of the applicant, an officer of the applicant, an
attorney, a surveyor, an engineer, a landscape architect or otherwise,
shall be notice to the applicant. The person presenting the plan on
behalf of the applicant shall be deemed to have authority to, on behalf
of applicant, accept or reject the conditions. Rejection of the conditions
of approval shall serve to automatically rescind the approval of the
preliminary plan. The failure to accept or reject such conditions within
the ten-business-day period shall be considered to be a rejection of
the conditions, and the conditional approval of the final plan shall be
automatically revoked. In that event the applicant shall be notified in
writing within 10 days following the expiration of the ten-business-day
period to accept or reject the conditions that the final plan approval
has been deemed revoked; provided, however, that failure to notify the
applicant of such revocation shall not constitute a deemed approval. If
the Board of Supervisors conditions its final plan approval upon receipt
of additional information, alterations, changes or notifications, such
data shall be submitted and/or alterations noted on three copies to be
submitted to the Township. The Board of Supervisors will acknowledge
the satisfactory compliance with all conditions, if any, of the final plan
approval at a public meeting. Conditional approval does not constitute
an extension of the ninety-day final plan certification period stated
below. [Amended 10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 170]
K. Final plan certification. After approval and/or conditional approval of
the final plan and the required changes, if any are made, the applicant
shall present to the Township two paper and two plastic transparencies.
All final plans shall bear original signatures in black ink on each
certificate. The final plans shall be signed by the Township Planning
Commission, Township Engineer and the Board of Supervisors (see
Appendix Nos. 3 and 576).
(1) Upon payment of any outstanding review, inspection or other fees,
and upon confirmation that all required changes have been made to
the plan, the Township may release the plan to the applicant for
recording. The applicant shall, within 90 days of final approval or
90 days after the date of delivery of the plan executed on behalf of
the Township following completion of any conditions imposed upon
such approval, whichever is later, record the plan in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds in and for Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. If
the applicant fails to so record the final plan, the Township's
approval of the final plan shall be null and void. [Amended
10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 170]
(2) No subdivision or land development plan may be recorded unless it
bears the original endorsement of the Board of Supervisors.
76.Editor's Note: Said Appendixes are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 240-11 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-11
240:241
§ 240-12. Waiver request.
(3) Recording of the final plan shall have the effect of an irrevocable
offer to dedicate all streets and other areas designated for public
use shown thereon unless reserved by the developer as hereinafter
provided. The approval of the Board of Supervisors shall not
impose any duty upon the Township concerning maintenance or
improvement of any such dedicated street, or public use, until the
Board of Supervisors shall have accepted the same by ordinance or
resolution.
(4) If the final plan includes a notation to the effect that there is no
offer of dedication to the public of certain designated uses, areas or
streets, the title to such areas shall remain with the owner, their
heirs and assigns, and the Township shall assume no responsibility
for improvements or maintenance thereof, which fact shall also be
noted on the final plan.
A. The Board of Supervisors may waive any mandatory provision of these
regulations to the benefit of the developer provided the majority of the
members of the Board of Supervisors present at a scheduled public
meeting, determines that the waiver:
(1) Is consistent with the purpose of this chapter as described in
§ 240-2.
(2) Will remove or reduce an unreasonable or undue hardship, as it
applies to the particular property, which is grossly disproportionate
to any benefit derived from the standard.
(3) Will result in an equal or better situation.
(4) Provides for reasonable utilization of the property while securing
the public interest.
B. Waiver application. Notwithstanding the ability of the Board of
Supervisors to consider a waiver in conjunction with their ruling on a
preliminary or final plan, a waiver request shall be submitted to the
Township Secretary at the Township Building, on any business day. A
waiver request shall include eight copies of all applicable plans,
reports, and supplementary data, one application form (see Appendix
No. 7 77) and a filing fee as set by resolution of the Township Board of
Supervisors (see fee schedule available at the Township Building). If
this information was filed with a preliminary plan or final plan,
additional copies need not be submitted.
C. Distribution. The Township shall distribute one copy of the waiver to the
Township Planning Commission, the Township Engineer, the Township
Zoning Officer, Board of Supervisors and, if necessary, Solicitor, or
other officials.
77.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 240-11 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-12
240:242
§ 240-13. Plans exempted from standard procedures.
D. Review of the waiver. The waiver is reviewed by the Township staff and
Planning Commission.
E. Execution of the waiver.
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall have the authority to approve or
disapprove the waiver. In granting any waiver, the Board of
Supervisors may impose such conditions as will, in its judgment,
secure substantially the objectives of the standards and
requirements of this chapter.
(2) Action on the waiver shall be entered in the minutes of the Board of
Supervisors and forwarded to the applicant.
(3) Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant as described herein shall be
deemed a denial of the waiver.
A. Procedures for processing revised subdivision and/or land development
plans. [Amended 10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 170]
(1) Any changes to or deviations from a recorded final plan or an
unrecorded final plan approved by the Board of Supervisors,
including but not limited to deviations reflected on as-built plans
required to be submitted pursuant to this chapter, shall be
considered a new application and shall comply with all
requirements of this chapter; except that recorded and approved
unrecorded final plans may be changed or deviations shall not be
subject to full plan processing requirements, provided that in
making such changes or provided that the deviations are such that:
(a) No lot or tract of land shall be created that does not meet the
minimum design standards required by this chapter and other
existing Township regulations.
(b) No structure shall be relocated which does not meet the
minimum design standards required by this chapter and other
existing Township regulations.
(c) No increase is made in the overall density.
(d) Stormwater management facilities shall not be changed except
for minor lot grading.
(e) Street locations and block sizes shall not be changed.
(f) The character and land use of the original application shall be
maintained.
(2) Where the Board of Supervisors determines that a revision to or
deviation from the final plan conforms to all provisions of the
§ 240-12 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-13
240:243
exception provided for in Subsection A, the following procedures
may be followed in lieu of compliance with the standard plan
processing procedures required by this chapter:
(a) The applicant shall submit to the Township two black-on-white
or blue-on-white paper copies of the revised final plan and one
application form (see Appendix No. 678).
(b) The applicant shall also file with the Township Secretary the
number of plans and supporting information, including a
request for review, as the Lancaster County Planning
Commission requires. The Township Secretary or Secretary's
designee shall submit the required plans and supporting
information to the Lancaster County Planning Commission.
The Board of Supervisors will not approve the application until
the Lancaster County Planning Commission report is received
or until the expiration of 45 days from the date the application
was forwarded to the County.
(c) The Township shall act on the revised final plan and
communicate its decision to the applicant in the same manner
as required for a final plan application as specified in § 240-11
of this chapter.
(d) After the Township's approval of the revised final plan, the
applicant shall prepare two sets of the revised final plan on
stable plastic base film and two sets of paper copies of the
revised final plan for the Township's files, all of which shall
specifically identify the alterations to the previously recorded
or approved final plan.
(e) The applicant shall submit the revised final plan to the
Township Engineer and the Board of Supervisors for
certification and to the Lancaster County Planning
Commission, if required, as specified in § 240-11K of this
chapter.
(f) The revised final plan shall then be recorded as specified in
§ 240-11K of this chapter.
B. Minor preliminary pans. Applicants may, at their discretion,
concurrently submit preliminary and final plans for land developments
involving no more than 10 residential units which require no new
streets or a single nonresidential building on one lot. Consideration of
both the preliminary and final plans will be scheduled at the same
meetings.
C. Auction sale. In the case of the proposed subdivision of land by process
of auction sale, the following procedure is recommended.
78.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 240-13 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-13
240:244
(1) The applicant should prepare a sketch pan in accordance with
§ 240-14.
(2) The sketch pan should be designed in accordance with the
standards of Article VI, Design Standards, and shall be submitted
to the Township staff for review. Additionally, the following notation
should be included on the plan: "The property is intended to be sold
by auction on or about _______________, 2___, in whole or in part
according to this plan. Sale of lots at such auction shall be in the
form of agreement to purchase, and no transfer of ownership or
interest in such lots shall proceed until a final plan showing such
division of property shall have been approved in accordance with
the West Lampeter Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance and recorded in the office of the Lancaster County
Recorder of Deeds."
(3) The auction sale may then proceed in accordance with the above
notation, after which the applicant shall prepare and submit plans
in accordance with this chapter.
§ 240-13 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-13
240:245

ARTICLE IV
Required Information
§ 240-14. Sketch plans.
§ 240-15. Preliminary plans.
Preliminary plans shall be prepared by an engineer, surveyor, and/or a
landscape architect registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
A. The scale and sheet size of sketch plans shall be as required for
preliminary plans in § 240-15A(1) and (3). Although not required, it is
recommended that the sketch plan be prepared by a registered
professional engineer, registered land surveyor or registered landscape
architect. It is recommended that the sketch plan show or be
accompanied by the following data, legible in every detail, but not
necessarily drawn to exact scale with precise dimensions:
(1) Name and address of the developer (if applicable) and landowner.
(2) Name and address of the individual and/or the firm that prepared
the plan.
(3) Location map with sufficient information to locate the property.
(4) North arrow.
(5) Written scales.
(6) Identification of the district, lot size and/or density and yard
requirements of Chapter 285, Zoning.
(7) Existing tract boundaries accurately labeled with the names of
adjacent landowners and adjacent plans of record.
(8) Name of the municipality in which the project is located, including
the location of any municipal boundary lines if located within the
vicinity of the property.
(9) Significant topographical and man-made features (e.g., bodies of
water, quarries, floodplains, tree masses, structures).
(10) Proposed street, parking, building, lot layout, water supply,
sanitary sewage disposal and other planned features.
(11) Proposed land use; if several land uses are proposed, the location
of each land use shall be indicated.
B. The sketch plan shall be accompanied by an application (see Appendix
No. 679) and a check or money order drawn to West Lampeter Township
in an amount specified on the Fee Schedule adopted by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors and available at the Township Building.
79.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 240-14 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-15
240:247
perform such duties. Metes and bounds descriptions shall be prepared by
surveyors, and designs which entail engineering expertise shall be prepared
by professional engineers. The preliminary plan shall show, be accompanied
by, or be prepared in accordance with the following:
A. Drafting standards.
(1) The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of 10 feet, 20
feet, 30 feet, 40 feet, 50 feet, 60 feet, 80 feet, or 100 feet to the
inch. Profile plans shall maintain a ratio of 1:10 vertical to
horizontal.
(2) Dimensions for the entire tract boundary shall be in feet and
decimals; bearings shall be in degrees, minutes and seconds. Lot
line descriptions shall read in a clockwise direction. The
description shall be based upon a survey and not have an error of
closure greater than one foot in 10,000 feet.
(a) If a landowner is going to retain a single lot with a lot area in
excess of 10 acres, the boundary of that lot may be identified as
a deed plotting and may be drawn at any legible scale; if the
retained lot has a lot area of 10 or fewer acres, its existing
perimeter must be described to the accuracy requirements of
this chapter.
(3) The sheet size shall be no smaller than 18 inches by 22 inches and
no larger than 34 inches by 44 inches. If the plan is prepared in two
or more sections, a key map showing the location of the sections
shall be placed on each sheet. If more than one sheet is necessary,
each sheet shall be numbered to show the relationship to the total
number of sheets in the plan (e.g., "Sheet 1 of 5").
(4) Plans shall be legible in every detail.
B. Location and identification.
(1) The proposed project name or identifying title.
(2) The municipality in which the project is to be located. If the tract of
land is located in the vicinity of a municipal boundary line, the
location of the boundary shall be shown.
(3) The name and address of the owner, authorized agent of the tract,
the developer and the firm that prepared the plans.
(4) Source of title to the land included within the subject application,
as shown by the books of the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
If equitable owner, the name, address and reference to the equity
agreement.
(5) The map and lot number assigned to the property by the Lancaster
County Tax Assessment Office.
§ 240-15 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-15
240:248
(6) The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared the
plan, the plan date, and the date(s) of all plan revisions.
(7) A North arrow, a graphic scale, and a written scale.
(8) The total acreage of the entire existing tract.
(9) A statement on the plan identifying the district, lot size and/or
density, and yard requirements of Chapter 285, Zoning, and any
existing variances, special exceptions, conditional uses and
nonconforming structures/uses.
(10) A statement on the plan identifying any existing waivers.
(11) The location and description of existing lot line markers and
monuments along the perimeter of the entire existing tract.
(12) A location map, drawn to scale, relating the property to at least two
intersections of existing road center lines, including the
approximate distance to the intersection of the center lines of the
nearest existing street intersection.
C. Existing features.
(1) Existing contours, at a minimum vertical interval of two feet for
land with average natural slope of 4% or less and at a minimum
vertical interval of five feet for more steeply sloping land. Contours
shall be accompanied by the location of the bench mark within or
immediately adjacent to the subject tract and a notation indicating
the datum used. Contours plotted from the United States Geodetic
Survey may only be used for subdivision plans which require no
new streets or other public improvement. Contour data is not
required beyond 200 feet of the proposed lots within remaining
land which exceeds 10 acres.
(2) The names of all immediately adjacent landowners, and the names
and plan book record numbers of all previously recorded plans for
adjacent projects.
(3) The following items when located within 200 feet of the subject
tract:
(a) The location and name of existing rights-of-way and cartways
for streets, access drives, driveways, and service streets.
(b) The location of the following features and any related rights-ofway:
sanitary sewer mains (including manhole numbers),
water supply mains, fire hydrants, bindings, swales,
watercourses, bodies of water, floodplain, and stormwater
management facilities which affect stormwater runoff on the
subject tract.
§ 240-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-15
240:249
(c) The location of existing rights-of-way for electric, gas, and oil
transmission lines, and railroads.
(d) Location of all street name signs and traffic signs. [Added
11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 145]
(4) The following items when located within the subject tract:
(a) The location, name, and dimensions of existing rights-of-way
and cartways for streets, access drives, driveways, and service
streets.
(b) The location and size of the following features and related
rights-of-way: sanitary sewer mains, water supply mains, fire
hydrants, buildings, swales, watercourses, bodies of water,
floodplain, stormwater management facilities, and wooded
areas.
(c) The location of existing rights-of-way for electric, gas, and oil
transmission lines, and railroads.
D. Proposed features.
(1) Complete description of the center line for all new streets. This
description shall include distances and bearings with curve
segments comprised of radius, tangent, arc, and chord. The
description shall not have an error of closure greater than one foot
in 10,000 feet.
(2) Approximate lot line dimensions and lot areas for all parcels. Along
existing street rights-of-way, the description may utilize the
existing deed lines or road center lines.
(3) Lot numbers in consecutive order.
(4) In the case of land development plans, the location and
configuration of proposed buildings, parking compounds, streets,
access drives, driveways, and all other significant facilities.
(5) A statement on the plan indicating the proposed total number of
lots, units of occupancy, density, minimum lot size, types of sanitary
sewage disposal, type of water supply, name of authority providing
sanitary sewage disposal and water supply (if applicable), and
proposed land use. The location of each land use if several types of
uses are proposed. This statement shall also include the criteria
needed to calculate off-street parking, lot coverage and other
requirements of Chapter 285, Zoning.
(6) Easements.
(7) Building setback lines, with distances from the property and street
right-of-way. A typical example may be used to identify side and
§ 240-15 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-15
240:250
rear yard setback, however, odd or unusual shaped lots shall be
plotted with all setback lines.
(8) Identification of buildings and other structures to be demolished.
(9) Typical street cross-section for each proposed street and typical
cross-section for any existing street which will be improved as part
of the application. Each cross-section shall include the entire rightof-
way width.
(10) Vertical and horizontal alignment on one sheet for each proposed
street, stormwater management facility, sanitary sewer (including
manhole numbers), and water distribution system. All street
profiles shall show at least the existing (natural) profile along the
center line, proposed grade at the center line, and the length of all
proposed vertical curves for streets. All water distribution and
sanitary sewer systems shall provide manhole locations, size and
type of material. This information is not subject to recording with
the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
(11) Proposed names for new streets.
(12) Location and material of all permanent monuments and lot line
markers, including a note that all monuments and lot line markers
are set or indicating when they will be set.
(13) In the case of land development plans, a grading plan. The grading
plan shall include finished grades and ground floor elevations. This
information may be provided on separate sheets and is not subject
to recording with the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
(14) A statement on the plan indicating any proposed waivers. This
statement must be revised, prior to recordation of the plan, to
acknowledge the outcome of the requested waiver.
(15) Identification of any lands to be dedicated or reserved for public,
semipublic, or community use.
E. Reports.
(1) A sketch plan for the entire landholding where the application
covers only a part of the property. The application will be
considered in light of its relationship to the entire landholdings.
(2) A sewer facilities plan revision (plan revision module for land
development) or supplement in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act 537 of 1966, as amended.80
(3) All preliminary plan applications for residential land uses which
exceed 25 lots or units in whole or in part, nonresidential uses that
require more than 25 parking spaces, or upon a determination of
80.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 240-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-15
240:251
need by the Board of Supervisors, shall include statements for each
of the following topics:
(a) Steep slopes. All applications involving ends that possess
slopes exceeding 8% shall require the preparation of a
statement by a commonwealth-registered engineer or
landscape architect which includes the following minimum
considerations:
[1] A topographic map of the site which highlights those areas
that possess slopes exceeding 8% and 15%, respectively.
Also reflected on this map should be all existing and
proposed site improvements (e.g., buildings, roads, sewer
systems, driveways, etc.);
[2] A detailed description of the methods that are being used
to:
[a] Protect and stabilize areas that have a high potential
for soil erosion;
[b] Prevent the construction of structures and other site
improvements on areas with slopes exceeding 15%, or
a description of the specific design and construction
techniques used to assure structural safety and
minimize harm to the environment associated with
development on these steep slopes;
[c] Minimize grading throughout the site;
[d] Protect and preserve any valuable natural wildlife
and/or plant habitats and coincide with the steepslope
areas of the site;
[e] Protect water quality on and around the site from the
adverse effects of the proposed use;
[f] Protect any steep slopes on adjoining properties; and,
[3] In those instances where buildings and/or other structures
are being placed on slopes exceeding 8%, a description of
the methods used to assure adequate foundations shall be
provided.
(b) Important natural habitats. All applications for lands that
possess an important natural habitat (as defined herein) shall
require the preparation of a statement by a professional
biologist (as defined herein) which includes the following
minimum considerations:
[1] A topographic map of the site that is prepared according to
the requirements of Subsections A, B and C of this section
(and subsequent amendments thereto). Such map shall
§ 240-15 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-15
240:252
highlight those areas of the site that are characterized
by any important natural habitats. Additionally, a textual
description of the important natural habitat's local,
regional, state and national importance, shall be
furnished.
[2] A letter from the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory
(PNDI), Department of Conservation and Natural
Resources, P.O. Box 1467, Harrisburg, PA 17120, stating
that the proposed use takes adequate measures to protect
any important natural habitats. The letter should also
describe those measures employed, and any additional
design, construction or use restrictions that would further
protect these species. Should it be determined that the site
does not contain any important natural habitat, the letter
should reflect this finding.
[a] Should PNDI determine that the site involves an
important natural habitat for fish, reptiles, and/or
amphibians, the applicant shall obtain a letter from
the Pennsylvania Fish Commission, 450 Robinson
Lane, Bellefonte, PA, 16832-9516. Such letter shall
state that the proposed use takes adequate measures
to protect any important wildlife habitats. The letter
should also describe those measures employed, and
any additional design, construction, or use restrictions
that would further protect these species;
[b] Should PNDI determine that the site involves an
important natural habitat for birds, mammals and
game, the applicant shall obtain a letter from the
Pennsylvania Game Commission, 2001 Elmerton
Avenue, Harrisburg, PA, 17110-9797. Such letter shall
state that the proposed use takes adequate measures
to protect any important wildlife habitats. The letter
should also describe those measures employed, and
any additional design, construction or use restrictions
that would further protect these species; and
[c] Should PNDI determine that the site involves an
important natural habitat for vegetation, the applicant
shall obtain a letter from the Pennsylvania
Department of Conservation and Natural Resources,
Bureau of Forestry, P.O. Box 1467, Harrisburg, PA
17120. Such letter shall state that the proposed use
takes adequate measures to protect any important
wildlife habitats. The letter should also describe those
measures employed, and any additional design,
construction or use restrictions that would further
protect these species.
§ 240-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-15
240:253
[3] If applicable, verification that the applicant has properly
obtained all of the required permits from both the United
States Army Corps of Engineers and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, pertaining to
wetlands; and
[4] A detailed description of the methods that are being used
to:
[a] Avoid the disturbance of any important natural
habitats during and following construction on the site;
[b] Assure that the proposed use is compatible with these
important natural habitats;
[c] Mitigate the loss of existing important natural
habitats;
[d] Replace and/or create additional land areas that will
be characterized by similar environmental traits as
the site's important natural habitats; and
[e] Assure that those activities associated with the
proposed use will remain compatible with the site's
important natural habitats, over time.
(c) Hydrogeology. Those applications proposing the use of on-lot
wells and/or on-lot sewage disposal systems in areas underlain
by the Conestoga and/or the Vintage geologic formations shall
require the preparation of a preliminary hydrogeologic study.
Such preliminary hydrogeologic study shall be conducted by a
qualified hydrogeologist and consist of the following minimum
considerations:
[1] A map showing the topographic location of the site,
proposed on-site sewage disposal systems and wells.
Narrative descriptions of the types of these systems shall
also be furnished.
[2] A description of the geologic conditions on and around the
site that would affect the groundwater recharge rate and
the degree of groundwater renovation. Such conditions
can include, but need not be limited to, closed depressions,
sinkholes, high water table conditions, springs,
lineaments, faults, outcrops of bedrock, soil mottling,
surface drainage into the ground, ghost lakes, etc.
[3] A map and narrative description of the area that will be
impacted from the proposed use of on-lot sewage disposal
systems. Such analysis will consider and identify the
systems and their dispersion plumes and mixing zones to
be calculated from the surface topography and known
§ 240-15 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-15
240:254
geologic conditions. The analysis will then describe
anticipated water quality/quantity impacts to areas
located downgradient and/or along any geologic strike or
fault. These anticipated impacts should also consider
existing and potential land uses located within the affected
area.
[4] Should it be determined that the proposed use(s) would
result in a degradation of groundwater quality, or
eliminate the potential groundwater use at nearby
properties, the study should present measures that can be
employed to mitigate these adverse impacts.
(d) Soils. Those applications involving lands with soils
characterized by "severe" limitations for building site
development in Table 11 of the Soil Survey of Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania (1985), and/or those plans involving the
use of on-lot sewage disposal systems on lands with soils
characterized by "severe" limitations for such facilities in Table
12 of the Soil Survey of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania (1988),
shall require the preparation of a statement by a qualified
planner, soil scientist, engineer and/or architect which
includes the following minimum considerations:
[1] A planimetric map of the site that depicts those soils
contained on the site. Soils with severe development
constraints shall be highlighted. The map shall also depict
all existing and proposed improvements on the site;
[2] A description of the site planning methods used to protect
soils with severe development constraints from deleterious
impacts associated with the proposed use; and
[3] A description of the construction techniques used to
assure that the site's soils can safely accommodate the
proposed use.
(e) Historic preservation. Those applications involving properties
listed with the Pennsylvania Historic Site Survey shall require
the preparation of a statement by a commonwealth-registered
architect or landscape architect which includes the following
minimum considerations:
[1] A topographic map of the site and any adjoining historic
sites that highlights existing historic sites and depicts the
proposed use;
[2] A description of the site's historic features and their
historic significance at the local, state and national level;
[3] A letter from the Historic Preservation Trust of Lancaster
County commenting on the proposed development's
§ 240-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-15
240:255
impact on the historic sites contained on or around the
site. This letter should also contain any additional design
and/or use recommendations that would further protect
historic resources.
[4] Architectural renderings of the proposed structures and
descriptions of any architectural treatments that are
intended to complement any important architectural
features of historic resources. Such descriptions shall be
analyzed with the following criteria:
[a] Proportion of buildings front facades. The relationship
between the width of the front of the building and the
height of the front of the building.
[b] Proportion of openings within the building. The
relationship of width to height of windows and doors.
[c] Rhythms of solids to voids in the front facade. Since
rhythm is a repeated and recurrent alteration of
strong and weak architectural elements, a rhythm of
masses to openings in a building should be
maintained.
[d] Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. In moving
past a series of buildings, a rhythm of recurrent or
repeated building masses to spaces between them
should be experienced.
[e] Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. Moving
past a series of structures, one experiences a rhythm
of entrances or projections at an intimate scale.
[f] Relationship of materials. Within an area, the
predominant materials may be brick, stone, stucco,
wood siding or other material.
[g] Relationship of textures. The predominant textures of
an area may be smooth, such as stucco or rough as
brick with tooled joints or horizontal wood siding, or
other textures.
[h] Walls of continuity. Physical ingredients such as brick
walls, wrought iron fences, evergreen landscape
masses, building facades, or combinations of these
form continuous, cohesive walls of enclosures along
the street.
[i] Relationship of landscaping. There may be a
predominance of a quality and quantity of landscaping
although emphasis herein shall be with the amounts
and continuity of landscaping.
§ 240-15 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-15
240:256
[j] Paving materials. There may be a predominance in the
use of brick pavers, cobblestones, granite blocks or
others.
[k] Directional expression of front elevation. Structural
shape, planning of openings and architectural detail
may provide a predominantly vertical, horizontal or
non-directional character to the buildings facade.
[l] Scale. Scale is created by the size of units of
construction and architectural detail that relate to the
size of man. It can also be determined by building
mass and how it relates to open space. The major
elements of scale may be brick or stone units, window
or door openings, porches and balconies, etc.
[m] Relationship of color. Insofar as the mass and detail
such as trim are concerned, a predominant color that
may be of a natural material or a patina colored by
time. Blending colors of trim is also a factor.
[n] Relationship of architectural details. Architectural
details and their relationship to the structure in
question and adjacent ones, including but not limited
to, cornices, lintels, arches, quoins, balustrades and
ironwork, chimneys, etc.
[o] Relationship of roof shapes. Buildings should have
compatible roof shapes such as gable, mansard, hip,
flat, gambrel and/or other kinds of roof shapes.
[5] A description of any nonstructural site improvements
(buffering, landscaping and screening) that will be used to
protect the integrity of the historic resources.
(f) Archaeological resources. All applications involving lands
identified by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum
Commission (PHMC) as containing a potential or known site of
archaeological significance shall require the preparation of a
statement by a professional archaeologist which includes the
following minimum considerations:
[1] A detailed account of a Phase I survey of archaeological
resources conducted on the site, and its findings. Such
survey shall be conducted only after notification of the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission (PHMC)
and undertaken in a manner specifically prescribed by the
PHMC;
[2] A letter from the PHMC discussing the archaeologic
significance of the site. This letter should also suggest
whether or not further study is warranted. If further study
§ 240-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-15
240:257
is warranted, a description of the level of investigation
needed, should also be explained.
[3] Should the PHMC determine that certain portions of the
site can accommodate the proposed use without risking
the loss of archaeological resources contained elsewhere
on the site, a detailed description of the methods that are
being used to:
[a] Prevent the disturbance of archaeologically significant
areas of the site during and following construction of
the proposed use;
[b] Prohibit grading in the vicinity of archaeologically
significant areas of the site; and,
[c] Orient improvements and activities of the proposed
use away from the archaeologically significant areas
that adjoin the site; and
[4] A detailed description of the plans for disposition of any
archaeologically significant artifacts found or, to be found,
on the site.
(g) Traffic. All applications shall require the preparation of a
traffic study by a professional traffic engineer with the
following minimum considerations:
[1] A description of the traffic impact area (TIA) including its
major roads and potential traffic generation rates to be
determined by current land use planning references.
[2] Existing twenty-four-hour and peak-hour traffic volume
data for all streets which provide direct access to the
proposed development and for the collectors and arterials
which will serve it, as well as any major intersection within
the impact area.
[3] Estimates of the total number of vehicle trips to be
generated by the development for a typical twenty-fourhour
period, and including typical a.m. and p.m. peak
periods.
[4] Assignment of future twenty-four-hour and peak-hour
volumes to the collectors and arterials, and other streets
that will serve the proposed development based on the
projections of increased traffic volumes within the traffic
impact area, to be determined by an extrapolation of
former development trends; and, the amounts of usable
area already planned and/or zoned within the traffic
impact area. Any previously approved projects within the
§ 240-15 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-15
240:258
TIA that have not yet been occupied should also be
factored in these future traffic volume projections.
[5] Projected twenty-four-hour and peak-hour turning
movement data for all access points proposed for the
development.
[6] Capacity/level of service analysis on major intersections
which will be impacted by the additional volumes
generated by the development.
[7] Recent data about existing accident levels at the above
intersections categorized by accident type for each
intersection.
[8] Descriptions of the street improvements that will be
required in order to avoid problems of traffic congestions
and traffic safety.
[9] Cost estimates of any proposed improvements that will be
required.
[10] Descriptions of existing and planned public transportation
services in the Township and the potential to serve the
proposed development.
[11] Descriptions of any actions proposed or offered by the
applicant to alleviate the impact of the proposed
development on the transportation network.
[12] The source of standards used in the data as presented.
(h) Parks and recreation. All applications involving residential
development shall require the preparation of a statement by a
qualified recreation planner with the following minimum
considerations:
[1] A description of the total projected number of residents in
their respective age groups.
[2] A description of those existing public recreation facilities
located within a one-half-mile radius of the site.
[3] A description of the adequacy of existing recreation
facilities to serve the proposed residents, taking into
consideration current usage.
[4] Discussion of potential for any recreation facilities to be
provided by the developer to accommodate new residents
and/or compensate for any anticipated deficiencies of the
Township's recreational facilities.
[5] A description of any recreation facilities to be provided by
the developer.
§ 240-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-15
240:259
[6] A description of responsibility for maintenance of any
recreational facilities to be provided by the developer.
[7] A description of accessibility of the proposed facilities to
general Township residents.
[8] A description of any contributions that the developer plans
to make for Township recreation to compensate for
expected impacts.
[9] Source of standards used in the data presented.
(i) Public utilities. All applications shall require the preparation of
the following:
[1] A description of the means of sewage disposal to be used,
including letter of commitment from Suburban Lancaster
Sewer Authority and/or DEP approvals for on-lot disposal
systems.
[2] A description of the means of water supply to be used and
on-site well testing, if applicable.
[3] A description of the means of stormwater management.
(j) Public facilities and services. All applications shall require the
preparation of a statement with the following minimum
considerations:
[1] A description of the effect of proposed use on the delivery
of fire protection. This description shall include a letter
from the respective fire chief describing the adequacy/
inadequacy of existing facilities and service to
accommodate the proposal use, and any suggestion that
might enhance fire protection service to the proposed use.
[2] A description of the effect of the proposed use on the
delivery of police protection. This description shall include
a letter from the Township Police Chief describing the
adequacy/inadequacy of existing facilities and service to
accommodate the proposed use, and any suggestions that
might enhance police protection to the proposed use.
[3] A description of the effect of the proposed use on the
delivery of ambulance service. This description shall
include a letter from the agency responsible for ambulance
service in the site's vicinity. Such letter shall describe the
adequacy/inadequacy of existing facilities and services to
accommodate the proposed use, and any suggestions that
might enhance ambulance service.
[4] A description of the effect of the proposed use on the
delivery of public education. This description shall include
§ 240-15 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-15
240:260
a letter from the Lampeter Strasburg School District
describing the adequacy/inadequacy of existing or
proposed facilities and services to accommodate the
proposed use. In addition the letter should list any
suggestions that could enhance the delivery of public
education to residents of the proposed use.
F. Certifications and notifications.
(1) Where the land included in the subject application has an electric
or telephone transmission line, a gas pipeline, or a petroleum or
petroleum products transmission line located within the tract, the
application shall be accompanied by a letter from the owner or
lessee of such right-of-way stating any conditions on the use of the
land and the minimum building setback and/or right-of-way lines.
This requirement may also be satisfied by submitting a copy of the
recorded agreement.
(2) A statement by the individual responsible for the data to the effect
that the survey, plan and/or other general data are correct (see
Appendix No. 181). This statement must be placed on both plans and
reports.
(3) A statement acknowledging that the subdivision or land
development shown on the plan is presented with the consent of
the landowner.
(4) A statement that a highway occupancy permit is required pursuant
to Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), as
amended,82 before street or driveway access to a state highway is
permitted.
(5) An application (see Appendix No. 683).
(6) (Optional) A statement acknowledging municipal action (see
Appendix Nos. 3 and 484).
(7) A note to be placed on the plan indicating that, prior to the use and
occupancy of a lot, the street number for the lot shall be required to
be displayed in a location clearly visible and readable from all
adjacent streets. Where a lot contains multiple buildings or units,
the applicant shall also document on the plan how each building
and unit will be identified prior to its use and occupancy in a
manner acceptable to the Board of Supervisors so that emergency
services can easily identify the location of every building and unit in
a time of emergency. [Added 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 145]
81.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
82.Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-420.
83.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
84.Editor's Note: Said Appendixes are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 240-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-15
240:261
§ 240-16. Final plans.
Final plans shall be prepared by an engineer, surveyor, or landscape
architect registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to perform such
duties. The final plan shall show, be accompanied by, or prepared in
accordance with the following:
G. Filing fee. The preliminary plan shall be accompanied by a check or
money order drawn to West Lampeter Township in an amount specified
on the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors
and available at the Township Building.
A. Drafting standards. The same standards are required for a final plan as
specified for a preliminary plan in § 240-15A.
B. Location and identification. The same standards are required for a final
plan as specified for a preliminary plan in § 240-15B.
C. Existing features. The same standards are required for a final plan as
specified for a preliminary plan in § 240-15C.
D. Proposed features. In addition to the following data, the same
standards are required for a final plan as specified for a preliminary
plan in § 240-15D.
(1) Complete description of the center line and right-of-way line for all
new streets. This description shall include distances and bearings
with curve segments comprised of radius, tangent, arc, and chord.
The description shall not have an error of closure greater than one
foot in 10,000 feet.
(2) Complete description of all lot lines, with accurate bearings and
distances, and lot areas for all parcels. Curve segments shall be
comprised of arc, chord, bearing and distance. Along existing
street rights-of-way, the description may utilize the existing deed
lines or road center lines. Along all proposed street rights-of-way,
the description shall be prepared to the right-of-way lines. The
description shall not have an error of closure greater than one foot
in 10,000 feet.
E. Reports. The same standards are required for a final plan as specified
for preliminary plan in § 240-15E.
F. Certifications and notifications. In addition to the following data, the
same standards are required for a final plan as specified for preliminary
plan in § 240-15F.
(1) A statement acknowledging final plan approval (see Appendix No.
585). This statement must be placed on all sheets which are subject
to recording with the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
85.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 240-15 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-16
240:262
(2) A statement acknowledging plan review by the Township Planning
Commission (see Appendix No. 386). This statement must be placed
on all sheets which are subject to recording with the Lancaster
County Recorder of Deeds.
(3) Notice from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection that a sewer facilities plan revision or supplement has
been approved.
(4) A notarized statement signed by the landowner, duly acknowledged
before an officer authorized to take acknowledgement of deeds, to
the effect that the subdivision or land development shown on the
plan is the act and the deed of the owner, that all those signing are
all the owners of the property shown on the survey and plan, and
that they desire the same to be recorded (see Appendix No. 287).
This must be dated following the last change or revision to said
plan.
(5) A statement of dedication of streets and other public property as
well as area that is not to be offered for dedication. (See Appendix
No. 2).
(6) The submission of a controlling agreement in accordance with
§ 240-24B when an application proposes to establish areas which
are not offered for dedication to public use.
(7) Such written notices of approval as required by this chapter,
including written notices approving the water supply systems,
sanitary sewage systems, and stormwater runoff to adjacent
properties.
(8) A statement that a highway occupancy permit is required pursuant
to Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), as
amended,88 before street or driveway access to a state highway is
permitted.
(9) A statement to accommodate the Lancaster County Recorder of
Deeds information (see Appendix No. 389).
(10) Improvement guarantees in accordance with Article V.
(11) An application (see Appendix No. 690).
(12) A letter from the Lancaster County-Wide Communications stating
that the proposed street names are acceptable (see Appendix No. 8
for suggested form91). [Added 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 145]
86.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
87.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
88.Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-420.
89.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
90.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 240-16 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-16
240:263
(13) The submission of a properly executed land development
agreement in the form and content required by the Township
setting forth, among other things, the responsibilities for the
development of the property and listing required improvements,
lands to be dedicated, and contributions to be made to the
Township (see Appendix No. 992). [Added 10-14-2002 by Ord.
No. 170]
G. Filing fee. The final plan shall also be accompanied by a check or money
order drawn to West Lampeter Township in an amount specified on the
fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors and
available at the Township Building.
91.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
92.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 240-16 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-16
240:264
ARTICLE V
Improvement Guarantees
§ 240-17. General requirements.
§ 240-18. Financial security.
The administration of the financial security shall comply with the provisions
of this article, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as
amended,93 and other applicable laws of the commonwealth.
A. No project shall be considered in compliance with this chapter until the
streets, all street signs, sidewalks, curbs, landscaping, storm drainage
for dedication or which affect adjacent properties or streets, sanitary
sewer facilities for dedication, water supply facilities, fire hydrants, lot
line markers, survey monuments and other such public improvements
have been installed in accordance with this chapter and other
applicable Township ordinances.
B. No final plan shall be signed by the Board of Supervisors for recording
in the office of the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds unless:
(1) A financial security in accordance with § 240-18 is accepted by the
Board of Supervisors; and/or
(2) The improvements required by this chapter have been installed.
A. Submission of financial security. Final plan applications that include
public improvements that have not been installed shall include a
financial security.
(1) Type of financial security. Although the Board of Supervisors may
accept an alternative type of financial security, commonly used
forms are irrevocable letters of credit and escrow accounts. Such
financial security shall be posted by a chartered lending institution
or bonding company authorized to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and is subject to review by the
Township Solicitor for adequacy.
(2) Amount of financial security.
(a) The amount of financial security shall be equal to 110% of the
cost of completion estimated as of 90 days following the date
scheduled for completion by the developer. Annually the
Township may adjust the amount of the financial security by
comparing the actual cost of the improvements which have
been completed and estimated cost for the completion of the
remaining improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day
after either the original date schedule for completion or a
rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said
93.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 240-17 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-18
240:265
adjustment, the municipality may require the developer to post
additional security in order to assure that the financial security
equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be posted by
the developer in accordance with this chapter.
(b) The amount of financial security required shall be based upon
an estimate of the cost of completion of the required
improvements, submitted by an applicant or developer and
prepared by a professional engineer licensed as such in this
commonwealth and certified by such engineer to be a fair and
reasonable estimate of such cost. The municipality, upon the
recommendation of the municipal engineer, may refuse to
accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or
developer and the municipality are unable to agree upon an
estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and
recertified by another professional engineer licensed as such
in this commonwealth and chosen mutually by the municipality
and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified by the
third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable, and shall
be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so
chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid
equally by the municipality and the applicant or developer.
(c) If the party posting the financial security requires more than
one year from the date of posting of the financial security to
complete the required improvements, the amount of financial
security may be increased by an additional 10% for each oneyear
period beyond the first anniversary date from posting of
financial security or to an amount not exceeding 110% of the
cost of completing the required improvements as reestablished
on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year period by
using the above procedure.
B. Release of financial security.
(1) When the developer has completed all of the necessary and
appropriate improvements, the developer shall notify the Board of
Supervisors in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the
completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy
thereof to the Township Engineer. The Board of Supervisors shall,
within 10 days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize
Township Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements.
The Township Engineer shall, thereupon, file a report, in writing,
with the Board of Supervisors, and shall promptly mail a copy of the
same to the developer by certified or registered mail. The report
shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the
Township Engineers of the aforesaid authorization from the Board
of Supervisors; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate
approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in
part, and if said improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be
approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineers, said
§ 240-18 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-18
240:266
§ 240-19. Dedication of improvements.
All improvements shall be deemed to be private improvements and only for
the benefit of the specific project until such time as the same have been
offered for dedication and formally accepted by the Board of Supervisors.
No responsibility of any kind with respect to improvements shown on the
final plan shall be transferred until the improvements have been formally
accepted. All requests for dedication shall follow the current procedures of
the Township of West Lampeter.
report shall contain a statement of reasons for such nonapproval or
rejection.
(2) The Board of Supervisors shall notify the developer, within 15 days
of receipt of the Engineer's report, in writing by certified or
registered mail of the action of the Board of Supervisors with
relation thereto.
(3) If the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer fails to
comply with the time limitation provisions contained herein, all
improvements will be deemed to have been approved and the
developer shall be released from all liability, pursuant to its
performance guaranty bond or other security agreement.
(4) If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or
shall be rejected by the Board of Supervisors the developer shall
proceed to complete the same and, upon completion, the same
procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
(5) Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer's right to contest or question by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Board of Supervisors or the
Township Engineer.
(6) If any portion of said improvements are not approved or are
rejected by the Board of Supervisors, the applicant shall proceed to
complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification outlined herein shall be followed.
C. Other remedies. If proceeds of the financial security are insufficient to
pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the Board of Supervisors may,
at its option, install all or part of such improvements and may institute
appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the funds necessary to
complete the remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds,
whether resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable
action brought against the applicant, or both, shall be used solely for
the installation of the improvements covered by such security, and not
for any other municipal purpose.
§ 240-18 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-20
240:267
§ 240-20. Maintenance guarantee.
The Board of Supervisors may, at its discretion, require the applicant to
submit a maintenance guarantee or other approved guarantee as specified
herein, guaranteeing the structural integrity as well as function of any
improvement shown on the final plan for a term not to exceed 18 months
from the date of acceptance of dedication by the Board of Supervisors. Said
guarantee shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of said
improvements and be of the same type of financial security as required in
this article.
§ 240-21. Inspection of improvements during construction.
§ 240-22. As-built plans.
Upon completion of all required improvements and prior to final inspections
of improvements, the applicant shall submit a plan labeled "as-built plan,"
showing the location, dimension and elevation of all improvements. In
addition, the plan shall indicate that the resultant grading, drainage
structures and/or drainage systems and erosion and sediment control
practices, including vegetative measures, are in substantial conformance
with the previously approved drawings and specifications. The plan shall
note all deviation from the previously approved drawings. Two copies of
the plan (one paper transparency and one plastic transparency) shall be
submitted to the Township, which shall distribute the paper transparency to
the Township Engineer and retain the plastic transparency for the Township
files.
A. Prior to the initiation of construction, the developer shall notify the
Township so that an inspection schedule can be coordinated with the
construction schedule. Additionally, the Township and the Township
Engineer shall be notified four working days in advance of any intended
date of construction. The provisions stated herein shall be construed as
mandating periodic inspections and the undertaking of periodic
inspections shall not be construed as an acceptance of the work during
construction or as a final inspection of the construction.
B. The Township, at the expense of the developer, reserves the right to
require tests of the improvement to determine whether the
improvement complies in all respects with the requirements of the
Township.
§ 240-20 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-22
240:268
ARTICLE VI
Design Standards
§ 240-23. Minimum standards; compliance with other provisions.
[Amended 10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 170]
A. The standards and requirements contained in this article shall apply as
minimum design standards for subdivisions and/or land developments
within the Township. In addition, subdivisions and/or land
developments shall be designed to comply with the requirements of
Chapter 285, Zoning, Chapter 230, Stormwater Management, the
regulations of the public water supplier and public sewer supplier, and
the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, as
applicable.
B. All proposed subdivisions and/or land developments shall be designed,
laid out, arranged, constructed, and coordinated with all presently
existing facilities and improvements which serve the tract proposed to
be developed, including but not limited to the a) transportation
network, b) sewer collection, conveyance, and treatment facilities, c)
water supply and distribution facilities, and d) stormwater management
facilities, as necessary to accommodate prospective traffic, provide
adequate sewer and water service, promote proper stormwater
management, facilitate fire protection, prevent flooding, and conform to
the Comprehensive Plan, including any Urban Growth Boundary, the
Official Map, and any regulations or plans adopted in furtherance
thereof. All proposed subdivisions and/or land developments shall also
be designed, laid out, arranged, constructed, and coordinated to insure
that abutting properties will continue to have safe and convenient
access in accordance with the standards of this chapter or, if such
properties do not presently have such access, to have access at least
equal to the level existing prior to the proposed subdivision and/or land
development. The applicant shall submit studies and reports with the
preliminary plan and the final plan which shall clearly identify any
assumed, proposed, and required improvements to existing facilities. If
an applicant submits a study, report or plan which contains
improvements assumed to be installed by others and compliance with
the design standards in this chapter is based upon the completion of
such assumed improvements, the design standards of this chapter shall
not be considered as met unless the applicant presents evidence that a
governmental entity has budgeted funds and/or has entered into
contracts for the assumed improvements or unless a plan for another
development which proposes the installation of such improvements has
been approved and recorded.
(1) Whenever Chapter 285, Zoning, provides that the use proposed by
the applicant for subdivision and/or land development approval
shall constitute a use by special exception or a conditional use, the
applicant shall obtain such special exception or conditional use
§ 240-23 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-23
240:269
§ 240-24. Streets, access drives and driveways.
approval from the Zoning Hearing Board or the Board of
Supervisors, as applicable, prior to the submission of the
preliminary plan. The preliminary plan shall be designed and
developed in accordance with any conditions which have been
imposed upon the grant of such special exception or conditional
use by the Zoning Hearing Board or the Board of Supervisors, as
applicable.
(2) Whenever the applicant proposes to develop a subdivision and/or
land development in a manner that would require a variance or
variances from any requirements of Chapter 285, Zoning, the
applicant shall obtain such variance or variances from the Zoning
Hearing Board prior to the submission of the preliminary plan. The
preliminary plan shall be designed and developed in accordance
with any conditions which have been imposed upon the grant of
such variance or variances by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(3) Whenever all or a portion of the land contained within an
application for subdivision or land development approval
constitutes all or a portion of land included in a prior subdivision or
land development plan approved by the Township or the Lancaster
County Planning Commission and recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds in and for Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, the
plan shall comply with all conditions, restrictions, and notes
imposed on the prior approval and/or included upon the recorded
subdivision or land development plan. The applicant shall identify
all prior recorded subdivision and/or land development plans of
which all or a portion of the land contained in the plan was a part
and all conditions, restrictions, and notes which affect the current
application. Failure to identify all applicable conditions,
restrictions, and notes of record on prior plans constitutes a
violation of this chapter. The applicant shall submit with the
application for preliminary plan approval (or final plan approval if a
preliminary plan is not required) a statement identifying the prior
plans reviewed; the conditions, restrictions, and notes which would
impact development in accordance with the plan for which
approval has been requested; and an explanation of the manner in
which the proposed plan has been designed to comply with such
conditions, restrictions, and notes. This information shall be signed
by the applicant or the applicant's engineer, landscape architect or
other consultant.
A. Conformance with adopted plans. The proposed street pattern shall be
properly related to existing streets, Official Maps, and such Township,
county, and state highway plans as have been duly adopted.
B. Private streets. Private streets are prohibited unless they meet the
design standards of these regulations. Applications which propose a
private street shall be accompanied by a right-of-way agreement which
§ 240-23 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-24
240:270
shall be submitted for review by the Township and recorded with the
Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds on the same date as the recording
of the final plan. This agreement shall establish the conditions under
which the street will be constructed and maintained, as well as
conditions controlling an offer of dedication.
C. Improvements to existing streets.
(1) Subdivision and land development along existing roads, which do
not meet the standards of this chapter, shall include the
improvement of 1/2 of such road to required standards.
Improvement construction guarantee in the forms permitted by
this chapter shall assure that such improvements will be made
within such period of time as the Township shall determine, such
determination to be based on the likely timing of the improvement
of the other portion of said roadway.
(2) In lieu of the improvement construction guarantee for the specific
road on which the subdivision lies, the subdivider may contribute a
general site improvement fee to be used by the Township whenever
said road is upgraded. The amount of "fee in lieu of" on a per-frontfootage
basis will be determined annually by the Township
Engineer.
D. Arterial street design. The design standards for arterial streets shall be
as specified by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and
based upon the projected average daily traffic and speed limit.
E. Arrangement.
(1) Streets shall be designed with consideration to both existing and
planned streets.
(2) All streets shall be arranged to conform as closely as possible to the
original topography.
(3) New streets shall be connected with streets of similar function, to
form continuations thereof.
(4) Local streets shall be laid out to discourage use by through traffic.
Streets shall be laid out to provide convenient and safe access to
the property.
(5) The rigid rectangular street pattern need not be adhered to; the
use of curvilinear streets may be provided when their use will
result in a more desirable layout.
(6) Where a development abuts a collector or arterial street, the
Township may require the use of marginal access streets, reverse
frontage lots, or such other treatment that will provide protection
for abutting properties, reduce the number of intersections with
the major street, and separate the local and through traffic.
§ 240-24 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-24
240:271
F. Street provisions for future development.
(1) Where appropriate, areas shall be reserved for future street usage
in conjunction with the development of adjacent tracts. Areas
reserved for future street usage will not be required to be
improved; however, the right-of-way for these areas shall be
reserved for street improvements to be provided by the developer
of the adjacent tract.
(2) Wherever there exists a dedicated or platted area reserved for
future street usage along the boundary of a tract being developed,
the adjacent street shall be extended into the proposed project
provided this use is not adverse to the man-made or natural
features of the site.
G. Street names. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 145]
(1) Streets that are extensions of or obviously in alignment with
existing streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. Street
names shall not be repeated and all street names shall be subject to
the approval of the Lancaster County-Wide Communications.
(2) Street signs.
(a) The developer shall be responsible for obtaining and installing
all street name and traffic signage within the development
prior to the use and occupancy of any part of the development,
or upon the installation of the binder or wearing course of the
street, whichever comes first. All signage shall be subject to
the approval of the Township and shall be consistent with
existing signage within the Township.
(b) At least two street name signs shall be placed at each four-way
street intersection, and one street name sign shall be placed at
each T-intersection. Signs shall be installed in a location and
manner where they will be clearly visible at all hours. The
design of street name signs shall be approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
H. Vertical alignments. Vertical street alignments shall be measured along
the center line. The minimum grade of all streets shall be 0.75%. The
maximum grade shall not exceed 10%.
(1) Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade exceeding 1%.
The minimum length, in feet, of vertical curves shall be 15 times
the algebraic difference in grade. For example, if a 3% upgrade is
followed by a 4% downgrade, the algebraic difference in grade is
seven [+3 - (-4) = 7]; the minimum length of the vertical curve
would then be 105 feet [15 x 7=105].
(2) Where the approaching grade exceeds 7% on any or all streets at a
four-way street intersection, or the terminating street at a three-
§ 240-24 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-24
240:272
way intersection, a leveling area shall be provided. Such leveling
area shall have a maximum grade of 4% for a minimum length of
100 feet measured from the intersection of the center lines.
(3) The grade within the diameter of a turnaround at the terminus of a
permanent cul-de-sac shall not exceed 5%.
(4) All areas within the street right-of-way shall be graded
substantially consistent with the street center line. The maximum
slopes of banks within the street right-of-way, measured
perpendicular to the center line of the street, shall be 2:1. Slope of
disturbed banks, located outside of the street right-of-way, shall not
exceed 3:1 for fills and 2:1 for cuts.
I. Horizontal alignments.
(1) Horizontal street alignments shall be measured along the center
line. Horizontal curves shall be used at all angle changes in excess
of 2°.
(2) Single, long radius curves shall be used rather than a series of
curves with varying radii and/or a series of short curves separated
by short, straight segments.
(3) The minimum horizontal curve radius for collector streets shall be
300 feet and for all other streets shall be 150 feet. All curves shall
be tangential arcs.
(4) A minimum one-hundred-foot tangent shall be provided between
reverse curves on collector streets.
(5) Perimeter streets. Street locations along the perimeter of a
property shall be required to provide building setback lines and
clear sight triangles within the adjacent properties; permission for
these encroachments shall be obtained from the adjacent
landowner.
(6) Cartway alignment. The center line of the street cartway shall
correspond with the center line of the street right-of-way.
J. Street right-of-way and cartway widths. The minimum street rights-ofway
and cartway widths shall be as follows:
Classification*
Minimum Rightof-
Way**
(feet)
Minimum
Cartway**
(feet)
Collector street 60 36
Minor street and cul-de-sac
street
50 34
Marginal access street, service
street or alley
32 24
§ 240-24 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-24
240:273
Classification*
Minimum Rightof-
Way**
(feet)
Minimum
Cartway**
(feet)
Turnaround 100 80
NOTES:
* See § 240-7, Definitions, for explanation of individual street
classifications.
** Width/diameter.
K. Street improvements. All streets shall be designed in accordance with
PennDOT specifications, acceptable engineering standards, and the
following:
(1) Subgrade. The subgrade shall be prepared as specified below:
(a) All rock shall be removed and covered with a six-inch cushion
of suitable material meeting the physical, placement and
compaction requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT) Form 408.94
(b) Preparation of subgrade shall conform to the construction
requirements of Section 210 of PennDOT Form 408.
(2) Subbase. The base construction material shall be crushed stone six
inches deep according to PennDOT Form 408, Section 350.
(a) No stone shad be laid on frozen ground.
(b) Geotextile fabric shall be used in accordance with the specific
street design or at the direction of the Township Engineer.
(3) Base. The base course material shall be bituminous concrete four
inches thick according to PennDOT Form 408, Section 305.
(4) Wear surface. The wear surface shall be ID2, 1 1/2 inches thick
according to PennDOT Form 408, Section 420.
(5) Finished streets. All finished streets must maintain 1/4 inch per
foot crown, except on superelevations and areas approved by
standard engineering practice.
L. Street intersections.
(1) All streets intersecting a state route shall be subject to the approval
of the Township and the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 240-24 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-24
240:274
(2) Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two
streets are prohibited. Only four-way intersections are permitted.
(3) The distance between the center line of streets opening onto the
opposite sides of existing or proposed streets shall be no less than
150 feet between center lines, measured along the center line of
the street being intersected; however, intersections with arterial
streets shall be located not closer than 800 feet, measured from
center line to center line, along the center line of the arterial street.
(4) Right angle intersections shall be used whenever possible. No
street shall intersect another at an angle of less than 75° or more
than 105°.
(5) Cartway edge.
(a) The cartway edge at intersections shall be rounded by a
tangential arc with the following minimum radii:
Type of Street Intersection
Radii
(feet)
Collector to arterial 55
Collector to collector 55
Collector to minor 30
Minor to minor 20
(b) The right-of-way radii at intersections shall be substantially
concentric with the cartway edge.
(6) Sight triangles.
(a) There shall be provided and maintained at all intersections a
clear sight triangle with a line of sight between points which
are established along the center line of the intersecting
streets. The minimum clear sight triangles are as follows:
Type of Street
Clear Sight Triangle Side
(feet)
Arterial 150
Collector and minor 100
(b) Clear sight triangles shall be indicated on all plans. No
building or other obstruction that would obscure the vision of a
motorist shall be permitted within these areas. Obstructions,
grading and/or plantings less than three feet above the street
grade shall be permitted.
M. Sight distance. All streets shall be designed to provide adequate sight
distance with regard to both horizontal and vertical alignment. The
§ 240-24 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-24
240:275
sight distance shall be measured along the center line of the street
cartway, from a height of 3.75 feet to the height of an object which is
0.5 foot above the street cartway. At intersections, the point shall be 15
feet from the edge of paving on the intersected street. The following
are minimum sight distances:
N. Cul-de-sac streets. A cul-de-sac will not be approved when a through
street is more advantageous. Permanent cul-de-sac streets shall not
exceed a center line distance of 600 feet in length, measured from the
center-line intersection with a street which is not a cul-de-sac to the
center of the cul-de-sac turnaround. Temporary cul-de-sac streets shall
not exceed 800 feet in length, measured from the center-line
intersection with a street which is not a cul-de-sac to the center of the
cul-de-sac turnaround. Any street which is terminated for access to an
adjoining property or because of authorized stage development shall be
provided with a temporary, all-weather turnaround. The use of such
turnaround shall be guaranteed until such time as the street is
extended. All cul-de-sac streets, whether permanently or temporarily
designed, shall be provided at the closed end with a fully paved
turnaround to the specifications stated in Subsection J of this section.
§ 240-24 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-24
240:276
O. Future access strips. Future access strips are rights-of-way reserved for
future street improvements. When in the opinion of the Board of
Supervisors access to adjacent land is desirable, future access strips
shall be provided and designed in conformance with the requirements
for a street.
P. Service streets (alley). Service streets are prohibited unless the
developer demonstrates a need. Service streets shall conform to the
following standards:
(1) No part of any dwelling, garage, or other structure shall be located
within 16 feet of the right-of-way of a service street.
(2) Service streets shall be designed in accordance with the street
standards in Subsections A, B, E, F, H, I, J, K, L, M, N and O of this
section.
(3) Service streets shall not provide lot frontage.
(4) On-street parking is prohibited along service streets and this
prohibition must be acknowledged both on the plan and on the site.
Q. Driveways. Driveways shall conform with § 285-53 of Chapter 285,
Zoning, of the Code of the Township of West Lampeter, as amended, and
as may be amended from time to time. [Amended 12-9-1992 by Ord.
No. 119]
R. Access drives. Access drives are private drives, other than driveways,
which provide for vehicular access between a public road and a tract of
land containing any use other than one single-family dwelling unit.
Access drives shall conform with the following standards: [Amended
12-9-1992 by Ord. No. 119]
(1) The vertical alignments of access drives shall conform to the
specifications for streets, as stated in Subsection H of this section.
(2) The horizontal alignments of access drives shall be measured along
the center line. Horizontal curves shall be used at all angle changes
in excess of 2°. All curves shall be tangential arcs. The minimum
horizontal curve radius shall be 75 feet.
(3) All access drive intersections shall be:
(a) Subject to approval of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation when intersecting a state road;
(b) Set back 100 feet from the intersection of any street right-ofway
lines;
(c) Set back 100 feet from the intersection of any other access
drive located upon the same lot (measured from cartway
edges);
§ 240-24 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-24
240:277
(d) Set back 15 feet from any side and/or rear property lines;
however, this setback can be waived along one property line
when a joint parking lot is shared by adjoining uses;
(e) Located in relationship to access drive intersections on
adjacent properties to provide safe and efficient movement of
vehicles;
(f) Designed with right-angle intersections whenever possible. No
access drive intersection shall utilize an angle less than 75°
unless turning movement restrictions are imposed;
(g) Rounded by a tangential arc with a minimum radius of 20 feet.
The Township may require fifty-five-foot radius where truck
traffic is anticipated; and
(h) Provided with a clear sight triangle and sight distance in
accordance with Subsections L(6) and M of this section.
(4) Access drives which form a cul-de-sac shall not exceed 1,000 feet in
length, measured from the center-line intersection of a street or
access drive which is not a cul-de-sac. Access drive culs-de-sac
which do not terminate in a parking compound shall be provided at
the terminus with a fully paved turnaround with a minimum
diameter of 100 feet.
(5) When vehicular parking is prohibited along access drives, the
prohibition must be acknowledged on the plan and properly signed
along the cartway.
(6) The cartway of all access drives shall be constructed with a
minimum six-inch crushed aggregate base course and a two-andone-
half-inch surface course of materials specified in the latest
edition of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Manual
408. Additionally, all work procedures shall conform to the latest
edition of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Manual
408.
(7) The following table specifies various access drive width
requirements:
Function
Required Cartway
Width
(feet)
Two lanes of traffic with on-street parking 36
Two lanes of traffic without on-street
parking*
24
One lane of traffic with one lane of onstreet
parking**
20
§ 240-24 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-24
240:278
§ 240-25. Vehicular parking facilities.
Vehicular parking facilities for multiple users shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 285, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of West
Lampeter.
§ 240-26. Sidewalks and curbs.
Function
Required Cartway
Width
(feet)
One lane of traffic without on-street
parking**
12
NOTES:
* Off-street parking lots must be provided in accordance with
§ 285-54 of Chapter 285, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of
West Lampeter, as amended, and as may be further amended from
time to time.
** The one-way direction of traffic must be identified along the
cartway.
A. Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks shall be provided in all residential projects with an
average density in excess of two dwelling units per acre.
Additionally, sidewalks shall be required in the following
circumstances: [Amended 10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 170]
(a) To continue existing sidewalk systems to the terminus of a
service area or block.
(b) To provide access to vehicular parking compounds, school bus
zones, or recreational facilities.
(c) To provide access to and/or within a commercial, industrial, or
other community facilities.
(2) Sidewalks which are located along streets or access drives shall be
located along the side(s) of the street upon which lots front and
pedestrian traffic is anticipated.
(3) Sidewalks which are provided off street or off access drives shall be
located along anticipated pedestrian traffic routes.
(4) Sidewalks located adjacent to public streets shall be constructed in
accordance with the following specifications:
(a) Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete. Concrete used in
sidewalk work shall be certified to develop a compressive
§ 240-24 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-26
240:279
stress of at least 3,000 psi at 28 days. Certification of the
mix shall be furnished, if requested by the authority accepting
dedication. Concrete shall be placed in forms that are straight
and securely braced. Care shall be taken to control the water
content to prevent separation of the aggregates. The concrete
shall have a broom finish and the edge shall be finished with
an edging tool.
(b) All concrete sidewalks shall be constructed on a four-inch-thick
crushed stone or gravel base to insure proper drainage. The
concrete shall be placed so that a score or separate joint is
provided every five feet. There shall be 1/2 inch premoulded
expansion joints between every fifth section and between all
points where the concrete sidewalk abuts a concrete curb.
(c) All concrete sidewalks shall have a minimum thickness of four
inches, except where driveways cross sidewalks and for
driveway apron areas. These areas shall have a minimum
thickness of six inches and shall contain one layer of No. 6 wire
forming six-inch squares. The wire shall be installed so that it
is not closer than one inch from the top or bottom surface of
the driveway.
(5) Sidewalks located outside of the public right-of-way (e.g., adjacent
to driveways, access drives, and parking compounds) may be
constructed of any material acceptable to the developer.
(6) Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four feet.
(7) Sidewalks shall be graded so as to discharge stormwater runoff.
(8) Sidewalks along public streets shall be located one foot inside the
street right-of-way and physically divided from the street cartway
by curb or grass strip.
(9) Maintenance and repair cost for sidewalks is the sole responsibility
of the landowner.95
(10) Pedestrian easements, which may be required by the Board of
Supervisors to facilitate pedestrian circulation or to give access to
community facilities, shall have a minimum right-of-way width of
six feet and a walkway width of four feet. This walkway shall be
improved to the standards assigned by the individual or other unity
which accepts the easements.
B. Curbs. Curbs shall be provided in accordance with the following
specifications.
(1) Curbs shall be provided wherever sidewalks are installed.
95.Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Streets and sidewalks, Art. III, Installation and Maintenance of
Sidewalks and Curbs.
§ 240-26 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-26
240:280
§ 240-27. Blocks and lots.
(2) Depending on storm drainage conditions, curbs may be required in
blocks where a street grade exceeds 5%.
(3) The Supervisors may require curbs where unusual or particular
conditions prevail with respect to prospective traffic and/or safety
of pedestrians.
(4) Curbs shall be the vertical type or slant curb. Transitions in curb
type shall be subject to approval by the Township Engineer.
(5) All curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the following
specifications:
(a) All curbs shall be of marble, granite, or concrete construction.
All concrete used in construction of curbs shall be certified to
develop a compressive stress of 4,000 psi with 6% ±1% air
entrainment. Certification of the mix shall be furnished, if
requested by the authority accepting dedication.
(b) Concrete shall be placed in forms that are straight and
securely braced. Care shall be taken to control the water
content to prevent separation of the aggregates. All concrete
shall be thoroughly tamped into any forms. After, the concrete
has set sufficiently, forms shall be removed and the exposed
surface rubbed to provide an even finish.
(c) Vertical curbs shall be 24 inches deep, seven inches wide at the
top, and nine inches wide at the base. The distance from the
top of the curb to flow line of the gutter shall be eight inches.
Slant curbs shall be 16 inches deep at the rear, 12 inches deep
along the street, rounded with a one-half-inch radius for one
inch, and 14 inches wide.
(d) Curbs shall be built in ten-foot lengths; construction joints of
asphalt-impregnated paper of 1/16 inch shall be provided at
ten-foot intervals, and expansion joints of one-quarter-inch
premoulded filler shall be placed at intervals of 100 feet.
(e) To provide for driveways, depressions in vertical curb may be
constructed and finished during the time of pouring,
A. General. The configuration of blocks and lots shall be based upon the lot
area requirements, the salient natural features, the existing man-made
features, and the proposed type of structure. Lot configurations should
provide for flexibility in building locations, while providing safe
vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
B. Lot and unit identification. Each lot within a development shall be
provided with a street number approved by both the Lancaster County-
Wide Communications and the Board of Supervisors. Prior to the use
§ 240-26 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-27
240:281
and occupancy of a lot, the street number for the lot shall be required
to be displayed in a location clearly visible and readable from the
adjacent streets. Where a lot contains multiple buildings or dwelling
units, each building and dwelling unit shall be identified prior to its
use and occupancy in a manner acceptable to the Board of Supervisors
so that emergency services can easily identify the location of every
building and dwelling unit in a time of emergency. [Added 11-10-1997
by Ord. No. 145]
C. Residential blocks. All blocks in a residential subdivision shall have a
maximum length of 1,600 feet. Where practical, the minimum width
shall be 500 feet.
D. Nonresidential blocks. Blocks in nonresidential areas may vary from the
requirement of Subsection C above when required by the nature of the
use. Adequate provisions shall be made for off-street parking, loading
areas, and traffic circulation.
E. Lot configuration.
(1) Whenever practical, side lot lines shall be radial or perpendicular
to street lines.
(2) In order to avoid jurisdictional problems, lot lines shall, wherever
feasible, follow municipal boundaries rather than cross them.
Where a lot is divided by a municipal boundary, the minimum
standards of both municipalities shall apply.
(3) Lots with areas that are two or more times the minimum area
requirements shall, wherever feasible, be designed with
configurations which allow for additional subdivision.
(4) Lot depth.
(a) All lots with a width of 60 feet or more shall contain a lot depth
not less than 1/2 nor more than three times their width.
(b) All lots with a width less than 60 feet shall contain a lot depth
not more than 180 feet.
(c) All lots shall contain a lot depth no less than 75 feet.
(5) All lots shall front on a street.
(6) Double frontage lots are prohibited. The Board of Supervisors may
permit reverse frontage lots as provided in Subsection E(7) below.
(7) Reverse frontage lots.
(a) Reverse frontage lots are limited to lots which have frontage
on both a minor street and a street of greater classification
with vehicular access solely from the minor street. All singlefamily
reverse frontage lots shall have a rear yard with a
minimum depth of 75 feet and have a planted buffer easement
§ 240-27 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-27
240:282
§ 240-28. Building setback lines and building separations.
The building setback lines and building separations shall conform with
the prevailing requirements of Chapter 285, Zoning, of the Code of the
Township of West Lampeter.
§ 240-29. Easements.
Easements for sanitary sewer facilities, stormwater drainage facilities,
public utilities, or pedestrian access shall meet the following standards:
of at least 10 feet in width located immediately contiguous
to the street right-of-way. Vehicular access shall be prohibited
from the rear of reverse frontage lots.
(b) All reverse frontage lots shall include an identification of the
frontage for use as a road access. The street designated for
frontage must be consistent for all contiguous lots.
(8) All remnants of land (areas remaining after subdivision) shall
conform to the lot area and configuration requirements.
(9) All lots shall be designed to provide sufficient building area based
upon building setbacks, easements, floodplains, etc.
F. Lot size and/or intensity. Lot areas shall conform with the prevailing
requirements of Chapter 285, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of
West Lampeter.
A. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be adjacent to property
lines.
B. Nothing shall be placed, planted, set, or put within the area of an
easement that would adversely affect the function of the easement or
conflict with the easement agreement.
C. Pedestrian easements shall have a minimum width of six feet.
D. Utility easements shall have a minimum width of 20 feet.
E. The applicant shall reserve easements where stormwater or surface
water drainage facilities are existing or proposed, whether located
within or beyond the boundaries of the property. Although normal lot
grading will not require easements, swales which receive runoff from
more than one other lot or from more than 1/2 acre must be provided
with an easement. Easements shall have a minimum width of 20 feet
and shall be adequately designed to provide area for a) the collection
and discharge of water, b) the maintenance, repair, and reconstruction
of the drainage facilities, and c) the passage of machinery for such
work. Easements shall include a description of an ownership and
maintenance program, in a recordable form, that clearly sets forth
responsibility for all temporary and permanent stormwater
management facilities. This document shall include the following:
§ 240-27 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-29
240:283
§ 240-30. Survey monuments and markers.
(1) Description of the method and extent of the maintenance
requirements.
(2) When maintained by a private entity, identification of a responsible
individual, corporation, association or other entity for ownership
and maintenance.
(3) When maintained by a private entity, a copy of the legally binding
document which provides that the municipality shall have the right
to:
(a) Inspect the facilities at any time.
(b) Require the private entity to take corrective measures and
assign the private entity reasonable time periods for any
necessary action.
(c) Authorize maintenance to be done and lien the cost of the work
against the properties of the private entity responsible for
maintenance.
(4) When an assignment of responsibility is made to the Township, it
must include an acknowledgement of their formal acceptance of
the responsibility.
F. Where any electric or telephone transmission or petroleum product
transmission line traverses a property, the applicant shall confer with
the applicable transmission or distribution company to determine the
minimum distance which shall be required between each structure and
the center line of such petroleum or petroleum product transmission
line. All applications shall include a letter from the owner of the
transmission line stating any conditions on the use of the tract and the
right-of-way width, or a copy of the recorded agreement which shall
contain the above data.
A. Permanent stone or concrete monuments shall be accurately placed at
the right-of-way lines along at least one side of each street and on the
property lines of the parent tract. These monuments shall be placed at
the intersection of all lines forming angles, changes in direction, and at
the end of each curved line. An intermediate monument shall be placed
wherever topographical or other conditions make it impossible to site
between two otherwise required monuments. Monuments shall be
placed along the line of streets as may be determined by the Township
to be necessary so that any street may be readily defined in the future.
B. Markers shall be set at all points where lot lines intersect curves and/or
other property lines.
C. Monuments shall be of concrete or stone, with a flat top having a
minimum width or diameter of four inches and a minimum length of 30
§ 240-29 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-30
240:284
§ 240-31. Stormwater management.
All subdivision and land development plans shall conform with Chapter 230,
Stormwater Management, of the Code of the Township of West Lampeter, as
amended.
§ 240-32. Floodplains.
All subdivision and land development plans shall conform with the
Floodplain Zone standards specified in Article VI of Chapter 285, Zoning, of
the Code of the Township of West Lampeter, as amended.
§ 240-33. Landscaping.
inches. Concrete monuments shall be marked with a three-quarter-inch
copper or brass dowel; stone or precast monuments shall be marked on
the top with a proper inscription and a drill hole. Markers shall consist
of iron pipes or steel bars at least 30 inches long and not less than 3/4
of an inch in diameter.
D. All monuments and markers shall be placed by a registered surveyor so
that the scored or marked point shall coincide exactly with the point of
intersection of the lines being monumented or marked.
E. All monuments and markers shall be set flush with the grade.
F. All existing and proposed monuments and lot line markers shall be
delineated on the final plan.
A. Protection of natural features. The finished topography of the site shall
adequately facilitate the proposed development without excessive
earthmoving, tree clearance, and destruction of natural amenities.
Natural features such as lakes, streams, and wooded slopes shall be
preserved and incorporated into the final landscaping of the
development wherever possible and desirable. The applicant shall
demonstrate the means whereby trees and other natural features shall
be protected during construction. The location of such trees and other
natural features must be considered when planning the open space,
location of buildings, underground services, walks, paved areas, and
finished grade levels.
B. Existing wood areas. Existing wooded areas shall be protected to
prevent unnecessary destruction. Healthy trees with a caliper of six
inches or more, as measured at a height of 4 1/2 feet above existing
grade, shall not be removed unless they are located within 15 feet any
planned improvement. In areas where trees are retained, the original
grade level shall be maintained if possible, so as not to disturb the
trees.
C. Street trees. Street trees shall be required by the Township in
accordance with the following standards:
§ 240-30 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-33
240:285
§ 240-34. Sanitary sewage disposal.
(1) The trees shall be nursery grown in a climate similar to that of the
locality of the project. Varieties of trees shall be subject to the
approval of the Township.
(2) All trees shall have a normal habit of growth and shall be sound,
healthy, and vigorous; they shall be free from disease, insects,
insect eggs, and larvae.
(3) The trunk diameter, measured at a height of six inches above finish
grade, shall be a minimum of two inches.
(4) Trees shall be planted between the street right-of-way line and the
building setback line, at a maximum spacing of 100 feet.
(5) All planting shall be performed in conformance with good nursery
and landscape practice and to the standards established by the
authority which accepts ownership of the plantings.
(6) Requirements for the measurements, branching, grading, quality,
balling, and the burlapping of trees shall follow the code of
standards recommended by the American Association of
Nurserymen, Inc., in the American Standard for Nursery Stock,
ANSIZ60, 1-1973, as amended.
D. Ground cover. Ground cover shall be provided on all areas of the project
to prevent soil erosion. All areas which are not covered by paving,
stone, or other solid material shall be protected with a vegetative
growth.
A. When the Board of Supervisors, in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act, Act 537 of 1966, as amended,96 determines the
necessity for a sewer facilities plan revision (Plan Revision Module for
Land Development), or supplement, the Board of Supervisors shall
require that notice of approval from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection be submitted as a condition of final plan
approval.
B. The applicant shall provide the type of sanitary sewage disposal facility
consistent with Planning Module for Land Development. Whenever
public sanitary sewer is planned in the foreseeable future, a capped
sanitary sewer system shall be provided.
C. Public sanitary sewer systems shall be designed in accordance with the
prevailing standards of the appropriate authority.
D. Where on-site sanitary sewage disposal facilities are to be utilized, each
lot so served shall be of a size and shape to accommodate the necessary
subsurface sewage disposal system and a replacement system at a safe
96.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 240-33 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-34
240:286
§ 240-35. Water supply.
§ 240-36. Park and open space provision.
distance from building and water supply in accordance with Title 25,
Chapter 73, Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, as amended.
A. Whenever feasible, a development shall connect to an existing public
water supply system.
B. Wherever the water supply system contains sufficient capability or will
in the foreseeable future, with or without developer assistance, fire
hydrants shall be provided. Fire hydrants shall meet the specifications
of the Middle Department Association of Fire Underwriters, and the
local fire company. Fire hydrants shall be located at street intersections
no more than 10 feet from the curb. All fittings shall be National
Standard threads. The large fitting shall face the street and be a
minimum of 16 inches above the ground level.
C. Where a public system is not accessible, particularly where on-site
sanitary disposal systems are to be used, a community water supply
may be required. If such a system is provided, it shall be approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and
appropriate measures shall be provided to ensure adequate
maintenance.
D. Where individual on-site water supply system is to be utilized, each lot
so served shall be of a size and shape to allow safe location of such a
system, in accordance with all applicable standards.
E. If water is to be provided by means other than by an individual on-site
water supply system (wells that are owned and maintained by the
individual lot owners), the final plan application shall include:
(1) A certificate by a public utility, a bona fide cooperative association
of lot owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A
copy of a certificate of public convenience from the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a
cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the
area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable
evidence.
(2) Notice of approval of the design, installation, and possible financial
guarantee from the provider of the water service.
A. General. This section shall only apply to proposals that would result in
the creation of new dwelling units. It is the purpose of this section to
implement the language contained in Section 503(11) of the
§ 240-34 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-36
240:287
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code97 and thereby provide
needed recreation/open space to accommodate growth.
B. Mandatory dedication. Any proposal that would result in the creation of
one or more new dwelling units shall be required to dedicate a
minimum of 0.04 acres of park and/or open space per dwelling unit to
the Township, prior to final plan approval. [Amended 3-6-1995 by
Ord. No. 132]
C. Dedication alternative.
(1) As an alternative to dedication, and upon agreement with the
Township, the applicant may agree to provide any of the following:
(a) Construct and/or improve existing recreation facilities;
(b) Pay a fee in lieu of dedication;
(c) Guarantee the private reservation and maintenance of
parkland or open space; or
(d) Provide for any combination of the above.
(2) Any of the preceding alternatives must be at least equal to the
predevelopment fair market value of the open space which would
have been otherwise required for dedication. Fair market value
shall be determined by a member of the Appraisal Institute of the
American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers (MAI) and shall
include any documentation used to derive the site's fair market
value. Should the Township dispute the appraised fair market
value, it can require mandatory dedication of needed acreage.
D. Parkland and open space design requirements.
(1) In general, parklands and open spaces provided for by this section
shall involve areas for active recreational pursuits. Accordingly, the
following design requirements shall apply:
(a) The site shall be located and designed so that safe and
convenient access shall be provided to all existing and
proposed inhabitants. Additionally, each site shall have at least
one area available for vehicular access that is no less than 24
feet in width;
(b) The site shall be sized and configured so as to accommodate its
intended uses. Sufficient lot width/depth dimension shall be
provided so as to accommodate, where practicable, ballfields,
courts and other open play areas. Furthermore, should a
development be proposed at a location contiguous to an
existing park, dedicated parklands should be provided, where
practicable, as an expansion of the existing facility;
97.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(11).
§ 240-36 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-36
240:288
(c) The site shall have suitable topography and soil conditions for
use and development as active play areas. No more than 25%
of the site shall be comprised of floodplains, stormwater
management facilities, and/or slopes exceeding 3%. Any
unimproved site shall be provided with a healthy and vibrant
grass ground cover;
(d) The site shall be located and designed to conveniently access
proximate public utilities (e.g., sewer, water, power, etc.)
However, no part of any overhead utility easement, nor any
above-ground protrusion of an underground utility, shall be
permitted in active play areas of the site;
(e) No part of the site shall be calculated as part of any required
setback, yard, and/or open space for adjoining lots or uses as
regulated by Chapter 285, Zoning; and
(f) The site shall comply with any applicable design, orientation,
size and location guidelines listed in the Township's Official
Comprehensive Plan and/or Recreation and Open Space Plan.
(2) In special instances, the Township may waive any or all of the
preceding design standards. In such instances the applicant must
demonstrate that the public will be better served by some alternate
design that would accomplish at least one of the following
objectives:
(a) Protection of important natural resources (e.g., streams,
ponds, wetlands, steep slopes, woodlands, unique geologic
features, wildlife habitats, aquifer recharge areas, etc.);
(b) Protection of important historical and/or archaeological sites;
and
(c) Integration of greenbelts throughout the development that link
residences with on-site or adjoining parks, schools, or other
similar features.
E. Parkland Capital Reserve Fund. Any funds collected as fees in lieu of
dedication of open space shall be deposited in an interest bearing
account. This account shall be separate from other municipal accounts
and shall be clearly identified for the purpose of funding acquisition and
development of recreation facilities. Interest earned on all monies
deposited in such accounts shall become funds of that account. Funds
from such accounts shall be expended at the discretion of the Board of
Supervisors in properly allocatable portions of the cost incurred to
design, construct or acquire the specific recreation facilities that will
benefit the subdivision or land development for which they were
collected. Funds collected under this section shall be expended within
three years of receipt, or the Township shall refund such fee, plus
interest accumulated thereon from the date of payment, to the
developer upon presentation of a written request for refund.
§ 240-36 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-36
240:289

ARTICLE VII
Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
[Added 5-22-1990 by Ord. No. 112]
§ 240-37. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "West Lampeter
Township Mobile Home and Mobile Home Park Ordinance."
§ 240-38. Purpose.
Pursuant to the Second Class Township Code, as amended,98 the purpose
of this article is to regulate mobile homes, mobile home parks and mobile
home lots in order to better protect the health, safety and general welfare
of the Township of West Lampeter and of all persons living in mobile homes
within said Township.
§ 240-39. Jurisdiction.
This article shall apply to existing mobile homes and mobile home parks
and the future placement, whether temporary or permanent, of one or more
mobile homes within West Lampeter Township.
§ 240-40. Adoption.
The Board of Township Supervisors of West Lampeter Township, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania, does hereby ordain and enact the following Mobile
Home and Mobile Home Park Ordinance.
§ 240-41. Definitions and word usage.
A. General. Words and phrases shall be presumed to be used in their
ordinary context unless such word or phrase is defined or interpreted
differently within this section.
B. General terms. In this article when not inconsistent with the context:
(1) Words in the present tense imply also the future tense.
(2) The singular includes the plural.
(3) The male gender includes the female gender.
(4) The word "person" includes a partnership or corporation as well as
an individual.
(5) The term "shall" or "must" is always mandatory.
C. Specific terms. The following words and phrases shall have the
particular meaning assigned by this section in the appropriate sections
98.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 240-37 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-41
240:291
§ 240-42. Minimum standards; compliance with other provisions.
The standards and requirements contained in this article shall apply as
minimum design standards for mobile homes, mobile home lots and mobile
home parks. Whenever other Township ordinances or regulations impose
more restrictive standards and requirements than those contained herein,
the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 240-43. Mobile homes located within streets or alleys.
Mobile homes shall not be parked along a street or alley for a period of
time longer than that allowed for the parking of vehicles upon such street
or alley by the applicable state laws and the ordinances of the Township of
West Lampeter. Nor shall a mobile home be located within the street or alley
of this article. Additionally, the words and phrases which are used in
this article and not defined below shall have the meaning assigned by
this Chapter 240, Subdivision and Land Development.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly contained in one unit,
or in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit
capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives
at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that
it may be used without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile
home, which is leased by the park owner to the occupants of the mobile
home erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which
has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME SPACE — A unit of land for the placing of one mobile
home or trailer.
MOBILE HOME STAND — The part of an individual mobile home space
which has been reserved for the placement of a mobile home and
appurtenant structures and connections.
PERSON — A person, individual, partnership, association, firm,
corporation, owner, lessee, licensee and the agent of each of them.
TOWNSHIP SUPERVISORS — The duly elected Board of Supervisors of
West Lampeter Township.
VEHICLE — A device in, upon, or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn, or which may draw devices upon the
public streets or highways of West Lampeter Township.
§ 240-41 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-43
240:292
without being attached to a licensed and inspected motor vehicle capable of
pulling the mobile home.
§ 240-44. Mobile homes located on individual lots.
The proposed location of mobile homes on individual lots shall be restricted
to lots which comply with the requirements of Chapter 285, Zoning, of
the Code of the Township of West Lampeter. A mobile home shall not be
occupied for sleeping or living quarters unless it is permanently affixed to
a mobile home stand which consist of a six-inch-thick poured concrete slab
over a six-inch stone base, the length and width of which shall be at least
equal to the length and width of the mobile home it is to support. Each
mobile home stand shall include properly designed utility connections. All
mobile homes shall be securely anchored to the mobile home stand and the
stand installed in a level condition with consideration given to the effect of
frost action, surface water drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the
superstructure.
§ 240-45. Mobile home parks.
In addition to the requirements of this article, all new mobile home parks
and expansions to existing mobile home park plans shall be processed in
accordance with Chapter 240, Subdivision and Land Development, of the
Code of the Township of West Lampeter. Mobile home parks shall comply
with the design standards set forth in this section with the exception that
any specific design standard will be superseded by any other Township
ordinance, resolution, or regulation containing an applicable standard
which is more restrictive.
A. Area and density requirements.
(1) Minimum size. The minimum size of a mobile home park shall be
five acres.
(2) Density. The total density of a mobile homes park shall not exceed
five mobile homes per acre.
(3) Recreation area. There shall be a minimum of 25% of the gross
acreage of the mobile home park devoted to active and/or passive
common recreational facilities. Responsibility for maintenance of
the recreational areas shall be with the landowner. Should the
landowner neglect to maintain the designated recreational area as
depicted on the plan, the Township may then maintain said areas
and assess the landowner for any costs incurred. The maintenance
of said recreation area by the Township shall not relieve the
landowner from prosecution and the penalties provided herein.
B. Mobile home lot dimensions.
(1) Lot area. Each mobile home lot shall have a minimum lot area of
4,600 square feet.
§ 240-43 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-45
240:293
(2) Density. Each mobile home lot shall contain no more than one
mobile home, nor more than one family.
(3) Lot width. Each mobile home lot shall be at least 45 feet wide.
(4) Street setback. No mobile home or other structure shall be closer
than 50 feet to the right of way line of a public street.
(5) Property line setback. No mobile home or other structure shall be
closer than 50 feet to any property line defining the external
boundary of the park.
(6) Interior distances. Mobile homes or other structures shall be
separated from each other, access drive or common parking area
by a minimum of 20 feet.
C. Mobile home unit requirements.
(1) Minimum size. All mobile homes shall have a minimum of 700
square feet of floor space.
(2) Mobile home stand. Each mobile home lot shall be provided with a
mobile home stand which is constructed with a minimum six-inchthick
poured concrete slab over a minimum six -inch stone base.
Said stand shall be designed to uniformly support the mobile home
in a level condition. Consideration shall be given to the effect of
frost action, surface water drainage, vibration or other forces
acting on the superstructure. Each mobile home stand shall be
equipped with properly designed and approved water, sewer and
electric connections.
(3) Skirting. An enclosure of compatible design and material,
commonly called "skirting," shall be erected around the entire base
of the mobile home prior to occupancy or other use. Such enclosure
shall provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay and
deterioration of the structure.
(4) Anchoring. Every mobile home shall be anchored to the mobile
home stand where it is located prior to the unit being occupied, and
no more than seven days from the arrival of the mobile home. The
anchoring system shall be designed to prevent tilting of the unit
and resist a minimum wind velocity of 90 miles per hour.
(5) Hitch. The hitch or tow bar attached to a mobile home for transport
purposes shall be removed and remain removed from the mobile
home when it is place on its mobile home stand.
D. Streets, access drives, and driveways. In additional to the below
standards, streets, access drives, and driveways shall conform with this
Chapter 240, Subdivision and Land Development (see § 240-24).
(1) The cartway edge at intersections shall be rounded by a tangential
arc with a minimum radii of 35 feet.
§ 240-45 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-45
240:294
(2) Driveways to all mobile homes must access onto the interior street
system of the mobile home park. Direct driveway access to an
existing adjoining public street is prohibited.
E. Vehicular parking facilities. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided
in all mobile home parks. Two spaces per dwelling unit shall be
provided either on the mobile home lot or in a common, paved parking
compound within 100 feet of each mobile home. Parking compounds
shall be designed in accordance with this Chapter 240, Subdivision and
Land Development (see § 240-25). Parking compounds shall be used
solely for the temporary storage of currently registered and inspected
motor vehicles.
F. Sidewalks. In addition to the standards of this Chapter 240, Subdivision
and Land Development (see § 240-26), sidewalks shall be provided:
(1) Along both sides of streets and access drives;
(2) Within parking compounds; and
(3) Between mobile homes, parking compounds, and service buildings.
G. Sanitary sewage disposal.
(1) Source. All mobile home parks shall be serviced by a publicly
owned sanitary sewage system, or by a privately owned sanitary
sewage system used by two or more mobile homes with treatment
other than subsurface absorption or holding tank. Additionally, all
sanitary sewage systems shall be approved in accordance with this
Chapter 240, Subdivision and Land Development (see § 240-34).
(2) Connection. All mobile home units and service buildings shall be
connected to an approved sewerage system. Individual riser pipes
having a minimum inside diameter of four inches shall be located
on each mobile home stand and shall extend at least one inch above
ground level. The sewer riser pipe shall be sealed with a securely
fastened plug or cap when the mobile home lot is unoccupied.
(3) Protection. Adequate provision shall be made to protect sanitary
sewers from stormwater infiltration and damage. All sewer lines
shall be constructed with materials and by methods approved by
the Sewer Authority and Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
H. Water supply.
(1) Source. All mobile home parks shall be serviced by a community or
public water supply system. Additionally, all water supply systems
shall be approved in accordance with this Chapter 240, Subdivision
and Land Development (see § 240-35).
(2) Connection. All mobile home units and service buildings shall be
connected to the water supply system. Individual water riser pipes
§ 240-45 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-45
240:295
having an inside diameter or not less than 3/4 inches shall be
provided for each mobile home stand and shall terminate no less
than four inches above the ground.
(3) Protection of water lines. Adequate provisions shall be made to
protect water service lines from damage, including a shutoff valve,
below the frost line for each mobile home stand.
I. Stormwater management and floodplain controls. All mobile home
parks shall conform to Chapter 235, Stormwater Management, and the
Floodplain Zone standards specified in Article VI of Chapter 285,
Zoning, as amended.
J. Refuse disposal.
(1) The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in the mobile home
park shall be so managed as to create no health hazards, rodent
harborage, insect-breeding areas, accident, fire or air pollution. All
refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, water-tight, rodent-proof
containers.
(2) Community refuse disposal sites shall be provided at locations
which are not more than 100 feet from any mobile home space and
no less than 50 feet from the mobile home park boundary.
Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to
properly store all refuse. Community refuse disposal sites shall be
screened or fenced.
(3) Racks or holders shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such
containers shall be so designed as to prevent tipping, to minimize
spillage and container deterioration, and to facilitate cleaning
around them.
(4) All refuse shall be collected at least once weekly. Where suitable
collection service is not available, the mobile home park operator
shall provide this service. All refuse shall be collected and
transported in enclosed vehicles or containers.
K. Exterior lighting. Streets, access drives, driveways, and walkways shall
be lighted at night with a minimum illumination of at least 0.2
footcandles. Lighting fixtures shall be so spaced and so equipped as to
provide adequate levels of illumination throughout the mobile home
park for the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians. Lighting
fixtures shall be shielded to avoid glare on adjacent properties.
L. Landscaping.
(1) A fifty-foot-wide landscape strip shall be located along the
perimeter of the mobile home park. This area shall include a variety
of vegetative materials including trees, shrubs, evergreens and
ground cover. For each 1,500 square feet of required area for
landscape strips, one deciduous tree and one evergreen tree shall
§ 240-45 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-45
240:296
be provided. Deciduous trees shall have a clear trunk at least five
feet above finished grade. Evergreen trees shall have a minimum
height of six feet. All landscape strips shall have landscaping
materials distributed along the entire length of the area.
(2) Any portion of the site not used for buildings, structures, parking,
sidewalks, streets and similar improvements shall be maintained
with a vegetative ground cover and other ornamental plantings.
M. Service and accessory buildings.
(1) Construction. All service and accessory buildings, including
management offices, storage areas, laundry buildings and indoor
recreation areas shall be adequately constructed, ventilated, and
maintained so as to prevent decay, corrosion, termites and other
destructive elements from causing deterioration.
(2) Mobile home park office. Every mobile home park shall have a
structure designed for and clearly identified as the office of the
mobile home park manager.
(3) Storage space. Occupants of each mobile home lot shall be
provided with at least 150 cubic feet of enclosed storage space
which is exclusive of the floor area devoted to living space. The
type of storage facility shall be approved by the Township Board of
Supervisors.
(4) Use of service and accessory buildings. Service and accessory
buildings shall be used only by the occupants of the mobile home
park.
N. Fire protection.
(1) The mobile home park area shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and
other flammable materials.
(2) Portable hand-operated fire extinguishers of a type suitable for use
on oil and electrical fires, and approved by the appropriate fire
company, shall be kept in each community building under park
control and shall be required by the mobile home park operator to
be placed in each mobile home in a fixed location preferably near a
door, but not in close proximity to cooking facilities.
(3) Mobile home parks shall be provided with fire hydrants or
acceptable alternatives for fire protection as approved by the local
fire company and Township Engineer. Where fire hydrants are
provided, they shall meet the specifications of this Chapter 240,
Subdivision and Land Development (see § 240-35B).
(4) Fire shall be made only for purposes of heating and cooking.
§ 240-45 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-45
240:297
§ 240-46. Responsibility of management.
(5) All mobile home parks shall be operated so as to comply with all
state and local laws, ordinance and regulations pertaining to fire
prevention.
(6) The mobile borne park manager shall consult periodically with the
appropriate fire company or authorities as to proper fire prevention
practice, accessibility of streets, testing of fire hydrant pressure,
location and operation of equipment, community education
programs, etc.
O. Maintenance. The landowner of a mobile home park shall be
responsible for the proper repair and maintenance of all facilities,
including but not limited to roads, parking areas, sidewalks or
pathways, improved and unimproved areas, water supply, sewage
disposal, and community buildings.
P. Easements. Easements located within a mobile home park shall
conform with the standards of this Chapter 240, Subdivision and Land
Development (see § 240-29).
Q. Survey monument and markers. All mobile home park plans shall
conform with the standards of this Chapter 240, Subdivision and Land
Development (see § 240-28).
A. Availability. In every mobile home park there shall be permanent office
building where the person in charge of said park shall be available. A
copy of the park permit and of this article shall be posted therein and
the park register shall at all times be kept in said office.
B. Duties. It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge,
the owner, and the permittee to:
(1) Keep at all times, a register of all occupants, which shall be open at
all times to inspection by the Township. Such register shall show
for each occupant:
(a) Name and prior address and for past occupants, a forwarding
address.
(b) Dates of entrance and departure.
(c) The lot number upon which such mobile home is parked or
located.
(d) The state license number of such mobile home and of the
vehicle towing the same.
(2) Maintain the park in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all
times.
§ 240-45 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-46
240:298
§ 240-47. General permit procedures and requirements.
In accordance with § 240-39 of this article, a mobile home or mobile home
park as defined in § 240-41C of this article shall not be located, operated
or maintained until a mobile home permit or mobile home park permit has
been issued.
§ 240-48. Mobile home permit.
§ 240-49. Mobile home park licenses.
The following procedure shall apply to all new and expansions of existing
mobile home parks, as defined in § 240-41C of this article.
(3) Comply with the provisions of this article and report promptly to
the proper authorities any violations of this article or any other
violations of law which may come to their attention.
(4) Prohibit the burning of trash or rubbish on the premises.
(5) Prohibit the use of any mobile home by a greater number of
occupants than that which it is designed to accommodate.
(6) Report to the State or County Board of Health all cases of persons
or animals affected or suspected of being affected with any
communicable disease, where he shall have reason to believe that
medical attention has not been sought.
A. The following procedures shall apply solely for the proposed placement
of one mobile home on a single parcel (separately deeded) provided the
proposal does not constitute a mobile home park.
B. Any person desiring to place one mobile home on a lot shall submit an
application for a mobile home permit (see Appendix No. 199) to the West
Lampeter Township Secretary on any business day.
C. The Township staff shall review the application for compliance with this
article and other applicable ordinances of the Township. The Township
staff may solicit the assistance of the Township Zoning Officer,
Engineer, Solicitor, and other municipal officials in order to determine
approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the application.
D. The Township staff shall, within 14 days from the municipal receipt of
an application, issue a permit or disapprove the application and
transmit the decision in writing to the applicant.
E. Failure of the municipality to render a decision and communicate it as
prescribed above shall be deemed an approval unless the time period is
extended by the applicant.
F. A notice of disapproval shall cite the reasons for disapproval.
99.Editor's Note: The Mobile Home Appendixes are on file in the Township offices.
§ 240-46 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-49
240:299
§ 240-50. Present operators of mobile home parks.
A. Any person desiring to establish a new mobile home park or expand an
existing mobile home park shall, when applicable, secure approval
under this Chapter 240, Subdivision and Land Development, prior to
applying for a mobile home park license.
B. Any person desiring to operate a mobile home park shall submit an
application for a mobile home park license (see Appendix No. 2100) to
the West Lampeter Township Secretary.
(1) The Township staff shall review the application for compliance with
this article and other applicable ordinances of the Township. The
Township staff may solicit the assistance of the Township Zoning
Officer, Engineer, Solicitor, and other municipal officials in order to
determine approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the
application.
(2) The Township Staff shall, within 14 days from the municipal receipt
of an application, issue a permit or disapprove the application and
transmit the decision in writing to the applicant.
(3) Failure of the municipality to render a decision and communicate it
as prescribed above shall be deemed an approval unless the time
period is extended by the applicant.
(4) A notice of disapproval shall cite the reasons for disapproval.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile home park
without a valid license, issued annually by the Township in the name(s)
of the landowner and manager.
D. The licensee shall give notice in writing to the Township, within 24
hours after a change in land ownership and/or management. Such
notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding
ownership and/or management.
A. Any person owning and/or operating a mobile home park prior to the
effective date of this article shall within 90 days from the effective date
hereof make application for and secure a license to operate said mobile
home park.
B. Full compliance with § 240-45J, N and O and § 240-46 shall be achieved
in order to warrant issuance of a mobile home park license. Where the
Township finds that compliance with provisions of this article would
result in undue hardship, an exception may be granted by the Board of
Supervisors. Factors to be considered in determining the length of time
and the given period in which to correct any deviation in and from
standards shall include but not be limited to the economic feasibility of
improvement, nature, significance, and extent of the deviation,
100. Editor's Note: The Mobile Home Appendixes are on file in the Township offices.
§ 240-49 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-50
240:300
§ 240-51. Appeals and waivers.
§ 240-52. Inspection of property.
§ 240-53. Notice of violation.
Whenever the Township determines that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this chapter, the
Township shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person to whom
the permit or license was issued. Such notice shall:
depreciation of materials, improvements, the existing layout, and other
similar factors. Gradual improvements to a higher degree of conformity
shall be permitted provided that there shall be complete conformity at
the end of a period prescribed by the Township.
A. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this article, or any provision of
this article, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the manner
before the West Lampeter Township Board of Supervisors.
B. Such person shall file with the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors a
written petition requesting a hearing and setting forth a brief statement
of the grounds for appeal or waiver. In the case of an appeal from a
decision, said appeal shall be filed within 10 days of the date of service.
C. The filing of request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice
and suspension of further action except in a case where immediate
action is necessary to protect the public health.
D. Upon receipt of a petition, the Board of Supervisors shall set a time and
place for a hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof.
E. After such hearing the Board of Supervisors shall make findings as to
compliance with the provisions of this article and shall issue an order in
writing.
A. The Township is hereby authorized and directed to make such
inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with
this article.
B. The Township shall have the power to enter, at reasonable times, upon
any property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions
relating to the enforcement of this article.
C. The Township shall have the power to inspect the register containing a
record of all residents of the mobile home park. It shall be the duty of
every resident of the mobile home park to give the management thereof
or his designated agency access to any part of such property at
reasonable times for the purpose of making repairs or alterations as are
necessary to effect compliance with this article.
§ 240-50 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-53
240:301
§ 240-54. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, costs
of prosecution and the cost of abating any violation of this article, and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more
than 30 days in county prison. Each day's continuance of a violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
A. Be in writing;
B. Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
C. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
D. Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this article; and
E. Be served upon the permittee or licensee, either in person or by
registered mail, to the last known address.
§ 240-53 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-54
240:302
ARTICLE VIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 240-55. Scope.
This article outlines the procedures for enforcement and amendment of
this chapter, as well as procedures for challenges and appeals of decisions
rendered under this chapter.
§ 240-56. Amendments.
§ 240-57. Waivers.
A. Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a public
hearing held pursuant to public notice in the manner prescribed for
enactment of a subdivision and land development ordinance in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as
amended.
B. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning
Commission, the Board of Supervisors shall submit each amendment to
the Planning Commission for recommendations at least 30 days prior to
the date of the public hearing on such proposed amendment
A. The provisions of this chapter are intended as minimum standards for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. The Township
Board of Supervisors may modify said provisions to the benefit of the
developer, provided that the majority of the members of the Board of
Supervisors present at a scheduled public meeting determines that the
waiver:
(1) Is consistent with the purpose of this chapter as described in
§ 240-2.
(2) Will remove or reduce an unreasonable or undue hardship, as it
applies to the particular property, which is grossly disproportionate
to any benefit derived from the standard.
(3) Will result in an equal or better situation.
(4) Provides reasonable utilization of the property while securing the
public interest.
B. All waivers of the minimum standards shall be processed in accordance
with the waiver provision described in § 240-12. It shall be the burden
of the applicant to demonstrate compliance with the above conditions.
In granting waivers, the Board of Supervisors may impose such
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of
the this chapter.
§ 240-55 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-58
240:303
§ 240-58. Challenges and appeals.
The decision of the Board of Supervisors with respect to the approval or
disapproval of plans may be appealed, as provided for in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended.
§ 240-59. Description of violations. [Amended 10-14-2002 by Ord.
No. 170]
A. Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other
entity, or the members of such partnership, limited liability company or
other entity, or the officers of such corporation or other entity, who or
which, being the owner or agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel
of land, shall:
(1) Lay out, construct, open and/or dedicate any street, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, water main or other improvement for public use,
travel or other purposes or for the common use of occupants of
buildings abutting thereon without full compliance with the
provisions of this chapter; or
(2) Sell, transfer or agree to enter into an agreement to sell or transfer
any land in a subdivision or land development, whether by
reference to or by use of a plan of such subdivision or land
development or otherwise without full compliance with the
provisions of this chapter; or
(3) Erect any building or buildings which constitute a land
development thereon without full compliance with the provisions of
this chapter; or
(4) Commence site grading or construction of improvements prior to
recording of a final plan unless such grading or construction is for
the sole purpose of installing improvements as prescribed in
§ 240-17 herein, unless and until a final plan has been prepared in
full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and has been
recorded as provided herein; or
(5) Fail to comply with any condition imposed upon approval of a
preliminary plan or a final plan or any condition imposed upon the
granting of any waiver; or
(6) Fail to comply with any agreement with the Township or any
provider of water or sewer service relating to development in
accordance with a preliminary plan or a final plan; or
(7) Fail to comply with any note included on an approved preliminary
plan or final plan;
Commits a violation of this chapter.
B. Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other
entity, or the members of such partnership, limited liability company or
§ 240-58 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-59
240:304
§ 240-60. Violations and penalties; remedies. [Amended 10-14-2002
by Ord. No. 170]
other entity, or the officers of such corporation or other entity, who or
which, being the owner or agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel
of land, shall construct or permit the construction of any improvement
or develop or permit the development of any property in a manner
which does not fully comply with the approved preliminary plan or final
plan, as applicable, commits a violation of this chapter.
C. Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other
entity, or the members of such partnership, limited liability company or
other entity, or the officers of such corporation or other entity, who or
which, being the owner or agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel
of land, shall knowingly provide false information on any plan, report,
certification or other document required to be submitted by this
chapter commits a violation of this chapter.
D. Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other
entity, or the members of such partnership, limited liability company or
other entity, or the officers of such corporation or other entity, who or
which, being the owner or agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel
of land, in any other way takes action or permits another to take action
not authorized by this chapter or contrary to the provisions of this
chapter commits a violation of this chapter.
A. Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other
entity, or the members of such partnership, limited liability company or
other entity, or the officers of such corporation or other entity, who or
which shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by a District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation unless the
District Justice, determining that there has been a violation, further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other entity, or
the members of such partnership, limited liability company or other
entity, or the officers of such corporation or other entity, violating this
chapter to have believed that there was no such violation. If the District
Justice makes a determination of good faith, there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of determination of a violation by the District Justice, and thereafter
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 240-59 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-60
240:305
§ 240-61. Recordkeeping.
The Township shall keep an accurate, public record of its findings,
decisions, and recommendations relevant to all applications filed with it for
review or approval.
§ 240-62. Construal of provisions.
B. The Township may institute and maintain actions at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate violations of this chapter, to prevent unlawful
construction, to recover damages and/or to prevent illegal occupancy of
a building, structure or premises.
C. The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has
been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter. The authority to deny such permit
or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of the violation without regard as to whether such
current owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the
violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
D. As an additional condition for the issuance of a permit or the granting of
an approval to any owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any real property, the Township may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
A. Whenever there is a difference between the minimum applicable
standard specified herein and those included in other applicable
regulations, the more stringent requirement shall apply.
B. The West Lampeter Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance of 1984, Ordinance No. 72, as amended, is hereby amended;
provided, however, that the amendment shall in no manner be
construed as a waiver, release or relinquishment of the right to initiate,
pursue, or prosecute, as the case may be, any proceeding at law or in
equity, including criminal proceedings, pertaining to any act done
§ 240-60 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-62
240:306
which would have constituted a violation of the West Lampeter
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 1984, or its
applicable predecessor ordinances and regulations, and all provisions
of said repealed ordinances shall remain in full effect and force, and not
repealed hereby, as they pertain to said acts.
§ 240-62 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 240-62
240:307
Chapter 246
TAXATION
§ 240-62 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 240-62
240:308
ARTICLE I
Amusement Tax
[Adopted 12-6-1982 by Res. No. 19; ratified and readopted
4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 188]
§ 246-1. Definitions.
The following words or phrases when used in this article shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly
indicates a different meaning;
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon
the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice
or other opening, or upon the payment of any price, operates or may be
operated, for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL DEVICE — Any device other than a jukebox, which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key may be operated for use
as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score
and whether or not a prize is offered, and shall include, but shall not be
limited to, electronic video game machines or apparatus, pinball machines,
skill-ball machines, mechanical grab machines, pool tables, or coin-operated
pool tables, and all other similar devices.
PERSON — Includes natural persons, firms, associations, copartnerships
or corporations, except such corporations as are specifically exempt from
taxation under the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965, P. L.
1257, as amended.101
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place indoors or outdoors, within the
Township of West Lampeter, where the general public, or a limited or
selected number thereof, or any other persons, may, upon payment of any
established price, operate, attend or engage in the operation of any jukebox
or mechanical device as herein defined.
§ 246-2. Imposition of tax.
There is hereby imposed upon each place of amusement a tax as hereinafter
set forth. The period for which this tax shall be imposed shall commence
January 1, 1983, and annually thereafter each calendar year, this tax shall
remain in effect, without annual reenactment at the rate of $100 per each
mechanical device and jukebox in use in any place of amusement as a
aforesaid.
§ 246-3. Proration of tax.
A. Commencing January 1, 1983, and annually thereafter the tax imposed
herein for the aforesaid twelve-month period shall be reduced as
follows:
101. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 246-1 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 246-3
240:309
§ 246-4. Taxes payable to Township.
The taxes imposed by this article shall be payable to West Lampeter
Township by the person owning or operating the place of amusement in
which the jukebox or mechanical device has been installed.
§ 246-5. License information.
The Township Manager shall procure, at the expense of the Township, a
sufficient number of licenses, each of which shall contain the following
information:
§ 246-6. Display of license.
The Township Manager shall issue a license to each person owning or
operating a place of amusement who pays the tax imposed by this article to
the Township of West Lampeter. Each license shall be prepared in duplicate
and the original shall be given to the person owning or operating the
establishment for which the license is issued and the duplicate shall be kept
on file by the Township Manager. The original license shall be prominently
(1) For licenses issued after April 1 of each period, 3/4 of the annual
tax.
(2) For licenses issued after July 1 of each period, 1/2 of the annual tax.
(3) For licenses issued after October 1 of each period, 1/4 of the annual
tax.
B. Licenses issued under this article shall expire on December 31 of each
year. Rebates shall be allowed by reason of reduction of number of
machines by a licensee as follows:
(1) For discontinuance of use by a licensee prior to April 1 of each
period, 3/4 of the annual tax.
(2) For discontinuance of use by a licensee between April 1 and June
30 of each period, 1/2 of the annual tax.
(3) For discontinuance of use by a licensee between July 1 and
September 30 of each period, 1/4 of the annual tax.
A. The name of the Township.
B. The number of the license.
C. The year or portion thereof for which the tax has been paid.
D. The name and the address of the establishment for which the license is
issued.
E. The type and number of devices for which the license is issued.
F. The amount of the tax paid.
§ 246-3 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 246-6
240:310
displayed by the person to whom it is issued in a prominent place in the
establishment for which it is issued at all times during the license period.
§ 246-7. Confidential information.
All information gained by the Township Manager or any other official or
agent of the Township by reason of any returns, investigations or
verifications required or authorized by this article shall be confidential,
except for official purposes, and except in accordance with proper judicial
order, or as otherwise provided by law. Any disclosure of any such
information contrary to the provisions of this section shall constitute a
violation of this article.
§ 246-8. Overdue penalty and interest.
All taxes are due and payable within 10 days of the installation of any
jukeboxes or mechanical devices covered herein. If any taxes imposed by
this article are not paid when due, a penalty of 10% on the amount of
tax due and unpaid shall be added thereto. Any tax not paid as required
hereunder shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2% per month or fraction
thereof.
§ 246-9. Recovery of taxes.
All taxes levied by this article, together with all back taxes and costs, shall
be recoverable by the Township Manager or Township Solicitor for and on
behalf of the Township as all other similar debts are recoverable.
§ 246-10. Failure to pay.
The failure of any person to pay the tax or taxes levied by this article
or to obtain the licenses specified herein while operating any jukebox or
mechanical device shall constitute a violation of this article.
§ 246-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article, or who fails to
carry out any of the provisions or requirements of this article or to pay any
tax or taxes levied by this article at the times required, shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the Township
in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be imposed until the
date of the determination of the violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure.
Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to
seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 246-6 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 246-12
240:311
§ 246-12. Legislative authority.
This article is being presented and adopted under the authority granted by
the Local Tax Enabling Act of December 31, 1965, P. L. 1257, as amended,
of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.102
§ 246-13. Effective date; continuation of provisions.
This article shall become effective January 1, 1983, and shall continue in
force thereafter without annual reenactment upon a calendar-year basis
to correspond with the Township's fiscal year unless the rate of tax is
subsequently changed.
102. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 246-12 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 246-13
240:312
ARTICLE II
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 227103]
§ 246-14. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the West Lampeter
Township Earned Income Tax Ordinance.
§ 246-15. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act shall have the meanings set
forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of West
Lampeter.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth
in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. while such numbering and provisions remain in
effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as
amended in the future.
TAX — The tax imposed by this enactment.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the collector for reporting the amount
of Tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted, or
reported under this enactment or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAXING AUTHORITY — West Lampeter Township.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
THIS ENACTMENT — This article.
TCC — The tax collection committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part
of the taxing authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 246-16. Imposition of tax; rate.
A. General purpose resident tax. The taxing authority hereby imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 0.5% on earned income
and net profits of individual residents of the taxing authority.
103. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Earned Income Tax, adopted
12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 151
§ 246-14 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 246-16
240:313
§ 246-17. Exemption.
This governing body finds that minors of various age groups have
traditionally, and with judicial sanction, been considered as comprising
separate classes for many legislative purposes; and minors under the age
of 16 are generally unemancipated and subject to compulsory school
attendance and child labor laws, and therefore have limited earned income
and net profits and control of money such that enforcement of reporting
and collection of tax hereunder against them would yield inconsequential
amounts and be unduly difficult, expensive, and not in the public interest.
For these reasons, individuals under the age of 16 years are exempt from
liability for the tax.
§ 246-18. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 246-19. Employer withholding, remittance, and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit the tax, and file tax
returns in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 246-20. Collection of tax.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the collector.
B. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this enactment is repealed or the rate is changed.
C. Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this
enactment. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that
are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will
automatically become part of this enactment upon the effective date of
such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this
enactment, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S. § 1937.
D. Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations; and with regulations, policies and procedures adopted by
the TCC or by the collector. This includes any regulations, policies, and
procedures adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1
Pa.C.S. § 1937.
§ 246-16 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 246-21
240:314
§ 246-21. Interest, penalties, costs, and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 246-22. Construal of provisions.
The primary purpose of this enactment is to conform the earned income
and net profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time frame
required by Act 32. Any prior enactment imposing a tax on earned income
or net profits of individuals is amended and restated in its entirety to read
as stated in this enactment. Any other prior enactment or part of any prior
enactment conflicting with the provisions of this enactment is rescinded
insofar as the conflict exists. To the extent the same as any enactment in
force immediately prior to adoption of this enactment, the provisions of
this enactment are intended as a continuation of such prior enactment and
not as a new enactment. If this enactment is declared invalid, any prior
enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in full force and effect and shall
not be affected by adoption of this enactment. If any part of this enactment
is declared invalid, the similar part of any prior enactment levying a similar
tax shall remain in effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this
enactment. The provisions of this enactment shall not affect any act done
or liability incurred, nor shall such provisions affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty or to punish
offense under the authority of any enactment in force prior to adoption
of this enactment. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, this
enactment shall amend and restate on the effective date any enactment
levying a tax on earned income or net profits in force immediately prior to
the effective date.
§ 246-23. Effective date.
This enactment shall take effect and be in force on January 1, 2012.
§ 246-24. (Reserved)
§ 246-21 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 246-24
240:315

ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-12-2007 by Ord. No. 200104]
§ 246-25. Short title and authority.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "West Lampeter
Township Local Services Tax Ordinance." This article is enacted under the
authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., and continues
and redesignates the emergency and municipal services tax pursuant to Act
7 of 2007.
§ 246-26. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of West Lampeter
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, its governing body.
COLLECTOR — The person or agency appointed from time to time by the
West Lampeter Township Board of Supervisors to assess and collect the tax
imposed under, and to administer the provisions of, this article.
COMPENSATION — Salaries, wages, commissions, tips, bonuses, fees, or
any other payment or income.
EARNED INCOME — Earned income as defined in the LTEA.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2008.
EMPLOYEE — An individual paid compensation by an employer to perform
work or services of any kind.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership,
unincorporated association, institution, trust, corporation, government
agency, or other entity engaged in business or operating within the
Township, employing one or more individuals engaged in any occupation,
other than domestic servants.
HE, HIS, OR HIM — Indicate the singular and plural number as well as
male, female and neuter gender.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the Township of West
Lampeter.
LTEA — Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., as amended.
NET PROFITS — Net profits as defined in the LTEA.
104. Editor's Note: This ordinance amended and restated former Art. III, Emergency and
Municipal Services Tax, adopted 12-30-2005 by Ord. No. 192.
§ 246-25 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 246-26
240:317
OCCUPATION — Any trade, livelihood, job, profession, business, or
undertaking of any type, kind or character, including services, domestic or
other, carried on or performed within the corporate limits of the Township
for which compensation is paid or received whether by means of salary,
wages, commissions or fees for services rendered. A person may have more
than one occupation.
REGULATIONS — Regulations duly adopted by the collector for
administration of the tax. To the extent allowed by law, including but not
limited to 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937, the Board of Supervisors intends to
incorporate future amendments to the regulations. If a court prohibits
such construction, the Board of Supervisors intends to incorporate the
regulations as they exist on the date of enactment of this article. A copy of
the regulations currently in force shall be available for public inspection.
SCHOOL DISTRICT — The Lampeter-Strasburg School District.
TAX — The local services tax in the amount of $52 per annum levied by this
article.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the collector for reporting the amount
of any tax deducted from an employee or otherwise owed under this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TAXPAYER — Any individual on whom the tax is imposed.
TOWNSHIP OF WEST LAMPETER or TOWNSHIP — The area within the
corporate limits of the Township of West Lampeter, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 246-27. Imposition of tax and adoption of regulations.
A. The Township hereby imposes a local services tax of $52 on each
individual who engages in an occupation within the boundaries of the
Township. The local services tax is imposed for the tax year starting on
the effective date and ending on the next December 31. The local
services tax is imposed for each tax year thereafter without annual
reenactment, until this article is repealed or amended.
B. The local services tax is based on an individual engaging in an
occupation within the Township at any time during the tax year.
C. All provisions of the LTEA imposing requirements applicable to a local
services tax are incorporated into this article. All provisions of the
regulations are incorporated into this article. If there is any discrepancy
between the regulations and the LTEA, the provisions of the LTEA shall
control.
D. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore
levied by the Township, and this tax shall continue in force on a
calendar-year basis, without annual reenactment, unless the rate of the
tax is subsequently changed or this article is repealed. The tax is
§ 246-26 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 246-27
240:318
§ 246-28. Exemptions from tax.
§ 246-29. Individuals who engage in an occupation in multiple
jurisdictions.
Rules applicable to individuals who engage in an occupation in multiple
jurisdictions are as set forth in the regulations.
§ 246-30. Collection by employer; return and payment.
imposed, and proceeds of the tax shall be used in accordance with all
applicable requirements of the LTEA.
A. An individual whose total earned income and net profits from all
sources within the Township in any tax year is less than $12,000 is
exempt from the tax for the tax year.
B. Individuals may also be exempt for other reasons, including disability
resulting from serving in the armed forces, active duty as a member of a
reserve component of the armed forces, and other reasons as set forth
in the regulations or the LTEA.
C. An individual may obtain exemption prospectively by filing a local
services tax exemption certificate on a form provided by the collector in
accordance with the regulations. The exemption certificate shall be
filed with the collector, and if the individual is an employee also with the
individual's employer.
D. If an individual pays the tax and at the end of any tax year has total
income during the tax year that is less than the income exemption
amount, or otherwise qualifies for an exemption, the Township will on
request after the end of tax year refund to the taxpayer the tax paid for
the tax year.
A. Every employer not registered under the provisions of an enactment of
the Township imposing a tax on earned income and net profits shall,
within 30 days after the effective date of this article, or within 30 days
after first becoming an employer, register with the collector the
employer's name, address and any other information required by the
collector on an employer registration form prescribed by the collector.
B. Every employer is required to deduct the tax as set forth in the
regulations from any compensation payable to any employee on whom
the tax is imposed, unless the employee has filed a local services tax
exemption certificate in accordance with the regulations. As set forth in
the regulations, the full amount of the tax shall be deducted in lump
sum if the combined municipal and school district tax rate is $10 or
less. As set forth in the regulations, the tax shall be deducted pro rata
on a per-payroll basis if the combined municipal and school district tax
rate exceeds $10.
§ 246-27 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 246-30
240:319
C. If an employee has filed a local services tax exemption certificate and it
is determined as set forth in the regulations that the employee is not
eligible for exemption or no longer eligible for exemption, the employer
shall start or restart withholding as set forth in the regulations.
D. As to each taxpayer employed at any time after the effective date and on
or before March 31, every employer shall deduct the tax from
compensation payable to the taxpayer as set forth in the regulations,
and shall file a tax return and pay to the collector on or before April 30
the amount of tax deducted on or before March 31. As to each taxpayer
for whom the full amount of the tax has not previously been deducted or
paid directly by the taxpayer to the collector, who is employed at any
time in any of the three-month periods ending June 30, September 30,
and December 31, every employer shall deduct the tax from
compensation payable to the taxpayer as set forth in the regulations,
and shall file a tax return and pay to the collector on or before the
following July 31, October 31, and January 31, the amount of tax
deducted on or before June 30, September 30, and December 31,
respectively. Every employer shall follow this same procedure in every
tax year.
E. If a taxpayer is employed by more than one employer within the
Township, the taxpayer's principal employer shall deduct the tax and
deliver to the employee evidence of the deduction on a form provided by
the collector.
An employer shall not deduct the tax from compensation of an
employee who presents evidence on a form provided by the collector of
prior deduction by an employer within the Township, or who provides
evidence on a form provided by the collector of prior payment of the
tax directly to the collector or of prior payment during the same tax
year of $52 as a tax imposed under the enabling act on an individual
based on engaging in an occupation in Pennsylvania.
F. Any employer who discontinues business or ceases operation shall,
within 15 days after discontinuing business or ceasing operations, file a
tax return and pay to the collector the full amount of the tax deducted
from employees prior to ceasing operations.
G. Tax amounts deducted from wages by an employer shall at all times be
the property of the Township, and shall constitute a trust fund held by
the employer until remitted to the collector; and deduction of tax from
wages shall, as between the employee and the Township, constitute
payment of the tax by the employee, regardless of any insolvency or
failure to remit by the employer.
H. Any employer who fails to deduct the tax or who fails to pay the tax to
the collector shall be liable for the tax and applicable penalties in full as
though the tax had originally been imposed against such employer. If
the employer is a partnership, the partners thereof, and if the employer
§ 246-30 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 246-30
240:320
§ 246-31. Self-employed individuals.
Every individual who is self-employed, or whose tax for any other reason
is not deducted by an employer under § 246-30, shall file a tax return and
pay the tax directly to the collector. Every such individual engaged in an
occupation within the Township at any time after the effective date of this
article and on or before March 31, shall file a tax return and pay the
full amount of the tax to the collector on or before April 30. Every such
individual who has not previously paid the full amount of the tax, who
engages in an occupation within the Township at any time in any of the
three-month periods ending June 30, September 30, and December 31, shall
file a tax return and pay the full amount of the tax to the collector on of
before the following July 31, October 31, and January 31, respectively. Every
individual who is self-employed, or whose tax for any other reason is not
deducted by an employer under § 246-30 shall follow this same procedure
in every tax year.
§ 246-32. Nonresident taxpayers.
By virtue of engaging in an occupation within the Township, both resident
and nonresident individuals are subject to the tax.
§ 246-33. Powers and duties of collector.
is a corporation or limited liability company, all officers thereof, shall
have the same liability as the employer.
A. The collector shall collect the tax, fines and penalties imposed by this
article, and shall keep records of collection.
B. The collector may examine the books, papers, and records of any
individual or employer in order to verify compliance with this article.
Every individual the collector believes might be subject to the tax and
every employer or person the collector believes might be an employer
shall on request meet with and show to the collector all books, papers,
and records requested by the collector. Every employer or person the
collector believes might be an employer shall also provide access to the
employer's books, papers, and records at the employer's place of
business and provide a place for the collector's review of such books,
papers, and records. For purposes of this enactment, records shall
include records in any form, including computer and other electronic
records.
C. The collector may file suit in its name or in the name of the Township for
recovery of any amount owed to the Township.
D. Except as limited by any applicable law, the collector shall have all of
the powers that the Township has or that the law prescribes for tax
collectors relating to administration and enforcement of this article.
§ 246-30 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 246-33
240:321
§ 246-34. Recovery of unpaid tax; interest and penalty added to
unpaid tax.
§ 246-35. Prohibited acts; violations and penalties.
Any person who makes any false or untrue statement on any return required
by this article, or who refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts
in his custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject
to this tax who are in his employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file
any return required by this article commits a violation of this article. If
the Board of Supervisors or the collector determines that a person has
committed or permitted the commission of a violation of this article, the
Township may institute summary criminal proceedings and/or may seek
equitable relief. In the event summary criminal proceedings are instituted,
the fine for the first offense shall be not less than $100 and not more than
$600. The fine for a second offense shall not be less than $300 and not
more than $600. The fine for a third or greater offense shall not be less
than $500 and not more than $600. Each day or portion thereof in which
a violation exists shall be considered a separate violation of this article.
Each section of this article which is violated shall be considered a separate
violation. The amount of any fine imposed by a magisterial district judge
or a court shall be in addition to any other fine which may be imposed
under any other provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the Township or
under any statute. In default of payment of any fine, such person shall be
liable to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to enforce the
article may be instituted against any person in charge of the business of any
E. The collector may promulgate and enforce regulations relating to
administration and enforcement of this article.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid, a
penalty of 5% of the amount unpaid for each month or a fraction of a
month during which the amount remains unpaid shall be imposed.
B. Any individual or entity who or which fails or refuses to pay the tax or
other amounts owed or to pay the tax deducted from employees shall, in
addition to paying the amount owed, pay reasonable costs incurred, as
set forth in the regulations, by the Township, collector, or any other
person or entity appointed to collect the amount, to provide notices of
delinquency or to implement similar procedures to collect delinquent
taxes.
C. If legal proceedings are commenced for failure to pay any amount
owed, the person or entity liable therefor shall, in addition to the
amount owed, pay to the Township, collector, or any other person or
entity appointed to collect the tax the costs of collection, including
reasonable attorney's fees.
D. The failure of any person or entity to receive or procure forms required
for making a required filing or return shall not excuse making such a
filing or return.
§ 246-33 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 246-35
240:322
employer who shall have failed or refused to file a return required by this
article.
§ 246-36. Applicability; validity.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Township to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any occupation
not within the taxing power of the Township under the Constitution of
the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or of the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as to any individual, such
decision shall not affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax,
or the validity of the tax so imposed, on other persons or individuals as
herein provided.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
on an occupation by the Township and the School District shall not
exceed the limitations prescribed in Sections 2 and 8 of the LTEA, 53
P.S. §§ 6902, 6908, and therefore the School District shall be entitled to
its share of the tax in accordance with the provisions of said Sections 2
and 8, Act 222 of 2004, and Act 7 of 2007.
§ 246-35 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 246-36
240:323
Chapter 262
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Engine brake retarders — See Ch. 137. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235.
§ 246-36 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 246-36
240:324
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 262-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 262-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Township of West Lampeter.
§ 262-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 262-4. Experimental regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq. (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except
that in this chapter the word "street" may be used interchangeably with
the word "highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word
"highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Police Department shall have the following powers to regulate
traffic and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
West Lampeter Township Police Department in the same manner as
permanent regulations. Any person who drives or parks a vehicle in
violation of any such regulation or who shall move, remove, destroy,
injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give
notice of any such regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a
violation of such nature.
A. The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, designate places upon
and along the streets in the Township where, for a period of not more
§ 262-1 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 262-4
240:325
§ 262-5. Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events.
§ 262-6. Authority of police officers.
The police shall have authority to direct traffic on the streets in the
Township, at intersections in public and in other places where the Vehicle
Code or this chapter applies.
than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate those
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in
this chapter. No person shall drive or park a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made
by authority of this section. Any person who violates any provision of
this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty set out in the
law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station police officers at each end of the closed portion while
construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is
being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
under way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
§ 262-4 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 262-6
240:326
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 262-7. Speed limits.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in this section is hereby established at the rate of speed
indicated in said schedule. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle at a higher speed than the maximum prescribed for that street or
part of a street.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Apple Blossom Drive
[Added 4-12-2010
by Ord. No. 216]
25 Entire length
Bank Barn Lane
[Added 3-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 211]
25 Entire length within Mill Creek
Community - Phase 1
Bittersweet Path 25 Thornhill Lane to Heatherfield Drive
Book Road (T 711) 30 Village Road to Pioneer Road
Bridge Road 40 Village Road to Penn Grant Road
Conard Road (T 539) 30 Lampeter Road to Windy Hill Road
Conestoga Avenue 25 From Conestoga Avenue to the
Willow Street Pike
Conestoga Avenue 25 From Musser Avenue to the deadend
on Musser Avenue
Eckman Road (T 508) 30 Willow Street Pike to Brenneman
Road
Edgmont Drive 25 Penn Grant Road to Silver Lane
Eshelman Mill Road 35 Route 222 to Garber's Farm Lane
Fieldcrest Drive (T
559)
35 Beaver Valley Pike to Silver Lane
Greenbrier Lane 25 Wyndmere Way to Township line
Hans Herr Road (T
710)
35 Beaver Valley Pike to Penn Grant
Road
Hawthorne Circle
[Added 10-12-2009
by Ord. No. 213]
25 Hemlock Drive to Wendover Way
Hayward Place 25 Wyndmere Way to dead end
Heatherfield Drive 25 Silver Lane to Woodhall Drive
§ 262-7 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 262-7
240:327
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Hemlock Drive
[Added 10-12-2009
by Ord. No. 213]
25 Entire length
Hollinger Road
(North)
30 Willow Street Pike to Millwood Road
Hollinger Road
(South)
30 Millwood Road to Willow Street Pike
Houser Road (T 714) 30 Pioneer Road to Rockvale Road
Kendig Road 25 Route 272 North to Route 272 South
Little Hill [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord.
No. 211]
25 Entire length
Locust Lane 25 Route 272 (Willow Street Pike) to
Eshelman Mill Road
Long Rifle Road
[Added 12-19-2016
by Ord. No. 244]
40 Gypsy Hill Road to Eshelman Mill
Road
Lyndon Avenue 25 South of Eckman Road
Mentzer Road [Added
11-14-2016 by Ord.
No. 242]
25 Entire length
Millcreek Road 25 Lyndon Avenue to Eckman Road
Millport Road 35 Lampeter Road to East Lampeter
Township
Morningside Drive 25 Lampeter Road to Gypsy Hill Road
Otsu Road (T 557) 30 Beaver Valley Pike to Shiprock Road
Paramount Avenue 25 Lampeter Road to a dead end
Peach Bottom Road
[Amended
3-10-2008 by Ord.
No. 206]
25 Beaver Valley Pike to Penn Grant
Road
Penn Grant Road
[Added 11-8-2010
by Ord. No. 220]
30 Lampeter Road to Pequea Creek
Covered Bridge
Pequea Lane (T 714) 35 Penn Grant Road to Lime Valley
Road
Pioneer Road [Added
4-12-2010 by Ord.
No. 216]
25 Apple Blossom Drive to Lampeter
Road
§ 262-7 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 262-7
240:328
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Pioneer Road
[Amended
3-10-2008 by Ord.
No. 206]
35 Lampeter Road to Strasburg Pike
Plymouth Avenue 25 Lampeter Road to Township line
Redwood Drive
[Added 10-12-2009
by Ord. No. 213]
25 Hemlock Drive to street end
Rockvale Road 40 Lampeter Road to Strasburg Pike
Shiprock Road 25 Fieldcrest Drive to Pequea Township
line
Silver Lane 35 Penn Grant Road to Fieldcrest Drive
South View Road (T
574)
35 Penn Grant Road to Lime Valley
Road
Spring Hollow Road
(T 531)
30 Strasburg Pike to Wheatland School
Road
Stayman Drive
[Added 4-12-2010
by Ord. No. 216]
25 Apple Blossom Drive to Lampeter
Road
Thicket Lane [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord.
No. 211]
25 Entire length
Thistle Lane [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord.
No. 211]
25 Entire length
Wheatland School
Road
35 Village Road North to Pioneer Road
Wiker Avenue 25 Lampeter Road to Township line
Woodcrest Drive 25 Entire length
Woodhall Drive 25 Penn Grant Road to Township line
Woodhall Drive 25 Silver Lane to Township line
Wyckford Place 25 Heatherfield Drive to dead end
Wyndmere Way 25 Township line to Township line
Wynwood Drive 25 Penn Grant Road to Peach Bottom
Road
§ 262-8. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
the following streets:
§ 262-7 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 262-8
240:329
Intersection
Beaver Valley Pike (SR 0222) and Peach Bottom Road (T 476)
Beaver Valley Pike (SR 0222) and Penn Grant Road (SR 3028)
Lampeter Road (SR 3028) and Millport Road (SR 2036)
Lampeter Road (SR 3028), Conard Road (T 539) and Morningside Drive
(T 579)
Lampeter Road (SR 3028) and Pioneer Road (T 720)
Lampeter Road (SR 3028) and Village Road (SR 0741)
Willow Street Pike: school warning sign
Willow Street Pike (SR 0222) and Willow Valley Drive
Willow Street Pike (N) (SR 0272) and Beaver Valley Pike (Mylin's Corner)
(SR 0222)
Willow Street Pike (N) (SR 0272) and Penn Grant Road (SR 3028)
Willow Street Pike (S) (SR 0222) and Long Lane (SR 0741)
Willow Valley Lakes Drive and Beaver Valley Pike (SR 0222)
§ 262-9. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
into another one-way street) when facing a steady red signal at any of the
following locations:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited Right
Turn on Red Signal Onto
(Reserved)
§ 262-10. Prohibited turns at intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a turn of the kind
designated (left, right, all) at any of the following intersections:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
(Reserved)
§ 262-11. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn on any of
the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 262-8 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 262-12
240:330
§ 262-12. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in this section are hereby
designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other than
in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 262-13. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established along those streets or parts of
streets described in this section, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of
any vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle or to drive on the left side of
the roadway in any no-passing zone described in said schedule:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 262-14. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in this section are hereby
established as through streets; and the driver of any vehicle, upon
approaching any such street at any intersection thereof (except for such
intersections where there are now or shall hereafter be located official
traffic signals), shall come to a full stop or yield the right-of-way, as the case
may be, before entering any such through street:
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 262-15. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in this section (in addition to intersections with
the through streets established by this chapter) are hereby established as
stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected in such a position
upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the second-named
street in the direction or directions indicated in said schedule. Every driver
of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street,
in the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall come to a full stop
before entering any such intersection.
§ 262-12 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 262-15
240:331
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Apple Blossom Drive North Pioneer Road (East)
Apple Blossom Drive North Pioneer Road (West)
Baldwin Drive South Eagle Drive
Bank Barn Lane [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 211]
South Conard Road (eastern
intersection)
Bank Barn Lane [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 211]
South Conard Road (western
intersection)
Barbara Avenue North Kendig Road
Barbara Avenue South Mylin Avenue
Birch Drive East Eshelman Mill Road
Birch Drive West Willow View Boulevard
Bittersweet Path North Thornhill Lane
Blueberry Circle West Strawberry Lane
Box Elder Lane West Shiprock Road
Braxton Drive East South Jefferson Court
Braxton Drive West Lightfoot Drive
Bridge Road South Penn Grant Road
Broadmoor Drive West Eshelman Mill Road
Carlton Court West Charleston Drive
Carollyn Drive North West Wynwood Drive
Casey Drive East Crestline Drive
Cedar Drive East Landis Boulevard
Cedar Drive West Willow View Boulevard
Chelsea Loop (north end) West Kimberly Court
Chelsea Loop (south end) West Kimberly Court
Cheryl Ann Court East Dorianne Drive
Chukar Court South Ridgefield Drive
Cindy Lane North Gary Drive
Cindy Lane South Thomas Road
Clearview Road South Leamon Road
Clemens Circle North Glebe Lane
Cliff Avenue West Conestoga Avenue
Clover Avenue North Buttercup Road
Clover Avenue South Magnolia Drive
§ 262-15 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 262-15
240:332
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Conard Road [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 211]
East Windy Hill Road
Conestoga Avenue East Conestoga Avenue
Conestoga Avenue South Eckman Road
Conestoga Avenue South Musser Avenue
Country Meadows West Ridgefield Drive
Covered Wagon Drive West and
south
Sandstone Drive
Cranberry Circle West Strawberry Lane
Creekwood Drive South Conard Road
Crestline Drive North Wynwood Drive
Crosscreek Lane East Woodcrest Drive
Crosscreek Lane South Pebble Run
Dahlia Road North Buttercup Road
Dale Street North Meadia Avenue
Dale Street South Mackin Avenue
Dennis Drive South East Kendig Road
Dianne Circle West Dorianne Drive
Divot Court South Meadia Avenue
Divot Court West Niblick Avenue
Doveland Court North Huntingwood Drive
Doveland Court South Huntingwood Drive
Driver Avenue South Meadia Avenue
Dunmore Drive East Kings Arm Lane
Dunmore Drive West Lightfoot Drive
East Jefferson Court East and
west
Kings Arm Lane
Eckman Road Both Millcreek Road
Edgmont Drive North Wynwood Drive
Edgmont Drive West Silver Lane
Elk Lane West Mallard Avenue
English Rose Court North Peony Road
Farmview Road South Golf Road
Fiddlers Green [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 211]
South Bank Barn Lane
§ 262-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 262-15
240:333
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Fieldcrest Drive Both Shiprock Road
Flintlock Drive South Wynwood Drive
Florentine Drive North Locust Lane
Florentine Drive West Dorianne Drive
Fox Hollow Drive East Huntingwood Drive
Francis Avenue South Buttercup Road
Garber Drive West Wycliffe Lane
Gary Drive West Nordick Drive
Glebe Lane East Fox Hollow
Glebe Lane [Added
10-8-2007 by Ord. No. 199]
West Lampeter Road
Greenbriar Lane East Wyndmere Way
Harvey Avenue East Lyndon Avenue
Harvey Avenue West Mill Creek Road
Hawthorn Circle North Hemlock Drive
Hayes Avenue East Lyndon Avenue
Hayes Avenue West Conestoga Avenue
Hayward Place North Wyndmere Way
Heatherfield Drive East Bittersweet Path
Heatherfield Drive West Bittersweet Path
Heatherfield Drive East Silver Lane
Heatherfield Drive West Woodhall Drive
Hedgewood Court West Parkwood Drive
Hemlock Drive East Millwood Road
Hemlock Drive East Redwood Drive
Henrietta Avenue South Buttercup Road
Herr Avenue Both Lyndon Avenue
Hidden Green [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 211]
West Bank Barn Lane
Hill Street North Meadia Avenue
Homecrest Drive North Wynwood Drive
Homecrest Drive South Laneview Drive
Hostetter Lane West Southgate Drive
Houser Road North Rockvale Road
Huntingwood Drive South Rockvale Road
§ 262-15 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 262-15
240:334
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Huntsman Lane North Ridgefield Drive
Ivywood Court East Parkwood Drive
Jamestown Court East Hollinger Road
Juniper Drive North Nectar Terrace
Juniper Drive West Plumeria Place
Kings Arm Lane South Braxton Drive
Kipling Drive South Milton Road
Knight Lane North Wolgemuth Drive
Knight Lane South Wolgemuth Drive
Kreider Avenue North Kendig Road
Kress Circle West Wolgemuth Drive
Landis Boulevard North Locust Lane
Landis Boulevard South Birch Drive
Laneview Drive East Edgmont Drive
Laneview Drive West Crestline Drive
Laurel Drive East Landis Boulevard
Laurel Drive West Willow View Boulevard
Lehman Avenue East Lyndon Avenue
Lehman Avenue West Mill Creek Road
Little Hill [Added 3-9-2009
by Ord. No. 211]
South Bank Barn Lane
Little Hill [Added 3-9-2009
by Ord. No. 211]
South Thicket Lane
Locust Lane Both Dorianne Drive
Locust Lane East Eshelman Mill Road
Long Rifle Road West Eshelman Mill Road
Lower Green [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 211]
North Middle Green
Lyndon Avenue North Eckman Road
Lyndon Avenue North and
south
Roslyn Avenue
Lyndon Avenue South Musser Avenue
Lynette Circle East Dorianne Drive
Mallard Avenue North North Section Broadmoor
Drive
Mallard Avenue South South Broadmoor Drive
§ 262-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 262-15
240:335
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Mark Avenue West Fannie Avenue
Meadia Avenue West Route 222
Meadowview Avenue West Sycamore Drive
Mentzer Road [Added
7-8-2013 by Ord. No. 231]
North Long Rifle Road
Middle Green [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 211]
East Thistle Lane
Mill Creek Community
Neighborhood Center
entrance/exit drive [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 211]
South Conard Road
Myrtlewood Court West Parkwood Drive
Nectar Terrace West Valette Drive
Niblick Avenue South Meadia Avenue
North Jefferson Court Both Lightfoot Drive
North Jefferson Court Both Kings Arm Lane
Old Farm Lane East and
west
Hostetter Lane
Otsu Road West Shiprock Road
Parkwood Drive North Eckman Road
Pebble Run West Woodcrest Lane
Pebbleside Lane (East) East Woodcrest Drive
Pebbleside Lane (West) West Woodcrest Drive
Peony Road East Clover Avenue
Peony Road East Lampeter Road
Pequea Lane North Penn Grant Road
Plank Avenue North and
west
Barbara Avenue
Plank Avenue South Mylin Avenue
Pleasant View Avenue North Mylin Avenue
Plumeria Place North Valette Drive
Plumeria Place South Glebe Lane
Providence Place North Garber Drive
Putter Avenue South Meadia Avenue
Redwood Drive South Hemlock Drive
Resch Lane North Millport Road
§ 262-15 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 262-15
240:336
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Ridgefield Drive West Huntingwood Drive
Sandstone Drive East and
north
Wynwood Drive
Sarah Lane North Baldwin Drive
Sarah Lane South Eagle Drive
Shiprock Road North Penn Grant Road
Shiprock Road North and
south
Fieldcrest Drive
Southgate Drive East Hostetter Lane
Southgate Drive South Millport Road
Southrun Drive West Hostetter Lane
Spring Avenue East Lyndon Avenue
Spring Avenue West Mill Creek Road
Spring Hollow Road West East Wheatland School Road
Spring Hollow Road East West Wheatland School Road
Stayman Drive East Lampeter Road
Stayman Drive West Apple Blossom Drive
Sundra Avenue South Buttercup Road
Susan Avenue North Edgmont Drive
Susan Avenue South Silver Lane
Sycamore Drive North Plymouth Avenue
Thicket Lane [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 211]
East and
west
Thicket Lane
Thicket Lane [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 211]
South Little Hill
Thistle Lane [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 211]
North Little Hill
Thistle Lane [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 211]
South Windy Hill Road
Thomas Road West Nordick Drive
Thornhill Lane South Heatherfield Drive
Thornhill Lane North Woodhall Drive
Tracy Court East Lynette Circle
Upper Green [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 211]
North Middle Green
Village Square (North) East Peach Bottom Road
§ 262-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 262-15
240:337
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Village Square (South) East Peach Bottom Road
Washington Avenue East Lyndon Avenue
Washington Avenue West Mill Creek Road
Waterfront Estates Drive East and
west
Waterfront Drive
West Jefferson Court East and
west
Lightfoot Drive
West Willow Road Both Nolt Avenue
West Willow Road Both Pleasant View Boulevard
West Wynwood Drive West Pleasant View Avenue
Wheatland Park Lane West Wheatland School Road
Whitefield Lane North Country Meadows Drive
Whitefield Lane South Wolgemuth Drive
Whitetail Path [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 211]
South Little Hill
Willow View Boulevard North Locust Lane
Windy Hill Road [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 211]
North and
west
Thistle Lane
Wolgemuth Drive North Windy Hill Road
Wolgemuth Drive South Windy Hill Road
Woodcrest Drive (East) South Conard Road
Woodcrest Drive (West) South Conard Road
Woodhall Drive Both Wyndmere Way
Woodhall Drive East Silver Lane and Fieldcrest
Woodlawn Drive West Peach Bottom Road
Wyckford Place North Heatherfield Drive
Wycliffe Drive North Locust Lane
§ 262-16. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in this section (in addition to intersections with
the through streets established by this chapter) are hereby established
as yield intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected in such a
position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street in the direction or directions indicated. Every driver of
a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street, in
the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop
the vehicle and then yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection
or approaching on the second-named street so closely as to constitute a
§ 262-15 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 262-16
240:338
hazard during the time that the driver is moving across or within such
intersection.
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 262-17. Closing of certain streets to certain vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle, except a passenger
vehicle (but not including any passenger vehicle drawing any trailer or
towing any other vehicle), upon any of the following streets or parts of
streets:
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 262-18. Vehicle weight limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any commercial vehicle or
other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination, having a gross weight in
excess of that respectively prescribed, upon any of the streets or bridges, or
portions thereof, described in this section, except for the purpose of making
local deliveries on said streets:
Name of Street or
Bridge
Maximum
Gross Weight
(pounds) Location
(Reserved)
§ 262-16 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 262-18
240:339

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 262-19. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 262-20. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in this section, except at the angle designated and only within the
painted stall lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is
now or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be
parked with the front thereof nearest the curb.
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 262-21. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following streets
or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Hollinger Road Both Entire length
Mackin Avenue [Added
7-10-2017 by Ord. No. 245]
South Entire length
Meadia Avenue [Added
10-10-2005 by Ord. No. 191]
Both Entire length
Paramount Avenue [Added
10-10-2005 by Ord. No. 191]
Both Entire length
Plank Avenue Both Entire length
§ 262-21.1. Parking parallel to curb; exceptions. [Added 7-8-2019
by Ord. No. 253]
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall park or stand a
vehicle upon a two-way highway except parallel to the right-hand curb
or, in the absence of a curb, to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall park or stand a
vehicle upon a one-way highway except parallel to the curb or edge of
the highway in the direction of authorized traffic movement. However,
when necessary to permit the proper loading or unloading of a
commercial vehicle, permission may be granted by the Police to either
§ 262-19 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 262-21.1
240:341
§ 262-21.2. Fire hydrants, intersections and stop signs. [Added
7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 253]
§ 262-21.3. Blocking public or private driveway or curb ramps.
[Added 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 253]
§ 262-21.4. Parking without current registration plates. [Added
7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 253]
No vehicle shall be parked at any time without current and proper
registration plates.
the owner or tenant of the real property or the owner of the vehicle to
park such vehicle at an angle for such purpose.
B. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall park or stand a
vehicle upon any highway except with its right-hand wheels within 12
inches of the right-hand curb or, in the absence of a curb, as close as
practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder on a one-way or
two-way street, or with its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the lefthand
curb, or in the absence of a curb, as close as practicable to the left
edge of the left-hand shoulder on a one-way street.
A. No vehicle shall be parked within 15 feet from any fire hydrant.
B. No vehicle shall be parked within 20 feet from any crosswalk at a street
intersection.
C. No vehicle shall be parked within 30 feet upon the approach to any
flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic-control signal located at
the side of a roadway.
D. Any vehicle which is unlawfully parked within the areas prohibited by
this section may be removed from that area by towing and may be
reclaimed by the vehicle owner upon payment of towing costs.
A. No vehicle shall be parked at any time in front of any public or private
driveway or garage entrance.
B. No vehicle shall be parked in a manner which blocks ingress, egress
and regress from emergency driveways or garages, or ingress, egress
and regress therefrom (e.g., police, fire, ambulance, rescue squad,
hospital emergency drive).
C. No vehicle shall be parked at any time in a manner which blocks ingress
or egress from a handicapped access curb.
D. Any vehicle which is unlawfully parked within the areas prohibited by
this section may be removed from that area by towing and may be
reclaimed by the owner upon payment of the towing costs.
§ 262-21.1 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 262-21.5
240:342
§ 262-21.5. Parking in violation of signs. [Added 7-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 253]
§ 262-21.6. Handicapped parking. [Added 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 253]
Except for persons parking vehicles lawfully bearing registration plates
or parking placards issued to handicapped persons or disabled veterans
and actively transporting such handicapped or disabled veteran, no person
shall park a vehicle on public or private property which has been posted
in the manner required by law as reserved for a handicapped person or
disabled veteran. Any vehicle which is unlawfully parked in a designated
handicapped parking area may be removed from that area by towing and
may be reclaimed by the vehicle owner upon payment of the towing costs.
§ 262-21.7. Leaving key in ignition. [Added 7-8-2019 by Ord. No.
253]
§ 262-21.8. Specific prohibitions. [Added 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 253]
A. Except when necessary to avoid a conflict with other traffic or to
protect the safety of any person or vehicle or in compliance with the law
or direction of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person
shall park a vehicle at any place where official signs prohibit parking or
stopping.
B. Except when necessary to avoid a conflict with other traffic or to
protect the safety of any person or vehicle or in compliance with the law
or direction of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person
shall park a vehicle at any place where temporary official signs prohibit
parking or stopping.
A. The owner or person in charge of any motor vehicle shall not permit it
to stand unattended on any street, private driveway, public or private
parking lot, used or new car sales lot or any other unattended open
space which is readily accessible to any person without having locked
the ignition of such motor vehicle and removed the ignition key from its
lock.
B. Any police officer of the Township who finds a motor vehicle left in the
condition set forth in above may immediately lock such vehicle's
ignition, remove the key from the lock and deliver it to the officer in
charge at the police station. The police officer shall leave a notice of any
violation found in a conspicuous place on such vehicle, which notice
shall also state where the ignition key has been taken and held.
A. Compliance with Pennsylvania Vehicle Code. All operators of vehicles
within the Township of West Lampeter shall comply with all provisions
of § 3353 regarding prohibitions in specified places, of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, codified at 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3353, unless a different
standard is specified herein, in which case operators shall comply with
§ 262-21.5 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 262-21.8
240:343
the standards set forth herein. Any violation of those provisions of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code shall constitute a violation hereunder.
B. Parking in fire lane.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle on private property in a fire lane that
has been so designated in the manner required by law and is posted
to prohibit same.
(2) Any vehicle which is unlawfully parked in a designated fire lane
area may be removed from that area by towing and may be
reclaimed by the vehicle owner upon payment of towing costs.
C. No parking blocking traffic lane.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle in such a manner that the vehicle
blocks the free uninterrupted flow of traffic in a designated driving
lane.
(2) Any vehicle which is unlawfully parked so as to block a traffic lane
may be removed from that area by towing and may be reclaimed by
the vehicle owner upon payment of towing costs.
D. No parking blocking sidewalk.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle in such a manner that the vehicle
blocks the free uninterrupted flow of pedestrian traffic on a
sidewalk.
(2) Any vehicle which is unlawfully parked so as to block a sidewalk
may be removed from that area by towing and may be reclaimed by
the vehicle owner upon payment of towing costs.
E. No parking bus stop.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle within a designated bus stop.
(2) Any vehicle which is unlawfully parked so as to block a bus stop
may be removed from that area by towing and may be reclaimed by
the vehicle owner upon payment of towing costs.
F. No person shall park a vehicle within 25 feet of an intersection.
G. No person shall park a vehicle upon any bridge or elevated structure
upon a highway or within a highway tunnel.
H. No person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle on private property
without the consent of the owner or other person in control or
possession of the property except in the case of emergency or
disablement of the vehicle, in which case the operator shall arrange for
the removal of the vehicle as soon as possible.
(1) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to private parking
lots unless such lots are posted to notify the public of any parking
§ 262-21.8 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 262-21.8
240:344
§ 262-22. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in this section, during the hours specified in said schedule, on any
day except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 262-22.1. Parking prohibited during snow events. [Added
9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 198]
It shall be unlawful to park or allow to be parked any motor vehicle or other
vehicle on any street or road which is part of the Township system after the
start of a snowfall and until the snow has stopped falling and the snow has
been completely plowed for the full width of the cartway.
§ 262-23. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon any
of the streets or parts of streets described in this section, between the hours
specified, for longer than the time indicated in said schedule.
restrictions and the operator of the vehicle violates such posted
restrictions. For the purposes of this section, "private parking lot"
means a parking lot open to the public or used for parking without
a charge; or a parking lot used for parking with a charge. The
Township hereby adopts the regulations promulgated by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation which defines posting
for public notice pursuant to Title 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3353(b) and any
amended or successor statute(s).
(2) Property owner may remove vehicle. The owner or other person in
charge of possession of any property in which a vehicle is parked or
left unattended in violation of the provisions of Subsection H may
immediately remove or have removed the vehicle at reasonable
expense of the owner of the vehicle. Such person who removes a
vehicle left parked or unattended in violation of the provisions of
Subsection H shall have a lien against the owner of the vehicle in
the amount of the reasonable costs of removing the vehicle.
I. The department on state-designated highways and local authorities on
any highway within the boundaries of the Township may, by erection of
official traffic control devices, prohibit, limit or restrict stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles on any highway where engineering and
traffic studies indicate that stopping, standing or parking would
constitute a safety hazard or where stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles would unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic.
§ 262-21.8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 262-23
240:345
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 262-24. Special purpose parking zones.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to allow the same
to remain parked in any special purpose parking zone established in this
section, except as specifically provided for such zone.
Name of Street Side
Authorized
Purpose
or Vehicle Location
(Reserved)
§ 262-24.1. Parking restrictions for commercial and recreational
vehicles. [Added 3-10-2008 by Ord. No. 206]
§ 262-25. Penalties for parking violations. [Amended 7-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 253]
A. No commercial vehicle as defined by this section shall park on any
street, highway, or alley of West Lampeter Township between the hours
of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. prevailing time. The term “commercial
vehicle” is defined as any self-propelled or drawn vehicle, which has a
gross registered weight in excess of 26,000 pounds, or any selfpropelled
or drawn vehicle that may be used for commercial, nonprofit
or industrial purposes.
B. No nonmotorized vehicle or recreational vehicle, defined in this section
as a camper, boat, house trailer, motor home, trailer or similar
conveyance and any device used for the transportation of said vehicle,
shall be allowed to remain parked, attached or unattached to another
vehicle, on any Township street for a continuous period of time greater
than 72 hours. Moreover, it shall be unlawful for any person to move
any such vehicle or trailer from one location to another or to remove
any such vehicle or trailer for a brief period of time and return it to the
original location or a location nearby in order to avoid the seventy-twohour
continuous time limitation set forth hereinabove. Each additional
twenty-four-hour time period during which any such vehicle remains
parked in violation of this section beyond 72 hours shall constitute a
separate offense for which the owner shall be liable for penalties in
§ 262-34.
A. Fine and penalties. Any person, film or corporation violating any of the
provisions of the parking regulations shall pay a fine in the amount
hereinafter set forth for such violations, plus any necessary costs of
prosecution.
§ 262-23 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 262-25
240:346
Violation Fine
Parking left side $25
Parking more than 12 inches from curb $25
Parking less than 15 feet from fire hydrant $25
Parking less than 20 feet from intersection $25
Parking less than 30 feet from a traffic signal or
sign
$25
No parking, blocking driveway or garage $25
No parking, blocking emergency driveways or
garages
$25
No parking, blocking handicap access curb $50
Expired registration $25
No parking permitted, posted temporary or fixed
signs
$25
No parking, handicap zone $50
Parked leaving key in ignition $25
No parking, fire lane $50
No parking, blocking traffic lane $25
No parking, blocking sidewalk $25
No parking, bus stop $25
Parking on a bridge or elevated structure $25
Parking in violation of commercial vehicle
ordinance
$50
Parking prohibited during snow events $25
B. Any person who violates any provision of this article not subject to the
above specific fines for violation shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$30 and costs. Violations of any one of these provisions may also subject
the vehicle illegally parked to immediate towing.
C. Fines for repeated violations. Any person who has more than five
parking violations in any period of six consecutive months may be fined
twice the amount prescribed by this section for the sixth violation and
three times the amount prescribed for the seventh and any subsequent
violation.
D. Cost for failure to pay fine after notice. Whenever an alleged violator of
the parking provisions set forth in this article has not paid the
prescribed fine within seven days after a parking ticket has been issued
and the Police Department has sent notice thereof to such person by
first-class mail, such person shall pay an additional $5 for the cost of
§ 262-25 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 262-25
240:347
processing and mailing such notice. If the parking ticket has not been
satisfied within 15 days after it has been issued, the violator shall be
prosecuted.
E. Responsibility of registered owner. Whenever any vehicle has been
parked in violation of any provision of this article prohibiting or
restricting parking, the person in whose name such vehicle is
registered shall be responsible for such violation and subject to the
penalty therefor.
§ 262-25 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 262-25
240:348
ARTICLE IV
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 262-26. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of Section 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle
Code and gives authority to the Township to remove and impound vehicles
that are parked overtime on any street in the Township, or in metered and
unmetered parking lots in the Township, in violation of any provision of this
chapter.
§ 262-27. Authority to remove and impound.
The Township shall have authority to remove and impound or to order
the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 262-26 of this article and provided that no such
vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the
provisions of this article.
§ 262-28. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time
by the Board of Supervisors. Every such garage shall submit evidence
to the Board of Supervisors that it is bonded or has acquired liability
insurance in an amount satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors as sufficient
to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to
those vehicles while in the custody of the garagekeeper for the purpose of
towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to the Board
of Supervisors its schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles
under this article, and when the schedule is approved by the Board of
Supervisors, those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage
garage. No different schedule of charges shall be adopted without approval
of the Board of Supervisors, and no different charges shall be demanded of
or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or impounded under
this article by any approved storage garage. The Board of Supervisors shall
delete from its list of approved storage garages any garage that makes any
unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle removed or impounded
under this article.
§ 262-29. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that the vehicle was removed shall
be sent by the Township to the owner of record of the vehicle. The notice
shall designate the place from which the vehicle was removed, the reason
for its removal and impounding and the garage in which it was impounded.
§ 262-26 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 262-30
240:349
§ 262-30. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this article
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive and
shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If
payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a District Justice. Payment
of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any
vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision
of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 262-31. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Township shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded
under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the
owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to
the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 262-32. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in
charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 262-30 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 262-32
240:350
ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 262-33. Enforcement authority.
The duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter shall be upon the Police
Department of the Township of West Lampeter.
§ 262-34. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or except as herein specified, every person
convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, or any supplement
thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of $25 and costs of prosecution.
§ 262-33 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 262-34
240:351
Chapter 273
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Suburban Lancaster Sewer Authority — See
Ch. 9, Art. II.
Sewers and sewerage — See Ch. 211.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 230.
§ 262-34 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 262-34
273:352
ARTICLE I
Water Use
[Adopted 3-9-1989 by Ord. No. 99]
§ 273-1. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following
terms, words and phrases as used in this article shall have the following
meanings:
CITY — The City of Lancaster and the City of Lancaster Authority, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania and its agents, including employees of the City of
Lancaster.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure or any portion thereof
intended to be used wholly or in part for the purpose of carrying on a trade,
business, or profession, or for social, amusement, charitable or public uses.
CONNECTION FEE — A one-time fee imposed upon a property owner to
have his property connected to the water system.
CUSTOMER — Any owner, patron or user of the water system or other
person as may be defined by the rules and regulations of the City for the
water system.
EDU or EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT — A usage or estimated usage
of 6,000 gallons of water consumed per month, except for a single-family
dwelling which shall be defined herein as one EDU.
HOUSE SERVICE LINE — The pipe extending from the curb stop to the
water meter.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure or any portion thereof
intended to be used wholly or in part for the purpose of carrying on the
manufacturing, fabricating, processing, cleaning, laundering, or assembly
of any product, commodity or article.
INSPECTION FEE — A fee imposed upon a property owner who installs,
at his own expense, water mains, curb boxes, curb stops and street and/or
house service lines to have his water connection inspected by authorized
representatives of the City or Township.
OWNER — With respect to any property located in the Township of West
Lampeter and connected to or to be connected to the water system, any
person:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or other group or entity.
Vested with an ownership interest, legal or equitable, sole or partial, in
any such property; or
A.
In open, peaceable and notorious possession of any such property, as
apparent owner thereof; or
B.
C. The reputed owner thereof in the neighborhood of such property.
§ 273-1 WATER § 273-1
273:353
PRIVATE DWELLING OR LIVING UNIT — Any structure or dwelling or part
thereof intended to be occupied as a whole by one family, an apartment
intended to be occupied as a whole by one family, or any other one-family
living unit; provided that hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes,
hotels, boarding, rooming and lodging houses, motels, recreational
campgrounds (excluding mobile home parks) and the like, offering
overnight or transient accommodations for patients or guests shall not be
considered to be private dwelling or living units but shall be considered to
be commercial establishments within the meaning of this article. 105
PROPERTY — The tract or tracts of ground owned by an owner and upon
which is located a private dwelling or living unit or units and/or a
commercial establishment or establishments and/or an industrial
establishment or establishments.
STREET SERVICE LINE — The pipe extending from the water main to and
including the curb stop.
TAPPING FEE — A one-time fee imposed upon a property owner for the
privilege of using the water system. The tapping fee is computed on an EDU
(equivalent dwelling unit) basis.
TOWNSHIP — Township of West Lampeter, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
WATER SYSTEM — All water mains, extensions, and distribution pipelines,
from the main to the point of service connections, street service lines and
appurtenances thereto which are constructed or acquired and owned by
the City of Lancaster Authority or serviced by the Authority or the City of
Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
§ 273-2. Connection to water system.
A. Whenever the water system or any usable portion thereof is completed
and ready for public use, the Township shall cause written notice to be
served either by personal service or certified mail upon all owners of
property abutting such completed water system or portion thereof,
which notice shall state that the water system or portion thereof is
complete and ready for public use and that all such owners shall make
connection with the water system, at their own expense, within 90 days
of the date of service of notice.
B. All owners of tracts of ground abutting the water system upon which no
private dwelling or living unit and/or commercial establishment(s) and/
or an industrial establishment(s) is erected shall, upon erection of any
such unit or establishment, make connection with the water system at
their own expense.
C. All connections to the water system shall be made in compliance with
applicable ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations as may from
time to time be enacted, adopted or promulgated by the Township in
accordance with its agreements with the City.
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 273-1 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 273-2
273:354
§ 273-3. Connection fee.
D. In case any owner of property so required to make connection to the
water system, other than those owners excepted in Subsections E and F
of this section, shall neglect or refuse to make connection within 90
days of the date of service of notice to do so:
(1) The Township through its agents may enter upon such property and
construct such connections; and
(2) The Township shall, upon completion of the work, send an itemized
bill of the cost of the construction of such connection to the owner
of the property to which connection has been made, which bill shall
be due and payable in full within 30 days; and
(3) Upon failure of the owner of such property to pay the itemized bill,
the Township shall cause a municipal lien and/or claim to be filed in
the full amount of the bill with six months of the date of completion
of construction of such connection, which lien and/or claim shall be
filed and collected, together with the maximum lawful rate of
interest as is then provided by law.
E. Owners of properties abutting the water system used solely for
industrial or farm purposes and which have their own supply of water
for uses other than human consumption shall not be required to
connect such properties to the water system.
F. Owners of properties abutting the water system shall not be required to
connect any structure or building located on any such property and
used for private dwelling or living unit and/or commercial
establishment and/or industrial establishment purposes, if such
structure or building is more than 150 feet from the service connection
with the water system, as measured in a straight line without regard to
intervening structures, from the closest point of such building or
structure to the closest point of such service connection.
G. Owners of properties abutting the water system shall not be required to
connect any structure or building located on any such property and
used for private dwelling or living unit and/or commercial
establishment and/or industrial establishment purposes, if such
structure or building presently has and continues to maintain a well
water supply providing water fit for human consumption which meets
all applicable governmental standards applying to water quality.
Owners of properties with wells shall not be permitted to combine the
use of well water with City water through the same plumbing.
A. A connection fee is hereby imposed upon every property owner
connecting his property to the water system. The amount of the
connection fee shall be either $250 or the amount of the actual
expenses incurred in connecting the property to the system, whichever
is greater. The property owner shall pay the $250 connection fee at the
§ 273-2 WATER § 273-3
273:355
§ 273-4. Tapping fee.
time he files his application for a permit to connect to the water system
pursuant to the rules and regulations of the water system. In the event
that the actual expenses incurred in connecting the property owner's
property to the water system exceed $250, the property owner shall pay
such excess amount upon completion of the connection.
B. Where a property owner is authorized to install, at his own expense,
water mains, curb boxes, curb stops and service lines, the property
owner shall not be required to pay the connection fee described in
Subsection A above, but in lieu thereof shall pay an inspection fee of
$50 per inspection of each connection. The inspection fee shall be paid
by the property owner at the time the property owner files his
application for a permit to connect to the water system, pursuant to the
rules and regulations of the water system.
C. If a property owner desires to add or construct additional connections
or customers to an improved property, such additional connections or
customers shall not be connected to the water system until the property
owner:
(1) Obtains a permit for the connection/customer, as provided in the
water system's rules and regulations; and
(2) Pays the appropriate connection fee or inspection fee in effect at
the time of the application for the permit.
A. A tapping fee is hereby imposed upon the owner of each property
making a connection to the water system. The amount of the tapping
fee shall be $2,000 for each EDU or estimated EDU of water consumed
on the property.
B. The tapping fee shall be paid by the property owner at the time he files
his application for a permit to connect to the water system pursuant to
the water system's rules and regulations. The tapping fee shall be in
addition to any connection fee, inspection fee, rental, or other charges
fixed, charged, or imposed by or for the use, or the availability of use, of
the water system. Whenever the tapping fee is imposed on an estimated
EDU figure, the amount of the final tapping fee will be adjusted in
accordance with actual use within a period of one year from the time of
initial service.
C. If a property owner desires to add or construct additional connections
or customers to an improved property, such additional connections or
customers shall not be connected to the water system until the property
owner:
(1) Obtains a permit for the connection/customer, as provided in the
water system's rules and regulations; and
§ 273-3 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 273-4
273:356
§ 273-5. Violations and penalties; remedies.
Any person (as defined above herein, whether owner, occupier, plumber
or other responsible person, firm or corporation) who shall make any
connection, or fail to connect, to the water system or in violation of the
terms of this article or other rules and regulations, or use or permit to exist
any plumbing actually or potentially connected with the system in violation
of any of the provisions of this article or rules and regulations of the water
system, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 and costs; and if such defective condition or connection
or connections or plumbing or any such failure to connect shall not be
corrected within 10 days after notice, served on the premises, the Township
through its agents may either:
(2) Pays the appropriate tapping fee in effect at the time of the
application for the permit.
A. Enter upon the premises and correct the defect or make the necessary
connection and charge the cost thereof against the owner or owners of
the property and collect the same by lien or suit;
B. Take legal action to compel the owner or owners or occupier or
occupiers to correct the defect or make any required connection;
C. Enter upon the premises and shut off water service and restore the
same only upon payment of the cost of shutting off and restoring the
service and of any work done; or
D. Pursue any or all remedies provided herein or by law cumulatively.
§ 273-4 WATER § 273-5
273:357
Chapter 278
WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Weapons in parks — See Ch. 195.
§ 278-1. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful and it is hereby prohibited for any person, persons, firm
or corporation, to store, sell, offer for or expose for sale, or have in their
possession with intent to sell, or with intent to use within the limits of the
Township of West Lampeter, any air rifle or air pistol (commonly known as a
"B-B gun"), slingshot, switchblade knife, the blade of which can be opened
or released by mechanical means, or any similar device or devices.
§ 278-2. Seizure.
The Township police or any peace officer is hereby authorized to seize,
remove and destroy any air rifle or air pistol (commonly known as a "BB
gun"), slingshot, switchblade knife, the blade of which can be opened
or released by mechanical means, or similar device, which is used or
discharged within the Township of West Lampeter or which shall be held
and possessed in violation of this chapter. Provided, however, that the sale,
use or possession of switchblade knives as herein defined shall not be
deemed to prohibit the use of knives falling within the above description
which are designed primarily for use in hunting or fishing when sold to and
carried and used by a duly licensed hunter or fisherman for such purposes.
§ 278-3. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to air guns or pistols, gaspowered
guns or pistols having rifled barrels and being commonly used for
target practice and the shooting of small game; provided, however, that
such articles shall not be used or discharged in violation of the hunting
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or less than 250 yards from any
building used or suitable for human occupancy.
§ 278-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense and upon conviction
thereof before any District Justice shall be subject to a fine or not more than
$100 or imprisonment in the Lancaster County Prison for not more than 30
days, or both.
Chapter 285
§ 273-5 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 278-4
278:358
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 85.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 120.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 143.
Noise — See Ch. 172.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 197.
Sewers and sewerage — See Ch. 211.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 230.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
240.
§ 278-4 WEAPONS § 278-4
278:359

ARTICLE I
Administration
§ 285-1. Applicability.
This new Zoning Ordinance shall apply throughout the Township of West
Lampeter. Any activity regulated by this chapter shall only occur in such a
way that conforms with the regulations of this chapter. See § 285-3A.
§ 285-2. Purposes and community development objectives.
This chapter is hereby adopted:
A. In accordance with the requirements and purposes (including Sections
604 and 605 or their successor section(s), which are included by
reference) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.
B. In accordance with goals and objectives of the West Lampeter Township
Comprehensive Plan, which are hereby included by reference.
C. To carry out the following major objectives:
(1) To make sure that development carefully relates to natural
features, and to avoid overly intense development of
environmentally sensitive land;
(2) To minimize disturbance of creek valleys and steep woodlands;
(3) To avoid overextending groundwater supplies and to encourage
groundwater recharge;
(4) To protect the quality of groundwater and surface waters;
(5) To promote traditional styles of development;
(6) To promote compatibility between land uses;
(7) To seek coordinated development and roads across municipal
borders;
(8) To provide for a variety of residential densities and meet legal
obligations to provide opportunities for all housing types;
(9) To promote development that retains the rural character of the
Township;
(10) To encourage rehabilitation and avoid demolition of historic
buildings;
(11) To direct higher density development to areas that are physically
suitable, accessible by major roads and that have the potential of
central water and sewage services;
§ 285-1 WEAPONS § 285-2
278:361
§ 285-3. Permits and certificates.
(12) To coordinate development with future central water and sewage
service areas;
(13) To direct industrial development to locations that will minimize
conflicts with homes;
(14) To direct commercial businesses to existing commercial areas,
while avoiding new strip commercial areas that would cause traffic
congestion and safety problems and conflicts with homes;
(15) To promote new business development in appropriate areas that
will provide additional tax revenue and job opportunities; and
(16) To promote public health, safety and general welfare.
A. Applicability.
(1) Any of the following activities or any other activity regulated by this
chapter shall only be carried out in conformity with this chapter:
(a) Erection, construction, movement, placement or extension of a
structure, building or sign;
(b) Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a structure
or area of land;
(c) Creation of a lot or alteration of lot lines; and/or
(d) Creation of a new use.
(2) Zoning permit. A zoning permit indicates that a zoning application
complies with this chapter to the best knowledge of the applicable
Township staff.
(a) A zoning permit is required to be issued prior to the start of
any of the following activities:
[1] Erection, construction, movement, placement, relocation
or expansion of a structure, building or sign;
[2] Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a
structure or area of land;
[3] Creation of a new use;
[4] Demolition of a building or partial demolition of the
exterior of a building;
[5] Site alterations or mineral extraction as defined by
§ 285-20;
[6] Excavation or grading in preparation for the construction
of a building or a change in use of a property; and/or
§ 285-2 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-3
278:362
[7] Construction or installation of any animal waste
impoundment, lake, pond, dam or other water retention
basin.
(b) The Township may, at its option, issue combined or separate
building permits and zoning permits and/or may utilize a single
or separate applications for the permits.
(c) See the provisions in § 285-29 regarding applications involving
wells or septic systems.
(3) Certificate of use and occupancy.
(a) It shall be unlawful to use and/or occupy any new principal
building or establish any new or replacement principal
nonresidential use until a certificate of use and occupancy for
such building or use has been issued by the Township staff.
(Note: A certificate of occupancy may also be required in
additional situations under the Construction Code, which is a
separate ordinance.)
(b) The Township staff may permit the zoning permit application to
serve as the application for the certificate of use and
occupancy.
(c) The certificate of occupancy shall only be issued by the Zoning
Officer if the Zoning Officer determines that the activity
complies with this chapter, to the best knowledge of the Zoning
Officer. The Township may also withhold issuance of the
certificate until there is compliance with other Township
ordinances.
(d) The applicant shall keep a copy of the certificate of occupancy
available for inspection.
(e) Upon the request of an applicant, the Zoning Officer may issue
a temporary certificate of occupancy. Such temporary
certificate may permit an activity to occur in all or part of a
structure before the entire work covered by the permit has
been completed.
[1] However, such temporary certificate shall only be issued if
the applicant proves to the Zoning Officer that the activity
or occupancy can occur safely without endangering public
health or safety.
[2] The temporary certificate shall establish in writing a
maximum time period under which it is valid. A six-month
maximum time period shall apply if not otherwise
specified. The Zoning Officer may provide written time
extensions for good cause.
§ 285-3 WEAPONS § 285-3
278:363
[3] Failure to receive a permanent certificate of use and
occupancy within such time period shall be a violation of
this chapter.
[4] The temporary certificate may be conditioned upon
compliance with certain specific requirements within
certain time periods.
[5] See also § 285-3G.
B. Repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance to
existing structures that do not involve an expansion or change of a use
or structure shall not by itself be regulated by this chapter. Examples of
such work include replacement of a roof or porch that does not involve
enclosure of space. (However, a construction permit under any
Township building code may be needed for such work.)
C. Types of uses.
(1) Permitted by right uses. The Zoning Officer shall issue a permit
under this chapter in response to an application for a use that is
permitted by right if it meets all of the requirements of this chapter.
(2) Special exception use or application requiring a variance. A permit
under this chapter for a use requiring a special exception or
variance shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only in response to a
written approval by the Zoning Hearing Board following a hearing.
(3) Conditional use. A use requiring zoning approval by the Board of
Supervisors under § 285-17.
D. Applications.
(1) Submittal. All applications for a zoning permit or a decision by the
Zoning Hearing Board shall be made in writing on a form provided
by the Township. Such completed application, with required fees,
shall be submitted to a designated Township staff-person.
(2) Site plan. The applicant shall submit a minimum of two copies of a
site plan with the application if the application involves a new
building, expansion of a building or addition of three or more
parking spaces. The site plan shall be drawn to scale and show the
following:
(a) Locations, dimensions and uses of existing and proposed
structures, parking and loading areas, and locations of existing
and proposed uses of areas of land, with existing features
clearly distinguished from proposed features;
(b) Notes showing the dimensions of all buildings from lot lines
and street rights-of-way;
§ 285-3 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-3
278:364
(c) Locations of any watercourses and any one-hundred-year
floodplain;
(d) Proposed lot areas, lot widths and other applicable
dimensional requirements;
(e) Locations and widths of existing and proposed sidewalks;
(f) A North arrow and scale; and
(g) Well and primary and alternate septic system locations, if
applicable. See § 285-29.
(3) Additional information. Any application under this chapter shall
include the following information, unless the Zoning Officer
determines such information is unnecessary to determine
compliance with this chapter:
(a) The address of the lot;
(b) Name and address of the applicant, and of the owner of the
property if different from the applicant;
(c) If the applicant is not the landowner of record, information
shall be presented with the application, such as an agreement
of sale or lease, to demonstrate that the applicant has the legal
right to make the application;
(d) A current deed for the property;
(e) A description of the existing and proposed use(s) of the
property, with the proposed use described in sufficient detail
for the Zoning Officer to determine compliance with this
chapter;
(f) All other applicable information listed on the official Township
application form;
(g) If the applicant is incorporated, the legal names and day
telephone numbers of officers of the organization/corporation;
(h) Such additional information that the Zoning Officer may
determine is reasonably necessary to determine compliance
with this chapter; and
(i) A listing of all conditional uses, special exception approvals
and/or variances which the applicant is requesting and/or a
description with a date of any such approvals that were
previously granted for this property that relate to this
application.
(4) Submittals to the Board. In addition to the information listed in
Subsection D(3) above, an application requiring a site plan and
action by the Zoning Hearing Board shall also include the following
§ 285-3 WEAPONS § 285-3
278:365
information, unless the Zoning Officer determines that such
information is unnecessary to determine compliance with this
chapter:
(a) The present zoning district and major applicable lot
requirements.
(b) For a nonresidential use:
[1] A description of the proposed nonresidential operations
and storage in sufficient detail to indicate potential
nuisances and hazards regarding noise, large truck traffic,
glare, odors, dust, fire or toxic or explosive hazards or
other significant public health and safety hazards.
[2] A list of the maximum hours of operation.
(c) The existing directions of stormwater flow (and any proposed
revisions), and any proposed methods of stormwater
management.
(d) A listing of any sections of this chapter being appealed, with
the reasons for any appeal.
(e) Approximate locations of principal buildings and locations of
streets and alleys and zoning district boundaries within 100
feet of the boundaries of the tract and description of uses of
adjoining properties (such as "drugstore" or "single-family
detached dwelling").
(f) Heights, locations, methods of illumination and intensity of
exterior lighting and sign lighting.
(g) Name and address of person who prepared the site plan.
(h) Signed acknowledgement of the application by the applicant.
(i) Such additional information required under applicable sections
of this chapter.
(5) Ownership. No person other than a landowner or his/her
specifically authorized agent or a tenant or lessee with written
permission of the landowner shall submit a zoning application (see
definition of "landowner" in Article II).
E. Issuance of permits.
(1) At least one copy of each permit application and any other zoning
approval shall be retained in Township files.
(2) PennDOT permit. Where necessary for access onto a state road, a
Township zoning or building permit shall be automatically
conditioned upon issuance of a PennDOT highway occupancy
permit.
§ 285-3 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-3
278:366
F. Revocation of permits; appeal of permit or approval.
(1) Revocation. The Zoning Officer shall revoke, withhold or suspend a
permit or approval issued under the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance in case of one or more of the following:
(a) Any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the
application or on the plans on which the permit or approval
was based. (Note: The Pennsylvania Criminal Code provides for
penalties for providing false information to a municipal
employee in the carrying out of his/her duties.)
(b) Upon violation of any condition lawfully imposed by the Zoning
Hearing Board upon a special exception use or variance.
(c) Any work being accomplished or use of land or structures in
such a way that does not comply with this chapter or an
approved site plan or approved permit application.
(d) For any other just cause set forth in this chapter.
(2) Appeals. A party with legitimate standing, or as otherwise provided
by state law, may appeal decisions under this chapter within the
provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code. Any such
appeal shall occur within the time period established in the State
Municipalities Planning Code. (As of the adoption date of this
chapter, such provisions were in Sections 914.1 and 1002.A.)
G. Zoning permit for temporary uses and structures.
(1) A zoning permit for a temporary use or structure may be issued by
the Zoning Officer for any of the following.
(a) A temporary permit may be issued for customary, routine and
accessory short-term special events, provided that:
[1] Only a well-established nonprofit organization or a
permitted place of worship proposing a temporary use to
clearly primarily serve a charitable, public service or
religious purpose shall be eligible to receive approval for
commercial-type activities in a district where a
commercial use would not otherwise be permitted;
[2] Such total events shall be limited to a maximum of 45 days
for Christmas tree sales and 10 total days per calendar
year for all other activities; and
[3] The applicant shall prove to the Zoning Officer that
sufficient parking and traffic control will be available for
the special event without obstructing parking that is
required to serve other uses on the site.
§ 285-3 WEAPONS § 285-3
278:367
(b) A temporary permit may be issued for temporary storage and
office trailers that are necessary to serve on-site construction
while such construction is actively underway under a valid
Township permit.
(2) Time period. The Zoning Officer shall state a reasonable maximum
time period on the temporary permit. If no time limit is stated, then
a seven-day maximum period shall apply. A temporary permit may
be renewed for just cause.
(3) Temporary retail sales. Except as provided for in Subsection
G(1)(a)[1] above, and except for agricultural sales allowed by
§ 285-26, a lot shall only be used for temporary retail sales if all of
the following conditions are met:
(a) The property shall be located within a zoning district that
allows retail sales.
(b) The operator shall have received any business permits
required by the Township.
(c) No off-street parking spaces shall be obstructed that are
required to serve permanent uses on the lot.
(d) Any signs visible from a public street shall comply with this
chapter.
(e) If food or beverages are sold that are not prepackaged, the
applicant shall prove compliance with state health regulations,
including having on-site facilities for workers to wash their
hands. Proper bathroom facilities shall also be available for
workers.
(f) Any structure shall meet applicable minimum setbacks.
(g) A permit under this chapter shall be required from the
Township, which shall be displayed while the activity is open
for business.
(h) The application may be rejected if the Zoning Officer has
reason to believe that the activity would obstruct safe sight
distances.
(i) Applicable state highway occupancy permit requirements shall
be met.
H. Compliance with Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance. If an application under this chapter would also be regulated
by the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(SALDO), then any permit or approval under this Zoning Ordinance
shall automatically be conditioned upon compliance with the SALDO.106
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 285-3 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-3
278:368
§ 285-4. General procedure for permits.
§ 285-5. Interpretation and uses not listed.
See the definitions of "land development" and "subdivision" in the
SALDO.
(1) For example, if an applicant applies for a single-family detached
dwelling on a proposed new lot, the construction permit for such
dwelling shall not be valid until after the lot is granted final
subdivision approval and the lot is officially recorded by the County
Recorder of Deeds.
A. After receiving a proper application, the Zoning Officer shall either: 1)
issue the applicable permit(s) or 2) deny the application(s) as
submitted, indicating one or more reasons.
B. After the permit under this chapter has been issued, the applicant may
undertake the action specified by the permit, in compliance with other
Township ordinances. However, it is recommended that applicants wait
30 days to begin construction if there is a possibility of an appeal by
another party to have the permit revoked. Any commencement of
construction or a use within this thirty-day appeal period shall be at the
risk of the applicant.
A. Minimum requirements. Where more than one provision of this chapter
controls a particular matter, the provision that is more restrictive upon
uses and structures shall apply. The provisions of this chapter are in
addition to any other applicable Township ordinance.
B. Uses not specifically regulated. If a use clearly is not listed as permitted
by right, as a conditional use, or as a special exception use by this
chapter within any zoning district, the use is prohibited, except that the
Zoning Hearing Board may permit such use as a special exception use if
the applicant specifically proves to the clear satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board that all of the following conditions would be met:
(1) The proposed use would be no more intensive with respect to
external impacts and nuisances than uses that are permitted in the
district;
(2) The proposed use would be closely similar in impacts and character
to uses permitted in that district, considering the standards in
§ 285-67F;
(3) The use would meet the standards that would apply under § 285-17
to a conditional use; and
(4) The use is not specifically prohibited in that district.
(5) The proposed use is a single discreet use and not a combination of
uses allowed individually within this chapter.
§ 285-3 WEAPONS § 285-5
278:369
§ 285-6. Enforcement, violations and penalties.
All of the enforcement, violations and penalty provisions of the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, are hereby incorporated into
this chapter by reference. (Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter,
these provisions were primarily in Sections 616.1, 617 and 617.2 of such
Act.)
C. Interpretation of ordinance text and boundaries.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall literally apply the wording of this chapter
and the location of all district boundaries to particular applications.
In any case, the Zoning Officer may also request an advisory
opinion from the Township Solicitor to aid in the Zoning Officer's
determination.
(2) If an applicant disagrees with the Zoning Officer's determination
and believes that the ordinance should be interpreted in the
applicant's favor, the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board. See § 285-11.
(3) See § 285-24.
D. Undefined terms/interpretation of definitions. See § 285-19.
E. In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this
chapter shall be held to be invalid, illegal or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity, illegality or
unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair the remaining provisions,
sections, sentences, clauses or parts of this chapter, it being the intent
of the Board of Supervisors that the remainder of the chapter shall be
and shall remain in full force and effect. [Added 3-14-2016 by Ord.
No. 239]
A. Violations. Any person who shall commit or who shall permit any of the
following actions violates this chapter:
(1) Failure to secure a zoning permit prior to any of the following: a
change in use of land or structure; or the erection, construction or
alteration of any structure or portion thereof; or the placement of a
sign; or a change in the area of a use or the land coverage or
setback of a use; or the excavation or grading of land to prepare for
the erection, construction or alteration of any structure or portion
thereof;
(2) Placement of false statements on or omitting relevant information
from an application for a zoning permit;
(3) Undertaking any action in a manner which does not comply with a
zoning permit;
§ 285-5 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-6
278:370
(4) Violation of any condition imposed by a decision of the Zoning
Hearing Board in granting a variance or special exception or other
approval;
(5) Violation of any condition imposed by a decision of the Board of
Supervisors in granting a conditional use or other approval; or
(6) Violation of any condition imposed by a decision of a court of
competent jurisdiction where such court has granted zoning
approval with conditions.
B. Enforcement notice. If the Township has reason to believe that a
violation of a provision of this Zoning Ordinance has occurred, the
Zoning Officer or his/her designee shall initiate enforcement
proceedings by sending an enforcement notice as provided in Section
616.1 of the State Municipalities Planning Code. Prior to sending an
official enforcement notice, the Zoning Officer may at his/her option
informally request compliance.
C. Time limits. An official enforcement notice shall state the deadline to
complete bringing the property into compliance with this chapter, and
shall state that the applicant has 30 days from the receipt of the notice
to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board.
D. Causes of action; enforcement remedies. The causes of action and
enforcement remedies provisions of the State Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended, are hereby incorporated by reference. (Note: As of
the adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were in Section 617 of
such Law.)
(1) Enforcement action. If compliance with this chapter is not achieved
following sending of an enforcement notice, the Zoning Officer
shall institute a civil enforcement proceeding before a District
Justice, as provided under state law.
(2) Violations and penalties. Any person who has violated or permitted
the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all
court costs, including the reasonable attorney's fees incurred by
the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or
be imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the determination
of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless a District Justice determining that there has been a violation
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person
violating this chapter to have believed that there was no such
violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only
one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice, and thereafter
§ 285-6 WEAPONS § 285-6
278:371
§ 285-7. Fees.
A Township fee schedule for permits and applications may be established
and amended by written resolution of the Board of Supervisors. No
application or appeal shall be considered filed until all fees are paid.
§ 285-8. Amendments to this chapter.
Within the requirements of the State Municipalities Planning Code, the
Board of Supervisors may amend, or repeal any or all portions of this
chapter on its own motion or after agreeing to hear a written request of any
person, entity, landowner or the Planning Commission.
§ 285-9. Curative amendments.
The applicable provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code shall
apply. (Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, these provisions were
primarily in Sections 609.1, 609.2 and 916.1 of such Act.)
§ 285-10. Zoning Officer.
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney's fees
collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the
Township for the general use of the Township.
(3) Remedies. In case any building, structure, sign or landscaping is
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted
or maintained; or any building, structure, sign or land is used; or
any hedge, shrub, tree or other growth is maintained in violation of
this chapter or of any of the regulations made pursuant thereto or
any of the permits or certificates of use and occupancy issued
under this chapter or any conditions imposed upon the grant of a
special exception or variance by the Zoning Hearing Board or upon
the grant of a conditional use, then, in addition to any other
remedies provided by law, any appropriate action or proceeding
may be instituted or taken to prevent or restrain such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance or use or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in and about such premises.
E. Enforcement evidence. In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the
Zoning Hearing Board, the Township shall have the responsibility of
presenting its evidence first.
A. Appointment. The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors may designate other Township
staff-persons to serve as Assistant Zoning Officer(s). Assistant Zoning
Officers may serve with the same authority and duties as the Zoning
Officer. The Zoning Officer shall not hold any elective office within the
Township but may hold other appointed offices.
§ 285-6 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-10
278:372
§ 285-11. Zoning Hearing Board actions and variances.
B. Duties and powers. The Zoning Officer's duties and powers shall
include the following:
(1) Administer the Zoning Ordinance in accordance with its literal
terms, including to receive and examine all applications required
under the terms of this chapter, and issue or refuse permits within
the provisions of this chapter;
(2) Conduct inspections to determine compliance and receive
complaints of violation of this chapter;
(3) Keep records of applications, permits, certificates, written
decisions and variances granted by the Zoning Hearing Board and
of enforcement orders, with all such records being the property of
the Township and being available for public inspection;
(4) Review proposed subdivisions and land developments for
compliance with this chapter;
(5) Take enforcement actions as provided by the State Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended;
(6) Maintain available records concerning nonconformities, provided
that the Township is not required to document every
nonconformity; and
(7) Serve such other functions as are provided in this chapter.
A. Membership of Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of three
residents of the Township appointed by the Board of Supervisors. The
existing terms of office shall continue, with terms of office being three
years, and with the terms being so fixed that the term of office of one
member shall expire each year. Members of the Board shall hold no
other office in the Township.
(1) Alternate members. The Board of Supervisors may appoint
alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board within the
applicable provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code.
[Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were
in Section 903(b) of such Act.]
(2) Expenditures. Within the maximum amount of funds appropriated
by the Board of Supervisors, the Zoning Hearing Board may employ
or contract for secretaries, legal counsel, and other technical and
clerical services. Members and alternate members may receive
compensation, within limits established by the Board of
Supervisors, for the performance of their duties.
B. Vacancies. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired
portion of a term.
§ 285-10 WEAPONS § 285-11
278:373
C. Organization. The applicable provisions of the State Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended shall apply. (As of the adoption date of this
chapter, these provisions were in Sections 906(a), (b) and (c) of such
Act.)
D. Zoning Hearing Board jurisdiction and functions. The Zoning Hearing
Board shall be responsible for the following:
(1) Appeal of a decision by the Zoning Officer.
(a) The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by
an affected person, entity or the Board of Supervisors that the
Zoning Officer has improperly acted under the requirements
and procedures of this chapter.
(b) See time limitations for appeals in Subsection F.
(2) Challenge to the validity of the Zoning Ordinance or Map. The
applicable provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, shall apply. (Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter,
these provisions were primarily in Sections 909.1 and 916 of such
Act.)
(3) Variance.
(a) The Board shall hear requests for variances filed with the
Township staff in writing.
(b) Standards. The Board may grant a variance only within the
limitations of state law.
[Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, the
Municipalities Planning Code provided that all of the following
findings must be made where relevant:
[1] There are unique physical circumstances or conditions
(including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot
size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other
physical conditions peculiar to the particular property)
and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions
generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located;
[2] Because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed
in strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and a variance is, therefore, necessary to
enable the reasonable use of the property;
[3] Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant;
§ 285-11 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-11
278:374
[4] The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located, nor substantially or permanently
impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare; and
[5] The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the
least modification possible of the regulation in issue.]
(c) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter.
(4) Special exception.
(a) The Board shall hear and decide requests for all special
exceptions filed with the Township staff in writing. The Board
shall only permit a special exception that is authorized by this
chapter. See § 285-16.
(b) Conditions. In granting a special exception, the Zoning
Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in the chapter, as it
may deem necessary to implement the purposes and intent of
this chapter.
(5) Persons with disabilities. After the Zoning Officer receives a
complete written application, the Zoning Hearing Board shall grant
a special exception allowing modifications to specific requirements
of this chapter that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Hearing Board are required under applicable federal law to
provide a reasonable accommodation to serve persons who the
applicant proves have "disabilities," as defined in and protected by
such laws.
(a) Such reasonable accommodations shall be requested in
accordance with the U.S. Fair Housing Amendments Act and/or
the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended.
(b) If the applicant is requesting a reasonable accommodation
under the United States Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988
or the Americans with Disabilities Act, the applicant shall
identify the disability which is protected by such statutes, the
extent of the modification of the provisions of this chapter
necessary for a reasonable accommodation, and the manner by
which the reasonable accommodation requested may be
removed when such person(s) with a protected disability no
longer will be present on the property.
§ 285-11 WEAPONS § 285-11
278:375
§ 285-12. Zoning Hearing Board hearings and decisions.
The following requirements shall apply to procedures, hearings and
decisions of the Zoning Hearing Board.
(c) Any modification approved under this section may be limited to
the time period during which the persons with disabilities
occupy or utilize the premises.
(6) The Zoning Hearing Board shall also hear any other matters as set
forth in the State Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. (Note:
As of the adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were
primarily within Section 909.1 of such law.)
E. Time limits for appeals. The applicable provisions of the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, shall apply. (Note: As of the
adoption date of this chapter, these provisions were in Section 914.1 of
such Act.)
F. Stay of proceedings. The stay of proceedings provisions of the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, shall apply. (Note: As of the
adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were in Section 915.1 of
such Act.)
G. Time limits on permits and approvals. The following time limits shall
apply unless a different time limit is provided by the Zoning Hearing
Board in a decision granting approval.
(1) After a variance is approved or other zoning approval (such as
special exception or conditional use approval) is officially
authorized, then any applicable zoning and building permits shall
be secured by the applicant within 12 months after the date of such
approval or authorization. The work authorized by such permits
shall then be completed within 12 months after the issuance of the
permits.
(2) In response to an applicant stating good cause in writing, the
Zoning Officer may extend in writing the time limit in which to
obtain a permit and/or for the completion of work to a maximum of
24 months each. [Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 202]
(3) If an applicant fails to obtain the necessary permits or begin
construction within the above time periods, or allows interruptions
in substantial construction of longer than 12 months, the Zoning
Officer shall conclusively presume that the applicant has waived,
withdrawn or abandoned approvals, variances and permits under
this chapter and all such approvals, variances and permits shall be
deemed automatically rescinded by the Township.
H. Multiple applications. No more than one application for the same
property shall be pending before the Zoning Hearing Board for special
exception approval at any time.
§ 285-11 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-12
278:376
A. Notice of hearings. Notice of all hearings of the Board shall be given as
follows:
(1) Ad. Public notice shall be published, as defined by Section 107 of
the State Municipalities Planning Code. The notice shall state the
time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered.
(2) Posting. Notice of such hearing shall be conspicuously posted on
the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing. The
Township staff shall post the property. It is the responsibility of the
applicant to make sure that such notice remains posted until the
hearing.
(3) Persons given notice. The Township shall provide written notice to
the applicant of the time and place of the hearing. The Township
should also provide notice to the Chairperson of the Board of
Supervisors. In addition, the Township shall endeavor to provide
notice to the last known principal owner of record of each property
that is immediately adjacent to or immediately across a street from
the subject property; however, failure to provide such notice shall
not be grounds for an appeal. Also, such notice shall be given to any
other person or group (including civic or community organizations)
who has made a written timely request for such notice. Any such
notices should be mailed or delivered to the last known address.
B. Initiation of hearings. A hearing required under this chapter shall be
initiated within 60 days of the date of an applicant's request for a
hearing, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of
time.
C. Decision/findings.
(1) The Board shall render a written decision on each application
within 45 days after the last hearing on that application before the
Board, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of
time.
(2) Where the application is contested or denied, the decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon,
together with the reasons for such conclusions.
(3) References shall be provided to the most pertinent section(s) of this
chapter and/or the State Municipalities Planning Code.
D. Notice of decision. A copy of the final decision shall be delivered or
mailed to the applicant or his/her representative or their last known
address not later than the time limit established by the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. [Note: As of the adoption
date of this chapter, such provisions were within Sections 908(9) and
908(10) of such Act, including provisions regarding notice to other
parties.]
§ 285-12 WEAPONS § 285-12
278:377
§ 285-13. Appeals to court.
The provisions for appeals to court that are stated in the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, shall apply. (Note: As of the
adoption date of this chapter, these provisions were in Sections 1001-A,
1002-A, 1003-A, 1004-A, 1005-A and 1006-A of such Act.)
§ 285-14. Limited public utility exemptions.
See the provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were within
Section 619 of such Act.)
§ 285-15. Limited Township and municipal authority exemption.
The minimum lot area, minimum lot width and minimum street frontage
requirements of this chapter shall not apply to uses or structures owned by
West Lampeter Township or by a municipal authority created solely by West
Lampeter Township for uses and structures that are intended for a public
utility, stormwater, public recreation or public health and safety purpose.
§ 285-16. Special exception use process.
E. See also Section 908 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
A. Purpose. The special exception process is designed to allow careful
review of uses that have some potential of conflicts with adjacent uses
or areas.
B. Special exception procedure.
(1) A site plan shall be submitted which shall contain the information
required in § 285-3D. If a fully engineered subdivision or land
development plan will be required, it may be submitted separately,
such as after a special exception is approved.
(2) The Zoning Officer should provide a review to the Zoning Hearing
Board regarding the compliance of the application with this
chapter.
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board shall follow the procedures provided in
§ 285-12.
(4) The Township staff should offer a special exception application to
the Township Planning Commission for any advisory review that
the Commission may wish to provide. However, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall meet the time limits of state law for a decision,
regardless of whether the Township Planning Commission has
provided comments.
(5) Time limits. See Section 908 of the State Municipalities Planning
Code.
§ 285-12 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-16
278:378
§ 285-17. Conditional use process.
C. Consideration of special exception applications. When special
exceptions are allowed by this chapter, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
hear and decide requests for such special exceptions in accordance
with standards established by this chapter, including the following:
(1) Compliance with this chapter. The applicant shall establish by
credible evidence that the application complies with all applicable
requirements of this chapter. The applicant shall provide the Board
with sufficient plans, studies or other data to demonstrate this
compliance.
(2) Compliance with other laws. The approval may be conditioned
upon proof of compliance with other specific applicable Township,
state and federal laws, regulations and permits. Required permits
or other proof of compliance may be required to be presented to
the Township prior to the issuance of any zoning permit, building
permit, certification of occupancy and/or recording of an approved
plan.
(3) Traffic. The applicant shall establish that the traffic from the
proposed use will be accommodated in a safe and efficient manner
that will minimize hazards and congestion, after considering any
improvements proposed to be made by the applicant as a condition
on approval.
(4) Site planning. The application shall include proper site layout,
internal circulation, parking, buffering, and all other elements of
proper design as specified in this chapter.
(5) Neighborhood. The proposed use shall not substantially harm any
surrounding residential neighborhood, after considering any
proposed conditions upon approval.
(6) Safety. The proposed use shall not create a significant hazard to the
public health and safety, such as fire, toxic or explosive hazards.
(7) Natural features and agriculture. The proposed use shall be
suitable for the site, considering the impacts upon steep slopes,
mature woodland, wetlands, floodplains, springs and other
important natural features. The proposed use shall be designed to
minimize conflicts with agricultural activities.
D. Conditions. In granting a special exception, the Board may require such
reasonable conditions and safeguards (in addition to those expressed in
this chapter) as it determines are necessary to implement the purposes
of this chapter. Conditions imposed by the Zoning Hearing Board shall
automatically become conditions of the building permit issued pursuant
thereto, and any failure to comply with said conditions shall be a
violation of this chapter.
§ 285-16 WEAPONS § 285-17
278:379
§ 285-18. Liability.
A. Purpose. The conditional use approval process is designed to allow the
Board of Supervisors to review and approve certain uses that could
have significant impacts upon the community and the environment.
B. Procedure. The Board of Supervisors shall consider the conditional use
application and render its decision in accordance with the requirements
of the State Municipalities Planning Code.
(1) Submittal. A site plan shall be submitted, which shall contain the
information listed in § 285-3D. Detailed site engineering (such as
stormwater calculations and profiles) are not required at the
conditional use stage. If a fully engineered subdivision or land
development plan will be required, it may be submitted separately,
such as after a conditional use is approved. Or, an applicant may
voluntarily choose to submit a subdivision or land development
plan for review at the same time as a conditional use application.
(2) Reviews.
(a) The Zoning Officer should provide a review to the Board
regarding the compliance of the application with this chapter.
(b) The Township staff shall submit a conditional use application to
the Planning Commission for any review that the Commission
may wish to provide. However, the Board of Supervisors shall
meet the time limits for a decision, regardless of whether the
Planning Commission has provided comments.
(3) The only uses that shall be approved as conditional uses shall be
those listed as conditional uses in Article III.
(4) Time limit. See Section 913.2 of the State Municipalities Planning
Code.
C. Consideration of conditional use application. The Board of Supervisors
shall determine whether the proposed conditional use would meet the
applicable requirements of this chapter. The same standards shall apply
to a conditional use as are listed in § 285-16C for a special exception
use.
D. Conditions. In approving conditional use applications, the Board of
Supervisors may attach conditions it considers necessary to protect the
public welfare and meet the standards of this chapter. These conditions
shall be enforceable by the Zoning Officer and failure to comply with
such conditions shall constitute a violation of this chapter and be
subject to the penalties described in this chapter.
A. Any review of activity within the floodplain, site plan review, subdivision
or land development approval, erosion control review, wetland
delineation review, stormwater runoff review, review of activity on
§ 285-17 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-18
278:380
steep slopes, or any other review, approval or permit under this chapter
by an officer, employee, board, commission, solicitor, consultant or
agency of the Township shall not constitute a representation, guarantee
or warranty of any kind by the Township, or its employees, officials,
boards, solicitor(s), consultants or agencies of the practicality or safety
of any structure, use or subdivision, and shall create no liability upon
nor a cause of action against such entity or person for any damage that
may result pursuant thereto.
B. If the Zoning Officer mistakenly issues a permit under this chapter, the
Township shall not be liable for any later lawful withdrawal of such
permit.
§ 285-18 WEAPONS § 285-18
278:381

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 285-19. General interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
§ 285-20. Terms defined.
When used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the following meanings, unless expressly stated otherwise or unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABUT or ABUTTING — Areas of contiguous lots that share a common lot
line, except not including lots entirely separated by a street, public alley
open to traffic, or a perennial waterway. See definition of "adjacent."
A. Words in the present tense shall include the future tense.
B. The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building
include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or
occupied."
C. "Should" means that it is strongly encouraged but is not mandatory.
"Shall" is always mandatory.
D. "Sale" shall also include rental.
E. Unless stated otherwise, the singular shall also regulate the plural, and
the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice-versa.
F. If a word or term is not defined by this chapter, but is defined in the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (SALDO),107 then the
SALDO definition shall apply. If a word or term is not defined in this
chapter nor the SALDO, then the word or term shall have its plain and
ordinary meaning within the context of the section. In such case, in case
of a dispute, a standard reference dictionary shall be consulted.
G. The words "such as," "includes," "including" and "specifically" shall
provide examples. These examples shall not, by themselves, limit a
provision to the examples specifically mentioned if other examples
would otherwise comply with the provision.
H. The word "person" includes a firm, company, corporation, partnership,
trust, organization or association as well as an individual.
I. Where a term is defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code (MPC), such MPC definition shall apply.
107. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 285-19 WEAPONS § 285-20
278:383
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — One dwelling unit that is created within part
of a single-family detached dwelling or above a vehicle garage on a
residential lot.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (INCLUDES ACCESSORY BUILDING) — A
structure serving a purpose customarily incidental to and subordinate to
the use of the principal use and located on the same lot as the principal
use. Accessory structures include but are not limited to a household garage,
household storage shed, detached carport, a household swimming pool, or
an accessory storage building to a business use. An accessory building is
any accessory structure that meets the definition of a building. A portion of
a principal building used for an accessory use shall not be considered an
accessory building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal
use.
ADAPTIVE REUSE — The rehabilitation and conversion of existing
structures for the purpose of a new or expanded use.[Added 9-9-2013 by
Ord. No. 232]
ADJACENT — Two or more lots that share a common lot line or that are
separated only by a street or waterway from each other.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — A use that has over 10% of the total floor area
occupied by items for sale or rent that are books, films, magazines,
videotapes, coin- or token-operated films or videotapes, paraphernalia,
novelties or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by
a clear emphasis on matter depicting, displaying, describing or relating
to uncovered male or female genitals or specified sexual activities. This
shall include but not be limited to materials that would be illegal to sell to
persons under age 18 under state law. If such items are within a separate
room, then the ten-percent standard shall apply to the floor area of such
room.
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY — A use including live
entertainment involving persons (which may include, but not be limited
to, waiters, waitresses, dancers, clerks, bartenders, contractors or others)
displaying uncovered male or female genitals or nude or almost nude female
breasts or engaging in simulated or actual specified sexual activities to
three or more persons and which is related to monetary compensation paid
to the person or entity operating the use or to persons involved in such
activity.
ADULT MOVIE THEATER — A use involving the on-site presentation to
three or more persons at one time of moving images distinguished by an
emphasis on depiction of specified sexual activities and that is related to
monetary compensation paid by the persons viewing such matter.
ADULT USE — Adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult live
entertainment facility/use or massage parlor. These terms shall be distinct
types of uses and shall not be allowed as part of any other use.
§ 285-20 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-20
278:384
AFTER-HOURS CLUB — A use that permits the consumption of alcoholic
beverages by five or more unrelated persons between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. and that involves some form of monetary compensation paid
by such persons for the alcohol or for the use of the premises.
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT — The A District.
AIRPORT — An area and related support facilities used for the landing and
takeoff of motorized aircraft that carry people. A "public airport" shall be
an airport that does not meet the definition of a "private airport." A private
airport shall be limited to a maximum of 15 total landings and takeoffs
in any seven-day period and shall not be available for use by the general
public.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — A use involving 15 or more token- or coinoperated
entertainment machines, and where the machines are the
principal use of the property. This term shall not include an adult use.
ANIMAL CEMETERY — A place used for the burial of the remains of five or
more noncremated animals, other than customary burial of farm animals as
accessory to a livestock use.
ANTENNA — An exterior device or apparatus designed for cellular, digital,
telephone, radio, pager, commercial mobile radio, television, microwave
or any other wireless communications through sending and/or receiving
of electromagnetic waves, including, without limitation, omnidirectional or
whip antennas and directional or panel antennas. Unless otherwise stated,
this term shall not include standard antenna.
ANTENNA HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the base of the antenna
support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure, including
any antennas attached thereto or forming a part thereof. If the support
structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and
lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height.
ANTENNA, STANDARD — A device, partially or wholly exterior to a
building, that is used for receiving television or radio signals for use on site,
or for transmitting amateur "ham" radio or citizens band radio signals. See
also "commercial communications antenna." See § 285-43.
APARTMENT — See "dwelling types."
APPLICANT — The definition in the State Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, shall apply.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — Coordinated and centrally managed rental
housing including self-contained units designed to provide a supportive
environment and to accommodate a relatively independent lifestyle. Such a
development may contain a limited number of supportive services, such as
meals, transportation, housekeeping, linen and organized social activities
for residents and their invited guests. Such a use shall primarily serve
persons 55 and older, persons with physical handicaps and/or the
developmentally disabled. Assisted living facilities shall be licensed as
personal care centers by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 285-20 WEAPONS § 285-20
278:385
AUTO, BOAT AND/OR MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME SALES — This
use is any area, other than a street, used for the outdoor or indoor display,
sale or rental of two or more of the following in operable condition: motor
vehicles, recreation vehicles, boat trailers, farm machinery, motorcycles,
trucks, utility trailers, construction vehicles, boats, or transportable mobile/
manufactured homes in a livable condition. This use may include an auto
repair garage as an accessory use, provided that all requirements of such
use are complied with. This use shall not include a mobile/manufactured
home park (unless the requirements for that use are also met) or a junkyard.
See requirements in § 285-42.
AUTO REPAIR GARAGE — An area where repairs, improvements and
installation of parts and accessories for motor vehicles and/or boats are
conducted that involves work that is more intense in character than work
permitted under the definition of "auto service station." An auto repair
garage shall include, but not be limited to, a use that involves any of
the following work: major mechanical or body work, straightening of body
parts, painting, welding or rebuilding of transmissions. Any use permitted
as part of an auto service station is also permitted as part of an auto repair
garage. This use shall not include activity meeting the definition of a "truck
stop." See requirements in § 285-42.
AUTO SERVICE STATION — An area where gasoline is dispensed into motor
vehicles, and where no repairs are conducted, except work that may be
conducted that is closely similar in character to the following: sale and
installation of oil, lubricants, batteries and belts and similar accessories
and safety and emission inspections, and sale of prepackaged propane. This
use may include a convenience store, provided that all of the requirements
for such use are also met. A business that maintains an accessory use of
providing motor fuel only for use by vehicles operated by that business shall
not, by itself, be considered to be an auto service station. See storage limits
and other requirements in § 285-42.
BASEMENT — An enclosed level of a building that is not a story and that is
partly or completely underground.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN — A dwelling and/or its accessory structure
which includes the rental of overnight sleeping accommodations and
bathroom access for temporary overnight guests, and that meets the
maximum number of overnight guests specified in § 285-42 for this use, and
which does not provide any cooking facilities for actual use by guests, and
which only provides meals to overnight guests, employees and residents of
the dwelling. Overnight stays shall be restricted to transient visitors to the
area, employees and their family. See requirements in § 285-42.
BETTING USE — A place used for lawful gambling activities, including
but not limited to off-track pari-mutuel betting and any use of electronic
gambling devices. This term shall not regulate state lottery sales or lawful
small games of chance.
BILLBOARD — A type of off-premises sign. See Article VII.
§ 285-20 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-20
278:386
BOARDINGHOUSE (INCLUDES "ROOMING HOUSE") — A residential use
in which: a) room(s) that do not meet the definition of a lawful dwelling
unit are rented for habitation; or b) a dwelling unit includes greater than
the permitted maximum number of unrelated persons. A boardinghouse
shall not include a use that meets the definition of a hotel, dormitory,
motel, life care center, personal care center, bed-and-breakfast inn, group
home or nursing home. A college fraternity or sorority house used as a
residence shall be considered a type of boardinghouse. A boardinghouse
may either involve or not involve the providing of meals to residents, but
shall not include a restaurant open to the public unless the use also meets
the requirements for a restaurant. A boardinghouse shall primarily serve
persons residing on site for five or more consecutive days.
BUFFER YARD — A strip of land that: a) separates one use from another use
or feature; and b) is not occupied by any building, parking, outdoor storage
or any use other than open space or approved pedestrian pathways. A buffer
yard may be a part of the minimum setback distance, but land within an
existing or future street right-of-way shall not be used to meet a buffer yard
requirement. See § 285-65.
BUILDING — Any structure having a permanent roof and walls and that
is intended for the shelter, work area, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals, vehicles, equipment or materials and that has a total area under
roof of greater than 50 cubic feet. "Building" is interpreted as including
"or part thereof." See the separate definition of "structure." Any structure
involving a permanent roof (such as a covered porch or a carport) that
is attached to a principal building shall be considered to be part of that
principal building.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage obtained by dividing the total
horizontal area covered by all buildings on a lot by the total lot area of a
lot. For the purposes of this definition, building coverage shall include all
buildings that are under a roof.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average of the
finished ground level adjoining a building at all exterior walls to the average
height of the highest roof surface. The finished ground level shall not slope
away from a building wall in such a manner that it is not possible to position
a ladder for fire rescue.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building used for the conduct of the principal
use of a lot and which is not an accessory building.
BUILDING WIDTH — The horizontal measurement between two vertical
structural walls that are generally parallel of one building, measured in one
direction that is most closely parallel to the required lot width. For attached
housing, this width shall be the width of each dwelling unit, measured from
the center of each interior party wall and from the outside of any exterior
wall. For detached buildings, this width shall be measured from the outside
of exterior walls.
BULK RECYCLING CENTER — A use involving the bulk commercial
collection, separation and/or processing of types of waste materials found
§ 285-20 WEAPONS § 285-20
278:387
in the typical household or office for some productive reuse, but which
does not involve the actual processing or recycling of hazardous or toxic
substances, and which does not primarily involve the processing of
nonrecycled solid waste, unless the use also meets the applicable
requirements for a solid waste transfer facility. This definition shall not
include a junkyard.
CAMP — An area that includes facilities and structures for primarily
outdoor recreational activities by organized groups, and/or that involves
overnight stays within seasonal cabins or temporary tents by organized
groups and/or transient visitors to the area. This term shall only include
facilities that are primarily used during warmer months and which have
a maximum impervious coverage of 5%. This term shall not include a
recreational vehicle campground.
CAMPGROUND — A development under single ownership of the land with
sites being rented, leased or sold through time share for use for tents or
recreational vehicle sites for transient visitors to the area, and which may
include associated recreational facilities.
CAMPGROUND, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A type of campground that
involves persons temporarily living within recreational vehicles.
CEMETERY — A place used for the burial of two or more noncremated
humans.
CHRISTMAS TREE FARM or TREE FARM — A type of crop farming
involving the raising and harvesting of evergreen trees for commercial
purposes. This may include the retail sale during November and December
of trees that were produced on the premises.
CHURCH — See "place of worship."
CLEAR-CUTTING — A logging method that removes all trees or the vast
majority of trees from a mostly wooded area.
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS TOWER OR ANTENNA — A structure,
partially or wholly exterior to a building, used for transmitting or
retransmitting electronic signals through the air, and that does not meet the
definition of a "standard antenna." Commercial communications antennas
shall include, but are not limited to, antennas used for transmitting
commercial radio or television signals, or to receive such signals for a
cable system, or to retransmit wireless telecommunications. A commercial
communications tower shall be a structure over 30 feet in height that
is primarily intended to support one or more antennas. See standards in
§ 285-42. This term shall not include a standard antenna.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT — The MS, MSL, CN, CH and OTR Districts.
LATTICE TOWER — A commercial communications tower that is guyed
or self-supporting with an open steel-frame structure.
A.
MONOPOLE TOWER — A commercial communications tower that
involves a single shaft as its structural support.
B.
§ 285-20 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-20
278:388
COMMERCIAL USE — This term includes but is not limited to: retail sales,
offices, personal services, auto sales, auto repair garages and other uses of
a similar profit-making nonindustrial nature. The sale of goods or services
from a vehicle on a lot shall also be considered to be a commercial use.
COMMONS — An area of common open space within a neighborhood
design option Development that serves as a focal point for dwellings, a
gathering place for residents and location for community functions. The
only permanent structures that shall be allowed within a required commons
area shall be those directly related to the purpose of the commons, in
addition to decorative lighting, landscaping and necessary utilities.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A use that exists solely to provide primarily
indoor leisure and educational activities and programs and meeting space
to members of the surrounding community and/or certain age groups, and
which does not involve substantial use of machinery or noise-producing
equipment. The use also may include the preparation and/or provision of
meals to low-income elderly persons, as accessory to leisure activities. This
shall not include residential uses or a treatment center.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The latest adopted Comprehensive Plan of
West Lampeter Township, as amended.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use listed as a conditional use under § 285-26,
which is only allowed after review by the Township Planning Commission
and approval by the Board of Supervisors under § 285-17.
CONDOMINIUM — A set of individual dwelling units or other areas of
buildings each owned by an individual person(s) in fee simple, with such
owners assigned a proportionate interest in the remainder of the real estate
which is designated for common ownership, and which is created under
the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980 or Uniform Planned
Community Act of 1996, as amended.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Lancaster County Conservation District
or any agency successor thereto.[Added 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 239]
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — A legal agreement granted by a property
owner that strictly limits the types and amounts of development that may
take place on such property. Such easement shall restrict the original and
all subsequent property owners, lessees and all other users of the land.
CONTIGUOUS LOTS — Adjacent parcels of land, including parcels
separated by a stream or road.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A use that primarily sells routine household
goods, groceries, prepared ready-to-eat foods and similar miscellaneous
items to the general public, but that involves food that is mostly consumed
off site and does not have drive-through service, and that includes a building
with a floor area of less than 7,000 square feet. A convenience store
involving the sale of gasoline shall be regulated as an auto service station.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Development that is not approved
under the open space development provisions of this chapter. (Note: This
§ 285-20 WEAPONS § 285-20
278:389
type of development typically does not involve the preservation of
significant open space.)
CRAFTS OR ARTISAN'S STUDIO — A use involving the creation, display
and sale of arts and crafts, such as paintings, sculpture and fabric crafts.
The creation of arts and crafts may also be permitted within a home
occupation, provided the requirements for such use are met.
CROP FARMING — The raising of products of the soil and accessory storage
of these products. This term shall include orchards, tree farms, wineries,
plant nurseries, raising of fish, greenhouses and keeping of animals in
numbers that are routinely accessory and incidental to a principal crop
farming use. See also "livestock, raising of."
CURATIVE AMENDMENT — A process provided in the State Municipalities
Planning Code that authorizes certain types of challenges to a zoning
ordinance.
DAY-CARE CENTER, ADULT — A use providing supervised care and
assistance to persons who need such daily assistance because of their old
age or disabilities. This use shall not include persons who need oversight
because of behavior that is criminal, violent or related to substance abuse.
This use may involve occasional overnight stays but shall not primarily be a
residential use. The use shall involve typical stays of less than a total of 60
hours per week per person.
DAY CARE, CHILD — A use involving the supervised care of children under
age 16 outside of the children's own home(s), primarily for periods of less
than 18 hours per child during the average day. This use may also include
educational programs that are supplementary to state-required education,
including a nursery school or "Head Start" programs. See also the definition
of "adult day-care center."
The following three types of day care are permitted without regulation
by this chapter: 1) care of children by their own relatives; 2) care of
children within a place of worship during regularly scheduled religious
services; and 3) care of one to three children within any dwelling unit,
in addition to children who are relatives of the care giver.
A.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME (or CHILD DAY CARE AS AN ACCESSORY
USE) — A type of day-care use that: 1) is accessory to and occurs within
a dwelling unit; and 2) provides care for four to six children at one time
who are not relatives of the primary caregiver. See § 285-43.
B.
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A type of day-care use that: 1) provides
care for between seven and 12 children at one time who are not
relatives" of the primary caregiver; 2) provides care within a dwelling
unit; and 3) is registered with the applicable state agency.*
* Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, such agency was the
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.
C.
§ 285-20 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-20
278:390
DCED — The Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development or any agency successor thereto.[Added 3-14-2016 by Ord.
No. 239]
DENSITY — The total number of dwelling units proposed on a lot divided by
the "lot area," unless otherwise stated.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and its
relevant bureaus.
DISTRICT (or ZONING DISTRICT) — A land area within the Township
within which certain uniform regulations and requirements apply under the
provisions of this chapter.
DORMITORY — A building used as living quarters for the exclusive use of
bona fide full-time faculty or students of an accredited college or university
or primary or secondary school, and which is owned by and on the same lot
as such college, university or school.
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE — An establishment where at least a portion of
patrons are served while the patrons remain in their motor vehicles.
DWELLING — A building used as nontransient living quarters, but not
including a boardinghouse, hotel, motel, hospital, nursing home or
dormitory. A dwelling may include a use that meets the definition of a
"sectional home."
DWELLING TYPES — This chapter categorizes dwellings into the following
types: 108
CHILD DAY-ARE CENTER — A type of day-are use that: 1) provides care
for seven or more children at any one time who are not relatives of the
primary caregiver; 2) does not occur within a dwelling unit; 3) does not
meet the definition of a "group day-care home;" and 4) is registered
with the applicable state agency.* See § 285-42.
* Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, such agency was the
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.
D.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT — A new dwelling unit created within
part of a new or existing single-family detached dwelling on a
residential lot and meeting the requirements of § 285-43D(20). [Added
5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 222]
A.
CONVERSION APARTMENT — A new dwelling unit created within an
existing building within the standards of Article IV and where permitted
by Article III and meeting the floor area requirements of § 285-63.
B.
DUPLEX — A building that includes two multifamily dwelling units
and which is not a "twin dwelling." This building typically involves one
dwelling unit located above a second dwelling unit.
C.
108. Editor's Note: Illustrations of Dwelling Types are included in Attachment A at the end of
this chapter.
§ 285-20 WEAPONS § 285-20
278:391
DWELLING UNIT — A single habitable living unit occupied by only one
family. See definition of "family." Each dwelling unit shall have: a) its own
toilet, bath or shower, sink, sleeping and cooking facilities; and b) separate
access to the outside or to a common hallway or balcony that connects
to outside access at ground level. A dwelling unit shall not include either
MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS (or APARTMENTS) — Two or more
dwelling units within a building that do not meet the definition of a
single-family detached dwelling, twin dwelling or townhouse/rowhouse.
The individual dwelling units may be leased or sold for condominium
ownership. If a building only includes two multifamily dwellings, it shall
be considered to be a duplex.
D.
SECTIONAL OR MODULAR HOME — A type of dwelling that meets
a definition of single-family detached dwelling, single-family
semidetached dwelling, townhouse or low-rise apartment that is
substantially but not wholly produced in two or more major sections
off the site and then is assembled and completed on the site, and that
does not meet the definition of a "mobile/manufactured home" and
that is supported structurally by its exterior walls and that rests on a
permanent foundation.
E.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — One dwelling unit in one
building accommodating only one family and having open yard areas on
all sides.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME — A type of single-family
detached dwelling that meets all of the following requirements:
a) is transportable in a single piece or two substantial pieces
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for towing; b) is designed for permanent occupancy; c)
which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except
for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations; d) is
constructed so that it may be used with or without a permanent
foundation; and e) is not a recreation vehicle. The terms "mobile
home" and "manufactured home" have the same meaning. This
term is different from a sectional home, which is defined above. See
standards in § 285-42.
(1)
F.
TOWNHOUSE or ROWHOUSE — One dwelling unit that is attached
to two or more dwelling units and with each dwelling unit being
completely separated from and attached to each other by unpierced
vertical fire-resistant walls. Each dwelling unit shall have its own
outside access. Side yards shall be adjacent to each end unit. See
standards in § 285-42.
G.
TWIN DWELLING UNIT — One dwelling unit accommodating one
family that is attached to and completely separated by a vertical listed
fire-rated assembly (fire-resistant wall) to only one additional dwelling
unit. One side yard shall be adjacent to each dwelling unit. Each unit
may or may not be on a separate lot from the attached dwelling unit.
H.
§ 285-20 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-20
278:392
or both of the following: a) two or more separate living areas that are
completely separated by interior walls so as to prevent interior access from
one living area to another; or b) two separate and distinct sets of kitchen
facilities.
EMERGENCY SERVICES STATION — A building for the housing of fire,
emergency medical or police equipment and for related activities. This
use may include housing for emergency personnel while on-call. See also
provisions for this use in § 285-42.
EMPLOYEES — The highest number of workers (including both part-time
and full-time, both compensated and volunteer, and both employees and
contractors) present on a lot at any one time, other than clearly temporary
and occasional persons working on physical improvements to the site.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES or ESSENTIAL PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICES —
Utility or municipal uses that are necessary for the preservation of the
public health and safety and that are routine, customary and appropriate to
the character of the area in which they are to be located. Essential services
shall include the following and closely similar facilities: sanitary sewage
lines, waterlines, electric distribution lines, stormwater management
facilities, cable television lines, natural gas distribution lines, fire hydrants,
street lights and traffic signals. Essential services shall not include a central
sewage treatment plant, a solid waste disposal area or facility, commercial
communications towers, a power-generating station, septic or sludge
disposal, offices, storage of trucks or equipment, or bulk storage of
materials.
FAMILY — One or more individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption
(including persons receiving formal foster care) or up to three unrelated
individuals who maintain a common household and live within one dwelling
unit. A family shall also expressly include numbers of unrelated persons
provided by the group home provision of § 285-42 residing within a licensed
group home, as defined herein. Through those provisions and § 285-11D(5),
the Township's intent is to comply with the Federal Fair Housing Act, as
amended.
FARM — A lot used for the raising of agricultural or dairy products and/or
the raising of livestock or poultry for commercial purposes. This term may
include one dwelling unit (unless additional units are allowed by another
section of this chapter), buildings used for the agricultural activities and the
storage of equipment used for the agricultural activities.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency or any entity
successor thereto.[Added 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 239]
FENCE — A man-made barrier placed or arranged as a line of demarcation,
an enclosure or a visual barrier that is constructed of wood, chain-link
metal, vinyl or aluminum and/or plastic inserts. Man-made barriers
constructed principally of masonry, concrete, cinder block or similar
materials shall be considered a wall. See § 285-43.
§ 285-20 WEAPONS § 285-20
278:393
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — An establishment primarily involved with
loans and monetary, not material, transactions and that has routine
interactions with the public.
FLOODPLAIN — See definitions of this term and related terms in Article V.
FLOOR AREA, TOTAL — The total floor space within a building(s) measured
from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center lines of walls
separating buildings. Floor area shall specifically include, but not be limited
to: a) fully enclosed porches; and b) basement or cellar or attic space that is
potentially habitable and has a minimum head clearance of at least 6.5 feet.
Floor area shall not include unenclosed structures.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, and which does not involve any land development. See "timber
harvesting" in this section and § 285-42.
GARAGE SALE — The accessory use of any lot for the occasional sale
or auction of only common household goods and furniture and items of a
closely similar character. See § 285-43.
GLARE — A sensation of brightness within the visual field which causes
annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance, visibility and/or ability
to focus. See § 285-50.
GOVERNMENT FACILITY, OTHER THAN TOWNSHIP-OWNED — A use
owned by a government, government agency or government authority for
valid public health, public safety, recycling collection or similar
governmental purpose, and which is not owned by West Lampeter Township
or an authority created solely by West Lampeter Township. This term shall
not include uses listed separately in the table of uses in Article III, such as
publicly owned recreation. This term shall not include a prison.
GREENS — An area of landscaped common open space designed to serve a
variety of noncommercial recreational and social interaction purposes.
GROUP HOME — A dwelling unit operated by a responsible individual,
family or organization with a program to provide a supportive living
arrangement for individuals where special care is needed by the persons
served due to age, emotional, mental, developmental or physical disability.
This definition shall expressly include facilities for the supervised care
of persons with disabilities subject to protection under the Federal Fair
Housing Act, as amended. Group homes must be licensed where required by
any appropriate government agencies, and a copy of any such license must
be delivered to the Zoning Officer prior to the initiation of the use.
Group homes shall be subject to the same limitations and regulations
by the Township as the type of dwelling unit they occupy.
A.
It is the express intent of the Township to comply with all provisions
of the Federal Fair Housing Act, as amended, and regulations
promulgated thereunder, in the construction of this term.
B.
§ 285-20 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-20
278:394
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES — A product or waste or combination of
substances that because of the quantity, concentration, physical or
infectious characteristics, if not properly treated, stored, transported, used
or disposed of, or otherwise managed, would create a potential threat
to public health through direct or indirect introduction into groundwater
resources and the subsurface environment, which includes the soil and all
subsequent materials located below. Such hazardous material includes, but
is not limited to materials which are included on the latest edition of one or
more of the following lists:
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES, EXTREMELY — Hazardous substances
included on the list of Extremely Hazardous Substances in 29 Code of
Federal Regulations Part 355, or its successor provisions, and that are
stored or used in quantities above the threshold reportable limits in such
regulations.
HEIGHT — See "building height." To measure the height of any structure
that is not a building, it shall be the total vertical distance from the average
elevation of the proposed ground level to the highest point of a structure.
For height of signs, see Article VII, entitled "Signs."
HELIPORT — An area used for the takeoff and landing of helicopters and
related support facilities. A private heliport shall be limited to 15 total
takeoffs and landings in any seven-day period and is not open to the general
public. A public heliport is one that does not meet the definition of a "private
heliport."
HOME OCCUPATION — A routine, accessory and customary nonresidential
use conducted within or administered from a portion of a dwelling or its
permitted accessory building and that meets all of the home occupation
requirements of § 285-43. A light home occupation shall be a home
occupation that meets the additional requirements for a light home
C. A group home shall not include a treatment center.
See standards in § 285-42.
* NOTE: The Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act defined
"handicap" as follows: "1) a physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; 2)
a record of having such an impairment; or 3) being regarded as having
such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal
use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Section 802
of Title 21." This definition was subsequently adjusted by Section 512
of the Americans With Disabilities Act to address certain situations
related to substance abuse treatment.
D.
"Hazardous substances," as defined pursuant to Section 311 of the
Federal Clean Water Act, or its successor provisions.
A.
"Hazardous substances," as defined pursuant to the Federal
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act, or its successor provisions.
B.
§ 285-20 WEAPONS § 285-20
278:395
occupation, as stated in § 285-43. The term light home occupation includes
but is not limited to the term "no-impact home occupation," as defined in
the State Municipalities Planning Code. A "general home occupation" shall
be a home occupation that does not meet the requirements for a light home
occupation.
Note: In most cases, under § 285-26, a light home occupation is permitted
by right, while a general home occupation typically needs special exception
approval from the Zoning Hearing Board.
HOSPITAL — A use involving the diagnosis, treatment or other medical
care of humans that includes, but is not limited to, care requiring stays
overnight. A medical care use that does not involve any stays overnight shall
be considered an office. A hospital may involve care and rehabilitation for
medical, dental or mental health but shall not primarily include housing or
treatment of the criminally insane or persons actively serving an official
sentence after being convicted of a felony. A hospital may also involve
medical research and training for health care professionals.
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or buildings including rooms rented out
to persons as clearly transient and temporary living quarters. Any such
use that customarily involves the housing of persons for periods of time
longer than 90 days shall be considered a "boardinghouse" and shall meet
the requirements of that use. See also "bed-and-breakfast" use. A hotel or
motel may also include a restaurant, meeting rooms, nightclub, newsstand,
amusement arcade, gift shop, swim club, exercise facilities, tavern and
similar customary accessory amenities, and provided any such use shall
only be allowed as a principal use of the property if such use is allowed by
the applicable district regulations.
HUNTING AND FISHING CLUB — Land owned by an organized group of
persons formed as a club that is used for hunting, fishing and similar types
of passive recreation, and which involves no buildings except those for the
recreational, lodging, eating and sanitary facilities for members and invited
guests and routinely accessory storage buildings.
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT — The I/M Zoning District.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The percentage that results from dividing the
land area on a lot covered by all impervious surfaces by the total land
area of the lot. Impervious surfaces shall be defined as areas covered by
buildings, paving or concrete or other man-made surfaces that have a runoff
coefficient of 0.85 or greater. Areas of stone regularly used for vehicle
parking and movement shall be considered impervious for the purposes of
restricting impervious coverage under the Zoning Ordinance.
For a townhouse development, the maximum impervious coverage may
be measured as a maximum for the entire development after
completion, after the deletion of street rights-of-way (or cartway where
a street right-of-way does not exist), as opposed to regulating each
individual townhouse lot.
A.
§ 285-20 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-20
278:396
JUNK — Any discarded, unusable, scrap or abandoned man-made or manprocessed
material or articles stored outside of a completely enclosed
building and which covers over 200 square feet of land area. Examples
of junk include: scrap metal, used furniture, used appliances, used motor
vehicle parts, worn-out machinery and equipment, used containers and
scrap building materials. Junk shall not include: a) solid waste temporarily
stored in an appropriate container that is routinely awaiting imminent
collection and proper disposal; b) toxic substances; c) yard waste or tree
trunks; d) items clearly awaiting imminent recycling at an appropriate
location; e) building materials awaiting imminent use at an ongoing building
site; or f) "clean fill," as defined by state environmental regulations.
JUNK VEHICLE —
JUNKYARD —
Includes any vehicle or trailer that meets any of the following
conditions:
Cannot be moved under its own power, in regards to a vehicle
designed to move under its own power, other than a vehicle clearly
needing only minor repairs;
(1)
(2) Cannot be towed, in regards to a trailer designed to be towed;
(3) Has been demolished beyond repair;
(4) Has been separated from its axles, engine, body or chassis; and/or
Includes only the axle, engine, body parts and/or chassis, separated
from the remainder of the vehicle.
(5)
A.
B. See also the definition of "unregistered vehicle."
Land or a structure used for the collection, storage, dismantling,
processing and/or sale, other than within a completely enclosed
building, of material of one or more of the following types:
(1) "Junk" (see definition) covering more than 1% of the lot area.
Two or more junk vehicles that are partly or fully visible from an
exterior lot line, dwelling and/or public street. This shall not apply
to such vehicles stored as part of an auto repair garage within the
requirements of § 285-42.
(2)
One or more mobile/manufactured homes that are not in a
habitable condition.
(3)
A.
Junk stored within a completely enclosed building for business
purposes shall be considered a warehouse.
B.
A junkyard specifically shall include but not be limited to a metal scrap
yard or auto salvage yard.
C.
§ 285-20 WEAPONS § 285-20
278:397
KENNEL — The keeping of a greater number of dogs and/or cats than are
permitted under the keeping of pets provisions of this chapter, and which
may also include temporary keeping of other household pets. In addition, in
any case, if more than 10 dogs age six months or older are kept, it shall be
considered a kennel.
LANDOWNER — The owner of a legal or equitable interest in land,
including the holder of a written, signed and active option or contract to
purchase or a person leasing the property (if authorized under the lease to
exercise the right of the landowner) or authorized officers of a partnership
or corporation that is a landowner.
LIGHTING, DIFFUSED — Illumination that passes from the source through
a translucent cover or shade.
LIVESTOCK OR POULTRY, RAISING OF — The raising and keeping of
livestock, poultry or insects beyond the number and type allowed under
the keeping of pets section of § 285-43 and beyond what is customarily
incidental to a principal crop farming use. Raising of livestock or poultry
shall not include a slaughterhouse nor a stockyard used for the housing of
animals awaiting slaughter.
LIVESTOCK OR POULTRY, INTENSIVE RAISING OF —
LOT109 — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit. A "lot" may or may not coincide with a lot of record and includes one
or more adjacent pieces, parcels or plots of land of record held in single and
separate ownership, including adjacent pieces, parcels or plots bisected by
public or private streets. The area and depth of a lot shall be measured to
the legal right-of-way line of the street, and all lots shall front on public or
private streets.
This term shall mean a raising of livestock or poultry use involving an
average of two or more animal equivalent units (see definition below)
of live weight per acre of livestock or poultry, on an annualized basis.
However, if a tract includes less than 150 total animal equivalent units,
it shall not be regulated as an intensive raising of livestock or poultry
use.
A.
An animal equivalent unit (AEU) is 1,000 pounds live weight of livestock
or poultry animals, regardless of the actual number of individual
animals comprising the unit. This weight is calculated on an annualized
basis. These units shall be calculated as provided under the State
Nutrient Management Act and accompanying regulations. Note: The
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance are based upon acreage of a lot,
and not acreage that is available for disposal of wastes. (Note: Two
animal equivalent units per acre would be roughly equal to 1.7 dairy
cattle, 6.7 swine, 10 sheep, 500 poultry or 400 rabbits per acre.)
B.
109. Editor's Note: Illustrations of Terms for Lot Requirements are included at the end of this
section.
§ 285-20 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-20
278:398
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting on two or more intersecting streets which
has an interior angle of less than 135° at the intersection of right-of-way
lines of two streets.
LOT AREA — The horizontal land area contained within the lot lines of a
lot (measured in acres or square feet). For the purposes of determining
compliance with the minimum lot area, the following shall be excluded:
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding the lot. Wherever a property line
borders a public street, for the purposes of determining setbacks, the lot
line shall be considered to be the street right-of-way line that will exist at
the time of completion of a subdivision or development. 110
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured
at the minimum prescribed front yard setback line, unless otherwise stated.
In the event of a curved lot line, such lot width at the minimum prescribed
front yard setback line shall be measured along the curve. Where buildings
are permitted to be attached, the lot width shall be measured from the
center of the party wall. Where a pie-shaped lot fronts upon a cul-de-sac,
the minimum lot width may be reduced to 75% of the width that would
otherwise be required.
Areas within the existing legal rights-of-way of: 1) any proposed or
existing public streets or alleys; or 2) any proposed or existing
commonly maintained private streets that serve more than one lot.
(Note: Other sections of this chapter, such as townhouse development,
may specifically permit proposed streets to be included in determining
density for a specific use.)
A.
Areas that are currently or will be required to be dedicated as common
or preserved open space on a separate lot. (Note: Other sections of
this chapter, such as open space development, may specifically permit
proposed common open spaces to be included in determining density
for a specific use.)
B.
Features required to be excluded from "lot area" under Article III of this
chapter.
C.
FRONT LOT LINE (STREET LINE) — A lot line separating the lot
from the existing or proposed street right-of-way. For a corner lot, see
§ 285-65B.
A.
REAR LOT LINE — Any lot line which is parallel to or within 45° of
being parallel to a front street right-of-way line. In the case of a lot
having no street frontage, or a lot of an odd shape, or a flag lot, only the
one lot line furthest from any street shall be considered a rear lot line.
Every lot shall have a rear yard.
B.
C. SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
110. Editor's Note: Illustrations of lot line requirements are included in Attachment B at the
end of this chapter.
§ 285-20 WEAPONS § 285-20
278:399
MASSAGE PARLOR — A type of adult use that is an establishment that
meets all of the following criteria:
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — An area of land or building routinely used by
a recreational, civic, social, fraternal, religious, political or labor union
association of persons for meetings and routine socializing and recreation
that is limited to members and their occasional guests and persons
specifically invited to special celebrations, but which is not routinely open
to members of the general public and which is not primarily operated as a
for-profit business.
MINERAL EXTRACTION — The removal from the surface or beneath the
surface of the land of bulk mineral resources using significant machinery.
This use also includes accessory stockpiling and processing of mineral
resources. "Mineral extraction" includes but is not limited to the extraction
of sand, gravel, topsoil, limestone, sandstone, oil, coal, clay, shale and
iron ore. The routine movement of and replacement of topsoil during
construction shall not by itself be considered to be mineral extraction.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME — See definition under "dwelling types."
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A lot under single ownership
which includes two or more mobile/manufactured homes for residential
use. The individual manufactured homes may be individually owned. A
development of mobile/manufactured homes that is subdivided into
individual lots shall be regulated in the same manner as a subdivision of
Massages are conducted involving one person using their hands and/or
a mechanical device on another person below the waist, in return for
monetary compensation, and which does not involve persons who are
related to each other.
A.
The use does not involve a person licensed or certified by the state
as a health care professional or a massage therapist certified by a
recognized professional organization that requires substantial
professional training. Massage therapy by a certified professional shall
be considered "personal service."
B.
The massages are not conducted within a licensed hospital or nursing
home or an office of a medical doctor or chiropractor or as an incidental
accessory use to a permitted exercise club or high school or college
athletic program.
C.
D. The massages are conducted within private or semiprivate rooms.
This use shall not include a target range for outdoor shooting of
firearms, boardinghouse, tavern, restaurant or retail sales unless that
particular use is permitted in that district and the requirements of that
use are met.
A.
See § 285-42. See also "after-hours club" and "hunting and fishing
clubs," which are distinct uses.
B.
§ 285-20 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-20
278:400
site-built homes and shall not be considered to be a "mobile home park."
See § 285-42.
MOTOR VEHICLE — An automobile, recreational vehicle, truck, bus,
motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle or similar means of transportation designed
to operate to carry persons or cargo on roads and that is powered by
mechanized means.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE or STATE PLANNING CODE — The
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as reenacted and amended.
NEIGHBORHOOD CENTER — A facility within a neighborhood design
option development designed to provide space for one or more
neighborhood facilities. A neighborhood center may also include small retail
or personal service establishments which are designed to serve a
pedestrian-oriented clientele from the neighborhood design option
development.
NEIGHBORHOOD DESIGN OPTION DEVELOPMENT or NEIGHBORHOOD
DEVELOPMENT — The dwelling units, residential accessory uses,
neighborhood center, open spaces and nonresidential structures installed
or to be installed upon a development approved under the neighborhood
design option provisions of § 285-34.
NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT TRACT — The land, which may be
comprised of one or more lots, which is proposed to be developed as a
single unified neighborhood design option development in accordance with
§ 285-34.
NEIGHBORHOOD FACILITY — Shall include any of the following: a)
meeting rooms, multipurpose spaces, and similar spaces available for the
use of residents of the neighborhood development; b) adult education
classroom; c) satellite offices for municipal agencies (such as police); or d)
offices of social service agencies or nonprofit organizations.
NIGHTCLUB — An establishment that offers amplified live music
performances or amplified music for dancing, sells alcoholic beverages
primarily for on-site consumption, is open to patrons after 12:00 midnight
and has a building capacity of over 200 persons.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot which does not conform with the minimum
lot width or area dimensions specified for the district where such lot is
situated, but which was lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of
this chapter or amendments hereinafter enacted.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — The definition in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Code (MPC) shall apply. See § 285-67.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of a structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter
or amendment(s), where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the
enactment of this chapter or applicable amendment(s). A use granted by
variance is not a nonconforming use. See § 285-67.
§ 285-20 WEAPONS § 285-20
278:401
NURSING HOME — A facility licensed by the state for the housing and
intermediate or fully skilled nursing care of three or more persons. See
§ 285-42.
OFFICE — A use that involves administrative, clerical, financial,
governmental or professional operations and operations of a similar
character. This use shall include neither retail nor industrial uses, but may
include business offices, medical offices, laboratories, photographic studios
and/or television or radio broadcasting studios.
OPEN SPACE, PRESERVED OR COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land
within a tract which meets all of the following standards:
Is designed, intended and suitable for active or passive recreation by
residents of a development or the general public.
A.
Is covered by a system that ensures perpetual maintenance, if not
intended to be publicly owned.
B.
Will be deeded to the Township and/or preserved by a deed restriction
or conservation easement to permanently prevent uses of land other
than "preserved open space" and noncommercial recreation or a golf
course.
C.
Does not use any of the following areas to meet minimum preserved
open space requirements:
(1) Existing street rights-of-way;
(2) Vehicle streets or driveways providing access to other lots;
Land beneath building(s) or land within 20 feet of a building (other
than accessory buildings and pools clearly intended for
noncommercial recreation and other than agricultural buildings
and a farmstead which are permitted within land approved by the
Township for agricultural preservation);
(3)
Off-street parking (other than that clearly intended for
noncommercial recreation);
(4)
(5) Area(s) needed to meet a requirement for an individual lot;
For land intended to be open to the public, that does not have
provisions for entry with a fifteen-foot minimum width by
pedestrians from a street open to the public or from adjacent
preserved open space that has access to such a street;
(6)
Land that includes a stormwater detention basin, except for a basin
or portions of a basin that the applicant proves to the satisfaction
of the Board of Supervisors would: a) be reasonably safe and useful
for active or passive recreation during the vast majority of weather
conditions; or b) serve as a scenic asset resembling a natural pond;
(7)
(8) Portions of land that have a width of less than 50 feet;
D.
§ 285-20 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-20
278:402
OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT — An optional type of residential
development that involves the permanent preservation of preserved open
space and that places dwellings on the most suitable portions of a tract
on lots that are typically smaller than would otherwise be allowed with
conventional development. See § 285-31.
ORDINANCE, THIS — The West Lampeter Township Zoning Ordinance,
including the Official Zoning Map, as amended.
PA — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PARENT TRACT — An existing lot from which one or more new lots are
subdivided.
PARKING — Off-street parking and aisles for vehicle movement unless
otherwise stated.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or its
successor, and its subparts.
PERMITTED BY-RIGHT USES — Allowed uses in which zoning matters may
be approved by the Zoning Officer, provided the application complies with
all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. A nonconforming use shall not
be considered to be a permitted by-right use, a special exception use or a
conditional use.
PERSONAL CARE HOME OR CENTER — See "assisted living facility."
PERSONAL SERVICE — An establishment that provides a service oriented
to personal needs of the general public and which does not involve primarily
retail or wholesale sales or services to businesses. Personal services include
barber and beauty shops, photography studios, shoe repair shops,
household appliance repair shops, custom detailing of private motor
vehicles and other similar establishments, but shall not include any adult
uses, as herein defined.
PETS, KEEPING OF — The keeping of domesticated animals of types that
are normally considered to be kept in conjunction with a dwelling for the
pleasures of the resident family. This shall include dogs, cats, small birds,
gerbils, rabbits and other animals commonly sold in retail pet shops. See
§ 285-43.
PICNIC GROVE, PRIVATE — An area of open space and pavilions that is not
publicly owned and is used for group picnics and related outdoor recreation,
and which is used on a commercial basis.
(9) Areas that are under water during normal weather conditions; and
Areas that are under electric transmission lines that are designed
for a capacity of 35 kilovolts or greater.
(10)
Each square foot of preserved open space that is of 25% or greater
slopes and each square foot within the one-hundred-year floodplain
shall only count as 1/2 square foot for the purposes of determining the
amount of preserved open space.
E.
§ 285-20 WEAPONS § 285-20
278:403
PLACES OF WORSHIP — Buildings, synagogues, churches, religious
retreats, monasteries, seminaries and shrines used primarily for religious
and/or spiritual worship and that are operated for nonprofit and
noncommercial purposes. If a religious use is primarily residential in
nature, it shall be regulated under the appropriate dwelling type. See
standards in § 285-42.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A principal structure which is also a building.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — The structure in which the principal use of a
lot is conducted. Any structure that is physically attached to a principal
structure shall be considered part of that principal structure.
PRINCIPAL USE — A dominant use(s) or main use on a lot, as opposed to an
accessory use.
PRISON — A correctional institution within which persons are required to
inhabit by criminal court actions or as the result of a criminal arrest.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code. (Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, for a Zoning
Hearing Board hearing or an amendment to this chapter, such Act generally
required a legal advertisement published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township, which states
that time and place of a meeting/hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered. The first publication shall not be more than 30
days and the second publication not less than seven days from the meeting/
hearing date.)
PUBLICLY OWNED RECREATION — Leisure facilities owned, operated or
maintained by governmental entities for use by the general public. Publicly
owned recreation is a distinct use from indoor recreation or outdoor
recreation.
RECREATION — The offering of leisure-time activities to unrelated persons.
This term shall not include any adult use. For the purposes of this chapter,
recreation facilities shall be permitted by right as an accessory use when
clearly limited to residents of a development and their occasional invited
guests.
INDOOR RECREATION — A type of recreation use that: a) does not
meet the definition of outdoor recreation; and b) is used principally for
active or passive recreation, such as a bowling alley, roller skating, ice
skating, commercial batting practice use and similar uses. This term
shall not include any use listed separately as a distinct use by § 285-26.
A.
OUTDOOR RECREATION — A type of recreation use that: a) has a
total building coverage of less than 15%; and b) is used principally for
active or passive recreation, such as a golf driving range, miniature
golf course, amusement park and similar uses. This term shall not
include any use listed separately as a distinct use by § 285-26, such as
a firearms target range.
B.
§ 285-20 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-20
278:404
RECYCLING COLLECTION CENTER — A use for collection and temporary
storage of more than 500 pounds of common household materials for
recycling, but that does not involve processing or recycling other than
routine sorting, baling and weighing of materials. This term shall not
include the indoor storage of less than 500 pounds of household recyclables
and their customary collection, which is a permitted by-right accessory use
in all zoning districts, without additional regulations. A recycling collection
center is also a permitted by-right accessory use to a public or private
primary or secondary school, a place of worship, a Township-owned use or
an emergency services station.
RELATED or RELATIVE — Persons who are related by blood, marriage,
adoption or formal foster relationship to result in one of the following
relationships: spouse, brother, sister, parent, child, grandparent, greatgrandparent,
grandchild, great-grandchild, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew,
sister-in-law, brother-in-law, parent-in-law or first cousin. This term
specifically shall not include relationships such as second, third or more
distant cousins. See definition of "dwelling unit."
REPAIR SERVICE — Shops for the repair of appliances, watches, guns,
bicycles and other household items.
RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (INCLUDES "BUILDING") OR
USE — A use or structure that is clearly accessory, customary and incidental
to a principal residential use on a lot, including the following uses and uses
that are very similar in nature: garage (household), carport, tennis court,
garage sale, basketball backboard, household swimming pool, gazebo,
storage shed, greenhouse. No business shall be conducted in a household
garage or storage shed that is accessory to a dwelling, except as may be
allowed as a home occupation.[Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 202]
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT(S) — The OSR, RR, RV, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning
Districts.
RESIDENTIAL LOT LINES — The lot line of a lot that: 1) contains an
existing primarily residential use on a lot of less than 10 acres; or b) is
undeveloped and zoned as a residential district.
RESTAURANT —
RETAIL STORE — A use in which merchandise is sold or rented to the
general public, but not including the following: sales of motor vehicles
or boats, adult movie theater, adult bookstore, manufacturing, tavern, car
An establishment that sells ready-to-consume food or drink and that
routinely involves the consumption of at least a portion of such food on
the premises.
A.
A restaurant may include the accessory sale of alcoholic beverages.
However, if such sale is a primary or substantial portion of the total
trade, the requirements of a tavern or nightclub, as applicable, must be
met.
B.
C. See "drive-through service" in this section.
§ 285-20 WEAPONS § 285-20
278:405
wash, auto service station, auto repair garage, or any restaurant.[Amended
12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 202]
RETREAT CENTER — A facility where groups may gather for the purpose
of religious worship, seminars, fellowship, family gatherings, nature and
historical studies, and similar activities, and which may involve overnight
stays, meals to persons attending other activities on site, and accessory
outdoor active and passive recreation.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — An area or strip of land which is reserved for use by or as
a street or by one or more utilities or by the public or by others. The term
"right-of-way" by itself shall mean the street right-of-way, unless another
meaning is otherwise stated or clearly implied from the context in which it
is used.
ROOMING HOUSE — See "boardinghouse."
SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE, PRIMARY OR SECONDARY — An
educational institution primarily for persons between the ages of five and 19
that primarily provides state-required or largely state-funded educational
programs. This term shall not include trade schools.
SCREENING — Year-round plant material of substantial height and density
designed to provide a buffer. See requirements in § 285-65D.
SELF-STORAGE DEVELOPMENT — A building or group of buildings divided
into individual separate access units, which are rented or leased for the
storage of personal and small business property.
SETBACK LINE — A line separating a yard from the area within which a
building or use is allowed.
SEWAGE SERVICE, CENTRAL — Sanitary sewage service to a building by a
Township-approved sewage collection and disposal system that serves five
or more lots, and which includes an appropriate mechanism to ensure longterm
professional operation and maintenance of the system.
SEWAGE SERVICE, ON-LOT — Sanitary sewage service to a building that
does not meet the definition of "central sewage service," such as but not
limited to an individual on-lot septic system.
SEWAGE SERVICE, PUBLIC — Central sanitary sewage service by a system
owned and/or operated by a municipality or a municipal authority.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY, EXISTING OR LEGAL — The official
established street right-of-way that either the Township or the state
presently owns or holds another interest in the land, or will own after
the completion of any proposed subdivision, land development or
development of a use under this chapter, whether by dedication or
otherwise.
A.
See also "right-of-way, future or ultimate" in the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.111
B.
111. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 285-20 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-20
278:406
SHOPPING CENTER — A lot that contains five or more retail sales
establishments on a lot and which may also include other allowed
commercial uses.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area required to be kept free of certain visual
obstructions to traffic. See § 285-645.
SIGN — The definition in § 285-57A shall apply.
SIGN AREA — The definition in § 285-57 shall apply.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — The definition in § 285-57 shall apply.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot by one or
more persons, partnerships or corporations, which ownership is separate
and distinct from that of any abutting or adjoining lot.
SITE ALTERATIONS — This term shall include one or more of the following
activities:
SQUARE — An area of landscaped common open space within a
neighborhood design option development that abuts streets on two or more
sides and that includes decorative lighting and may include noncommercial
recreation areas.
SOLID WASTE-TO-ENERGY FACILITY — An area where municipal solid
waste and similar materials are incinerated or otherwise processed to result
in usable energy for off-site use.
SOLID WASTE LANDFILL — An area where municipal solid waste and
similar materials is deposited on land, compacted, covered with soil and
then compacted again, and which has a permit from DEP to operate as a
sanitary landfill.
SOLID WASTE TRANSFER FACILITY — Land or structures where solid
waste is received and temporarily stored, at a location other than the
site where it was generated, and which facilitates the bulk transfer of
accumulated solid waste to a facility for further processing or disposal.
Such facility may or may not involve the separation of recyclables from solid
waste. Such facility shall not include a junkyard, leaf composting, clean fill
or septage or sludge application.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use for which the Zoning Hearing Board may
grant permission following a public hearing and findings of fact consistent
with this chapter, provided the use complies with the conditions and
standards required by this chapter. See § 285-16.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — One or more of the following:
Filling of lakes, ponds, marshes or floodplains or alteration of
watercourses;
A.
Clearing and regrading of more than 1/2 acre, other than selective
thinning of existing vegetation or trees.
B.
A. Human male genitals in a visible state of sexual stimulation.
§ 285-20 WEAPONS § 285-20
278:407
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and its agencies.
STORY — A level of a building routinely accessible to humans having an
average vertical clearance from floor to ceiling of 6.5 feet or greater shall
be considered a full story, except as follows: If the floor of a basement level
is more than six feet below the finished grade level for more than 50% of
the total building perimeter, it shall not be regulated as a story. Any level of
a building having an average vertical clearance from floor to ceiling of less
than 6.5 feet shall be considered a "half-story."
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare which provides the principal
means of vehicle access to three or more lots or that is an expressway,
but not including an alley or a driveway. The terms "street," "highway" and
"road" have the same meaning and are used interchangeably.
STREET CLASSIFICATION — The functional classification of streets, roads
and highways that is provided in the Township Comprehensive Plan shall
apply. Such classifications may be revised by written resolution of the Board
of Supervisors.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having a stationary location on, below
or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land. Any structure shall be
subject to the principal or accessory setbacks of this chapter, as applicable,
unless specifically exempted or unless a specific setback is established for
that particular type of structure by this chapter. For the purposes of this
chapter, utility poles, stormwater basins, stormwater inlets and outlets,
wells, paving and septic systems shall not be considered structures, and
shall not be subject to minimum zoning setback requirements unless stated
otherwise.
SUBDIVISION — The definition in the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance112 shall apply.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE or SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE — The West Lampeter Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, as amended.113
SWIMMING POOL, HOUSEHOLD OR PRIVATE — A man-made area with
walls of man-made materials intended to enclose water at least 30 inches
deep for bathing or swimming and that is intended to serve the residents of
only one dwelling unit and their occasional guests. See § 285-423.
SWIMMING POOL, NONHOUSEHOLD — A man-made area with walls of
man-made materials intended to enclose water at least 30 inches deep for
bathing or swimming and that does not meet the definition of a "household"
swimming pool.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral sex or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals. See definition of
"adult use."
C.
112. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Subdivision and Land Development.
113. Editor's Note: Chapter 240, Subdivision and Land Development, of this Code.
§ 285-20 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-20
278:408
TAVERN — A place where alcoholic beverages are served as a primary or
substantial portion of the total trade and which does not meet the definition
of an "after-hours club" or a "nightclub." The sale of food may also occur.
See also the definition of "restaurant."
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of
motion pictures or theatrical or performing arts productions as a principal
use, but not including an outdoor drive-in theater or adult movie theater.
TIMBER HARVESTING (INCLUDES LOGGING) — The process of cutting
down trees and removing logs from the forest for the primary purpose of
sale or commercial processing into wood products. For the purposes of
timber harvesting, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
BASAL AREA — The area in square feet per acre occupied by tree stems
4.5 feet above the ground, normally measured by a calibrated prism or
angle gauge.
A.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Universally accepted activities
that have a positive effect or minimize a negative effect on the forest
ecosystem. They provide minimum acceptable standards for good forest
management. Examples of such practices may be found in the
publication entitled, "Best Management Practices for Pennsylvania
Forests," published by Penn State University, College of Agricultural
Sciences, dated 1996, or a successor version.
B.
FELLING — The act of cutting a standing tree so that it falls to the
ground.
C.
LANDING — A place where logs, pulpwood or firewood are assembled
for transportation to processing facilities.
D.
LITTER — Discarded items not naturally occurring on the site, such as
tires, oil cans, garbage, equipment parts and other rubbish.
E.
LOP — To cut tops and slash into smaller pieces to allow the material to
settle close to the ground.
F.
NONCOMMERCIAL TIMBER STAND IMPROVEMENT — A forest
practice, such as thinning or pruning, which results in better growth,
structure, species composition or health for the residual stand but
which does not yield a net income to the landowner, usually because
any trees cut are of poor quality, too small or otherwise of limited
marketability or value.
G.
SKIDDING — Dragging trees on the ground from the stump to the
landing by any means.
H.
SLASH — Woody debris left in the woods after logging, including logs,
chunks, bark, branches, uprooted stumps and broken or uprooted trees
or shrubs.
I.
§ 285-20 WEAPONS § 285-20
278:409
TIRE STORAGE, BULK — The storage of more than 30 used tires on a lot,
except that a tire retail store may include the storage of up to 100 used
tires on a lot without being regulated by this term. See "outdoor storage" in
§ 285-43.
TOWNHOUSE — See "dwelling types."
TOWNSHIP — West Lampeter Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
TRADE/HOBBY SCHOOL or TRADE SCHOOL — A facility that: a) is
primarily intended for education of a work-related skill or craft or a hobby;
and b) does not primarily provide state-required education to persons under
age 16. Examples include a dancing school, martial arts school, cosmetology
school or ceramics school.
TRADESPERSON — A person involved with building trades, such as but
not limited to: plumbing, electrical work, building construction, building
remodeling, and roofing.
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS — An optional process, authorized
under § 285-33, that allows the residential density that would otherwise be
allowed on one tract to be transferred to increase the density on another
tract. The developer of the second tract compensates the owner of the first
tract for preserving his/her land, based upon an agreement negotiated and
accepted by both parties.
TREATMENT CENTER —
STAND — Any area of forest vegetation whose site conditions, past
history and current species composition are sufficiently uniform to be
managed as a unit.
J.
TIMBER OPERATOR — An individual, partnership, company, firm
association, corporation or other entity engaged in timbering
harvesting, including the agents, subcontractors and employees
thereof.
K.
TOP — The upper portion of a felled tree that is unmerchantable
because of small size, taper or defect.
L.
A use (other than a prison or a hospital) providing housing for three or
more unrelated persons who need specialized housing, treatment and/
or counseling because of:
(1) Criminal rehabilitation, such as a criminal halfway house;
Current addiction to a controlled substance that was used in an
illegal manner or alcohol; and/or
(2)
A type of mental illness or other behavior that causes a person to
be a threat to the physical safety of others.
(3)
A.
See standards in § 285-42. Also, a group home that exceeds the number
of residents allowed by this chapter within a group home shall be
B.
§ 285-20 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-20
278:410
UNIT FOR CARE OF RELATIVE — A dwelling unit that: a) is especially
created for and limited to occupancy by a close "relative" of the permanent
residents of the principal dwelling unit; b) is necessary to provide needed
care and supervision to such relative; and c) meets the requirements for
such use in § 285-43.
UNREGISTERED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle or trailer that does not
display a license plate with a current registration sticker and does not have
a valid state safety inspection sticker. This term shall not apply to vehicles
(such as licensed antique cars) for which state regulations do not require an
inspection sticker. The term also shall not include motor vehicles displaying
a license and inspection stickers that have each expired less than 90 days
previously.
USE — The purpose, activity, occupation, business or operation for which
land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained.
Uses specifically include but are not limited to the following: activity within
a structure, activity outside of a structure, any structure, recreational
vehicle storage or parking of commercial vehicles on a lot.
VARIANCE — The granting of specific permission by the Zoning Hearing
Board to use, construct, expand or alter land or structures in such a way
that compliance is not required with a specific requirement of the Zoning
Ordinance. Any variance shall only be granted within the limitations of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. See § 285-11.
WALL — See "fence."
WAREHOUSE — A building or group of buildings primarily used for the
indoor storage, transfer and distribution of products and materials, but not
including retail uses or a truck terminal, unless such uses are specifically
permitted in that zoning district.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATER SERVICE, CENTRAL — Water supply service to a building by a
Township-approved water supply system that serves 20 or more lots, and
which includes an appropriate mechanism to ensure long-term professional
operation and maintenance of the system.
WATER SERVICE, ON-LOT — Water supply service to a building that does
not meet the definition of "central water service," such as but not limited to
an individual on-lot well.
WATER SERVICE, PUBLIC — Central water service by a system owned and/
or operated by a municipality or a municipal authority.
WETLANDS — An area of land and/or water meeting one or more definitions
of a "wetland" under federal and/or Pennsylvania law and/or regulations.
regulated as a treatment center, unless approved otherwise under
§ 285-11D.
§ 285-20 WEAPONS § 285-20
278:411
YARD — An open area unobstructed from the ground to the sky that is not
permitted to be covered by buildings and principal structures and that is
on the same lot as the subject structure or use. A minimum yard is also
known as a minimum setback. Each required yard shall be measured inward
from the abutting lot line, existing street right-of-way or setback required
from a street under § 285-69, whichever is most restrictive. Regulations of
each district prohibit principal and accessory structures within the specified
minimum yards.
YARD, FRONT or FRONT SETBACK — A land area measured a distance
from and running parallel to the front lot line, street right-of-way line or
setback required by § 285-69, whichever is most restrictive. Such yard shall
extend the full width of the lot from side lot line to side lot line.
YARD, REAR or REAR SETBACK —
YARD, SIDE OR SIDE SETBACK —
A. See yard/setback exceptions in § 285-65B.
Private streets: For a building setback measured from a private street,
the setback shall be measured from the existing street right-of-way/
easement or 15 feet from the center of the cartway, whichever is more
restrictive.
B.
The front yard shall be on a side that faces towards a street, whenever
one street abuts the lot. If a lot abuts two streets, the front yard shall be
whichever side the front door or front display windows of the principal
building faces upon.
A.
B. See § 285-65 concerning yards along corner lots.
No accessory or principal structure shall extend into the required front
yard, except as provided in this chapter.
C.
D. Every lot shall include at least one front lot line.
A yard extending the full width of the lot, and which is measured from
along the rear line, and which establishes the minimum setback for
the subject structure, and which stretches between the side lot lines
parallel to the rear lot line.
A.
A principal building shall not extend into the required rear yard setback
for a principal building, and an accessory structure shall not extend into
the required rear yard for an accessory structure, except as provided in
this chapter.
B.
C. Every lot shall include a rear lot line and a rear yard.
A yard which establishes the minimum setback for the closest portion
of the subject structure, and which is measured from along the entire
length of the side lot line, and which extends from the front setback line
to the rear lot line.
A.
§ 285-20 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-20
278:412
YIELD PLAN — A plan required to be submitted to the Township by the
applicant under certain provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. The yield plan
shall accurately show the maximum number of dwelling units that would be
possible under current Township ordinances if certain optional development
provisions would not be used, and instead the provisions for conventional
development under the current zoning district would be used. A yield plan
shall be completed to an accurate scale, including accurately showing the
existing features map information. The yield plan shall show potential lots,
streets and retention/detention pond locations.
ZONING MAP — The Official Zoning Map of West Lampeter Township,
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
ZONING OFFICER — The person charged with the duty of enforcing the
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, and any officially designated assistant.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The West Lampeter Township Zoning Ordinance,
as amended.
A structure shall not extend into the applicable minimum side yard
setback, except as provided for in this chapter.
B.
C. See "corner lot" provision in § 285-65B.
A triangular lot shall include one side yard. All other lots shall include
at least two side yards, except for a corner lot.
D.
§ 285-20 WEAPONS § 285-20
278:413

ARTICLE III
Districts
§ 285-21. Designation of districts and purposes.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, West Lampeter Township is hereby
divided into the following zoning districts, with the following
abbreviations:
A Agricultural
OSR Residential - Open Space
RR Residential - Rural
R-1 Residential - Low Density
R-2 Residential - Medium Density
R-3 Residential - Medium High Density
RV Residential - Village
MS Main Street
MSL Main Street Limited
CN Commercial - Neighborhood
CH Commercial - Highway
OTR Office/Technology/Residential
I/M Industrial/Mixed Use
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the zoning districts named in
Subsection A shall be of the number, size, shape and location shown on
the Official Zoning Map.
C. Overlay districts. The Floodplain Area, as defined by Article V, shall
serve as an overlay district to the applicable underlying districts.
D. Purposes of each district. In addition to serving the overall purposes
and objectives of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan, each zoning
district is intended to serve the following purposes:
(1) A Agricultural. To promote the continuation and preservation of
agricultural activities in those areas most suitable for such
activities. This zone also intends to protect and stabilize the
Township's viable agricultural economy by eliminating uses that
are incompatible with farming but permitting limited agricultural
support businesses. Consequently, residential uses are limited and
any future inhabitants in this zone must be willing to accept the
impacts associated with normal farming practices, and related
businesses. Additionally, large-scale and obtrusive uses are
permitted by conditional use, to separate them from the Township's
population concentrations. Finally, it is the intent of this zone to
limit the total number of subdivisions and the maximum lot sizes of
§ 285-21 WEAPONS § 285-21
278:415
nonagricultural uses so as to avoid the creation of farmettes which
reduce the productivity of the Township's agricultural economy.
(2) OSR Open Space Residential District. To provide for development
with a low average intensity in areas that include significant
important natural features, such as wetlands, creeks, flood-prone
lands and steeply sloped areas. To protect the water quality and
habitats along creeks and around lakes and promote groundwater
recharge. To provide incentives and a certain amount of flexibility
in lot layout through conservation-oriented development so that
development can be clustered on the most suitable portions of a
tract of land while avoiding overly intense development.
(3) RR Rural Residential District. To provide for rural types of
development at a lower overall density in a manner that protects
creeks and other natural features. To avoid conflicts with nearby
agricultural areas and recognize sewage limitations.
(4) R-1 Low Density Residential District. To provide for low density
residential neighborhoods that are primarily composed of singlefamily
detached dwellings. To protect these areas from
incompatible uses. To provide incentives and a certain amount of
flexibility in lot layout through the neighborhood design option so
that development can be clustered on the most suitable portions of
a tract of land while still avoiding overly intense development.
(5) R-2 Medium Density Residential District. To provide for medium
density residential neighborhoods with a mix of housing types at a
medium density. To protect these areas from incompatible uses. To
meet requirements of state law to provide opportunities for various
housing types.
(6) R-3 Medium High Density Residential District. To provide
opportunities for a mix of housing types at a medium high density.
(7) RV Residential-Village District. To provide for a mix of housing
types in a manner that promotes a pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly
environment. To promote use of the neighborhood design option.
(8) MS Main Street District. To provide business opportunities while
seeking to develop a central community focus for the Township. To
promote a pedestrian-friendly and bicycle-friendly environment. To
promote an appropriate mix of retail, service, office, public,
institutional and residential uses. To avoid heavy commercial uses
that are most likely to conflict with the historic and scenic
character and most likely to cause conflicts with homes. To
primarily provide for smaller-scale uses that will not be obtrusive in
the landscape and that will not overload the road system. To
carefully locate commercial areas and commercial driveways to
minimize traffic safety and congestion problems along roads.
§ 285-21 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-21
278:416
(9) MSL Main Street Limited District. To provide for the preservation
of existing architecturally significant structures within an area
impacted by adjoining roads and businesses. Limited business
opportunities in this District provide for smaller-scale uses that will
not be obtrusive to the neighborhood and existing streetscape, will
promote a mix of compatible uses, and will promote adaptive reuse
of existing structures. Bonus incentives are provided to encourage
adaptive reuse of converted structures, rather than the
construction of new commercial buildings. [Amended 9-9-2013
by Ord. No. 232]
(10)CN Neighborhood Commercial District. To provide for lighter types
of commercial uses that will be compatible with nearby homes.
(11)CH Highway Commercial District. To provide for a variety of
commercial uses along major highways where a variety of
commercial uses are already present. To provide for a wider range
of commercial uses than the CN and MS Districts, including uses
that are more auto-related (such as gas stations). To carefully
locate commercial areas and commercial driveways to minimize
traffic safety and congestion problems along roads.
(12) I/M Industrial/Mixed Use District. To provide for industrial and
certain types of commercial development in a manner that is
compatible with any nearby homes and the surrounding
environment. To carefully control the types of industrial operations
to avoid nuisances and environmental hazards. To encourage
coordinated development, particularly in regard to traffic access.
To recognize that the road system of the Township is only suitable
for types of industries that do not generate large numbers of heavy
truck traffic. To recognize that West Lampeter is not suitable for
large areas of industrial development because of the proximity of
all areas of the Township to homes and creeks. To offer alternatives
for other types of development, such as residential development,
provided that it occurs in a unified manner.
(13)OTR Office/Technology/Residential District. To provide sufficient
space, in appropriate locations, to meet needs for offices and
complementary types of business development. This district is
intended to control the types and intensities of uses to avoid
nuisances and hazards. This district is also intended to provide for
development that will generate additional tax revenue and wider
employment opportunities. This district promotes an attractive,
well landscaped, campus type of business park development that
will aid in attracting new businesses. This district is also intended
to encourage development that uses deed restrictions imposed by
the subdivider as well as interior road systems. This district
promotes landscaped front yards and substantial buffers adjacent
to residential development to attract higher paying jobs to the
Township. To also allow a portion of a tract of land to be used for
§ 285-21 WEAPONS § 285-21
278:417
§ 285-22. Application of district regulations.
§ 285-23. Zoning Map.
the Neighborhood Design Option, to encourage appropriate mixed
uses.
A. The regulations set by this chapter shall apply uniformly to each class
or kind of structure or land, except as provided for in this chapter.
B. No structure shall hereafter be erected, used, constructed,
reconstructed, structurally altered or occupied and no land shall
hereafter be used, developed or occupied unless it is in conformity with
the regulations herein specified for the use and district in which it is
located.
C. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set
forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter
shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this
chapter.
D. Boundary change. Any territory which may hereafter become part of
the Township through annexation or a boundary adjustment shall be
classified as the OSR Zoning District of West Lampeter Township until
or unless such territory is otherwise classified by the Board of
Supervisors.
A. A map entitled "West Lampeter Township Zoning Map" accompanies
this chapter and is declared a part of this chapter. The Official Zoning
Map, which should bear the adoption date of this chapter and the words
"Official Zoning Map," shall be retained in the Township Building.
B. Map changes. Changes to the boundaries and districts of the Official
Zoning Map shall only be made in conformity with the amendment
procedures specified in the State Municipalities Planning Code. All
changes should be noted by date with a brief description of the nature
of the change either on the Map or within an appendix to this chapter.
C. Replacement map. If the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged,
destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of changes and
additions, or needs to have drafting errors or omissions corrected,
Township Supervisors may, by resolution, adopt a new copy of the
Official Zoning Map, which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning
Map. Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost or has been
totally destroyed, the prior map or any remaining parts shall be
preserved together with all available records pertaining to its previous
adoption or amendment.
§ 285-21 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-24
278:418
§ 285-24. District boundaries.
The following rules shall apply where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of
any district as shown on the Zoning Map.
§ 285-25. Setbacks across municipal boundaries.
§ 285-26. Table of allowed uses in each zoning district.
A. District boundary lines are intended to follow or be parallel to the
center line of street rights-of-way, streams and railroads, and lot lines
as they existed on a recorded deed or plan of record in the County
Recorder of Deeds' office at the time of the adoption of this chapter,
unless such district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on
the Official Zoning Map.
B. Where a district boundary is not fixed by dimensions and where it
approximately follows lot lines, such boundary shall be construed to
follow such lot lines unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. The location of a district boundary on unsubdivided land or where a
district boundary divides a lot shall be determined by the use of the
scale appearing on the Zoning Map unless indicated otherwise by
dimensions.
D. Where a municipal boundary divides a lot, the minimum lot area shall
be regulated by the municipality in which the principal use(s) are
located, unless otherwise provided by applicable case law. The land
area within each municipality shall be regulated by the use regulations
and other applicable regulations of each municipality.
A. Intent. To continue the objective of compatible land uses across
municipal boundaries.
B. This chapter requires additional setbacks and the provision of buffer
yards when certain uses would abut an existing dwelling or a
residential zoning district. These same additional setback and buffer
yard provisions shall be provided by uses proposed within West
Lampeter Township regardless of whether such abutting existing
dwelling or principally residential zoning district is located in an
abutting municipality and/or in West Lampeter Township.
A. For the purposes of this § 285-26, the following abbreviations shall have
the following meanings in the Table of Allowed Uses, which follows:
P = Permitted by right use (zoning decision by Zoning
Officer)
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning
Hearing Board)
C = Conditional use (zoning decision by Board of
Supervisors)
§ 285-24 WEAPONS § 285-26
278:419
N = Not permitted
(§ 285-42) = See additional requirements in § 285-42
(§ 285-43) = See additional requirements in § 285-43
B. Unless otherwise provided by state or federal law or specifically stated
in this chapter (including § 285-5B), any land or structure shall only be
used or occupied for a use specifically listed in this chapter as
permitted in the zoning district where the land or structure is located.
Such uses shall only be permitted if the use complies with all other
requirements of this chapter.
(1) See § 285-5B, which generally provides a process for approval of a
use that is not listed, based upon similarity to permitted uses and
other criteria. Except as provided in such § 285-5B, any other
principal use that is not specifically listed as P, C or SE in the
applicable district in this table114 is prohibited in that district.
(2) For temporary uses, see § 285-3.
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Agricultural or Residential Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II) OSR RR R-1 R-2 R-3 RV A
a. RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-Family Detached
Dwelling:
— Involving 10 or more
total acres or 20 or
more new dwelling
units
C C C C C C N
— Other than above P P P P P P P3
(Note: Manufactured/
mobile homes shall also
meet the additional
requirements of § 285-42)
(See also the Age-Restricted
Residential Development
Option which allows a
bonus under § 285-36
Neighborhood Design
Option in compliance with
§ 285-34
N N C C C C N
114. Editor's Note: The Table of Allowed Uses is included on the following pages.
§ 285-26 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-26
278:420
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Agricultural or Residential Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II) OSR RR R-1 R-2 R-3 RV A
Open Space Development
Option in compliance with
§ 285-31
C C N N N N N
Twin Dwelling (side by
side):[Amended
12-10-2007 by Ord. No.
202; 9-9-2013 by Ord.
No. 232]
— Involving 10 or more
total acres or 20 or
more dwelling units
N N N1 N1 C C N
— Involving more than
2 dwelling units but
less than 20 dwelling
units on less than 10
total acres
N N N1 N1 P C N
— Involving 2 dwelling
units or less
N N N1 N1 P C N
Townhouse (Rowhouse)
(§ 285-42):[Amended
12-10-2007 by Ord. No.
202; 9-9-2013 by Ord.
No. 232]
— Involving 10 or more
total acres or 20 or
more dwelling units
N N N1 N1 C C N
— Other than above N N N1 N1 P C N
Multifamily Dwellings
(§ 285-42) involving 10 or
more total acres or 20 or
more dwelling units, not
including conversions of an
existing building:
[Amended 12-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 202]
— Only two dwelling
units in a building
("Duplex")
N N N N1 C N1 N
§ 285-26 WEAPONS § 285-26
278:421
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Agricultural or Residential Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II) OSR RR R-1 R-2 R-3 RV A
— Three or more
dwelling units in a
building
N N N N1 C N1 N
Manufactured/Mobile Home
Park (§ 285-42)
N N N N C N N
Boardinghouse (includes
Rooming House) (§ 285-42)
N N N N SE N N
Group Home within a lawful
existing dwelling unit
(§ 285-42), not including a
Treatment Center
P P P P P P P
Conversion of an existing
building to result in an
increased number of
dwelling units (See also
"Unit for Care of Relative"
under Accessory Uses)
N N N N SE N N
b. COMMERCIAL USES2
[Amended 9-9-2013 by
Ord. No. 232]
See also "Medical
Residential Campus" under
"Institutional Uses," which
allows a mix of certain
residential and
nonresidential uses
Bed-and-Breakfast Inn
(§ 285-42)
SE N2 N2 N2 N2 SE2 SE
Camp (§ 285-42), not
including Recreational
Vehicle Campground
C C N N N N N
Communications Tower/
Antennas, Commercial
(§ 285-42):
— Meeting
§ 285-42A(15)(a)
pertaining to antenna
placed on certain
existing structures
P P P P P P P
§ 285-26 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-26
278:422
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Agricultural or Residential Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II) OSR RR R-1 R-2 R-3 RV A
— Antenna/tower that
does not meet
§ 285-42A(15)(a)
(such as freestanding
towers)
N N N N N N C
Golf Course (§ 285-42), with
up to 9 holes and minimum
lot area of 25 acres
[Amended 11-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 247]
P P P P P P N
Kennel (§ 285-42) N N N N N N P
Plant Nursery or Tree Farm,
with any on-site retail sales
limited to trees and shrubs
primarily grown on the
premises, and with a 5%
maximum building coverage
and a two-acre minimum lot
area
P P P P P P P
Retreat Center (§ 285-42) SE SE N N N N N
c. INSTITUTIONAL/
SEMIPUBLIC USES
Cemetery (not including
crematorium) (§ 285-42)
P P P P P P P
Church: See "Place of
Worship" below
College or University -
educational and support
buildings
N N N N N C N
Community Recreation
Center or
Library[Amended
12-10-2007 by Ord. No.
202]
P N P P P P N
Cultural Center or Museum SE N N N N SE SE
Day-Care Center, Adult
(§ 285-42)
N N N N N SE N
§ 285-26 WEAPONS § 285-26
278:423
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Agricultural or Residential Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II) OSR RR R-1 R-2 R-3 RV A
Day-Care Center, Child
(§ 285-42) (See also as an
accessory use)
N N N N N SE N
Emergency Services Station
(§ 285-42)
SE N N SE SE SE N
Hunting and Fishing Club,
with a 5% maximum
building coverage in a
residential district. This
term shall not include uses
listed separately in this
§ 285-26.
P N N N N SE SE
Maintenance Facilities for
Residential Community
Associations, which shall be
required to be separated by
landscaped screening from
any dwellings
P P P P P P P
Medical Residential
Campus (§ 285-42)
N N N4 N C N N
Membership Club meeting
and noncommercial
recreational facilities,
provided that an After-
Hours Club, Tavern or uses
listed separately in this
§ 285-26 shall only be
allowed if so listed in this
table and if the
requirements for that use
are also met.
N N N N N N N
Nursing Home or Personal
Care Home/Assisted Living
(§ 285-42)
N N N P P SE N
Place of Worship (§ 285-42)
(includes "Church")
N SE SE SE SE SE SE5
School, Public or Private,
Primary or Secondary
(§ 285-42):
§ 285-26 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-26
278:424
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Agricultural or Residential Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II) OSR RR R-1 R-2 R-3 RV A
— Serving fewer than
50 students at one
time
P P P P P P P
— Serving 50 or more
students at one time
N C C C C C N6
d. PUBLIC/SEMIPUBLIC
Township Government
Uses, other than uses listed
separately in this § 285-26
P P P P P P P
Government Facility, other
than uses listed separately
in this § 285-26
SE SE SE SE SE SE SE
Publicly Owned or Operated
Recreation Park
P P P P P P P
Public Utility Facility (see
also § 285-14) other than
uses listed separately in
this § 285-26
SE7 SE7 SE7 SE7 SE7 SE7 SE7
Swimming Pool,
Nonhousehold (§ 285-42)
SE SE SE SE SE SE N
U.S. Postal Service Facility,
which may include a leased
facility
N N N N N P N
e. ACCESSORY USES
See list of additional
permitted uses in
§ 285-26C, such as
"Residential Accessory
Structure or Use"
See additional requirements
in § 285-43 for Specific
Accessory Uses
Accessory Dwelling Unit
(§ 285-43) [Added
5-9-2011 by Ord. No.
222]
P PP p p P P P7-1
Bees, Keeping of (§ 285-43) SE SE SE SE SE SE SE
§ 285-26 WEAPONS § 285-26
278:425
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Agricultural or Residential Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II) OSR RR R-1 R-2 R-3 RV A
Bus Shelters for local bus
service (§ 285-43)
N N P P P P N
Composting, other than
leaves or materials
generated on site (§ 285-43)
SE SE N N N N SE
Day-Care Center accessory
to and on the same lot as an
existing lawful Place of
Worship
P P P P P P P
Day Care (§ 285-43) as
accessory to a dwelling:
— Day care of a
maximum of 3 adults
or youth, in addition
to "relatives" of the
caregiver
P P P P P P P
— Group Day-Care
Home
N N N N SE SE SE
— Family Day-Care
Home
SE SE SE SE SE SE SE
Farm-Related Business
(§ 285-43) 8
SE SE SE SE SE SE SE
Accessory Office (§ 285-43),
other than Home
Occupation
N N N N N SE N
Home Occupation, General
(§ 285-43)
SE SE SE SE SE SE SE
Home Occupation, Light
(§ 285-43)
P P P P P P P
Retail Sales of Agricultural
Products (§ 285-43)
P P P P P P P
Stable, Household
(§ 285-43)
P P P P P P P
Temporary Retail Sales -
shall only occur if allowed
by § 285-3G.
§ 285-26 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-26
278:426
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Agricultural or Residential Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II) OSR RR R-1 R-2 R-3 RV A
Unit for Care of Relative
(§ 285-43), except special
exception approval shall be
required if a new detached
building will be constructed
or placed on the lot.
P P P P P P P
f. MISCELLANEOUS USES
Agricultural Education
Facility, which may involve
accessory sales of
agricultural products,
agricultural
demonstrations, and
teaching of agricultural
methods, but with
residential uses limited to a
maximum of one dwelling
unit on the lot
N N N N N N P
Crop Farming and
Wholesale Greenhouses
P P P P P P P
Forestry - see Timber
Harvesting below
Groundwater or Spring
Water Withdrawal,
averaging more than 10,000
gallons per day removed
from a tract for off-site
consumption (§ 285-42)
(Not including on-site
beverage bottling)
C C C C C C C
Nature Preserve or
Environmental Education
Center, with a ten-acre
minimum lot area for any
use involving a principal
building
P P P P P P P
Parking Lot for carpooling N N N N N N N
Parking Lot as the Principal
Use of a Lot
N N N N N N N
§ 285-26 WEAPONS § 285-26
278:427
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Agricultural or Residential Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II) OSR RR R-1 R-2 R-3 RV A
Livestock or Poultry,
Raising of (§ 285-42)
— Not intensive P P SE SE SE SE P
— Intensive N SE SE SE SE SE P
Sewage Sludge/Biosolids,
Land Application of
(§ 285-43)
SE SE N N N N SE
Sewage Treatment Plant C C C C C C C
Stable, Nonhousehold
(§ 285-42; includes horseriding
academy) (See also
"Pets" in § 285-43)
P P SE SE SE SE P
Timber Harvesting
(§ 285-42)
P P P P P P P
Warehousing and Storage
as a Principal Use (see
§ 285-35H) [Added
12-10-2007 by Ord. No.
202]
N N N N N N SE
Windmills, which shall be
required to have a setback
equal to the total height
from all lot lines, except
that, if placed above a
building, only the height of
the pole and windmill needs
to be set back from lot
lines:
— Maximum of 1
Windmill per lot
P P P P P P P
— 2 or more Windmills
per lot
N N N N N N C
All uses that will be unable
to comply with the
performance standards of
this ordinance. See the
"Environmental Protection"
requirements of Article V
N N N N N N N
§ 285-26 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-26
278:428
1 = Except as may be allowed under the Neighborhood Design Option under
§ 285-34.
2 = In addition, certain uses are allowed as a special exception within an historic
building under § 285-37.
3 = Additional requirements apply under § 285-35.
4 = Also, a Medical Residential Campus shall be allowed as a conditional use
on a tract within the R-1 District that directly abuts the R-3 District. See
additional requirements for the R-1 District in § 285-42.
5 = See maximum lot size in A District in § 285-42.
6 = Shall be an allowed conditional use on a lot that is adjacent to a RV or R-3
Zoning District.
7 = Special exception approval is not needed for water and sewage facilities if
they are approved as part of a conditional use approval of a development.
7-1 = Certain accessory dwelling units require conditional use approval as set
forth in § 285-43D(20).
8 = See standards in § 285-43. Some Farm-Related Businesses are permitted by
right.
P = Permitted by use right (zoning decision by Zoning Officer).
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing Board).
C = Conditional use (zoning decision by Board of Supervisors).
N = Not permitted.
(§ 285-42)= See additional requirements in § 285-42.
(§ 285-43)= See additional requirements in § 285-43.
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Business Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II)
MS &
MSL3 CN CH I/M5 OTR4
a. RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-Family Detached Dwelling (Note:
Manufactured/mobile homes shall meet
the additional requirements of § 285-42)
P N N N2 N2
(See also the Age-Restricted Residential
Development optional bonus under
§ 285-36, with a ten-acre minimum tract
size)
Neighborhood Design Option meeting
§ 285-34 (Note: This typically allows a
higher density and smaller lot sizes, and
may allow various types of housing)
N N N C N
§ 285-26 WEAPONS § 285-26
278:429
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Business Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II)
MS &
MSL3 CN CH I/M5 OTR4
Twin Dwelling (side-by-side) P N N N2 N2
Townhouse (Rowhouse) (§ 285-42)
[Amended 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 232]
P11 N N N2 N2
Multifamily Dwellings (§ 285-42), other
than conversions of an existing building
P1 P1 N N2 N2
Manufactured/Mobile Home Park
(§ 285-42)
N N N C N
Medical Residential Campus - See
"Institutional Uses" below
Boardinghouse (includes Rooming House)
(§ 285-42)
N N SE N N
Group Home within a lawful existing
dwelling unit (§ 285-42), not including a
Treatment Center
P P P P N
Conversion of an existing building
(§ 285-42) to result in an increased
number of dwelling units (see also "Unit
for Care of Relative" under Accessory
Uses)[Amended 9-9-2013 by Ord. No.
232]
P SE SE N N
b. COMMERCIAL USES
Adult Use (§ 285-42) N N N SE N
After-Hours Club (Note: This use is
effectively prohibited by State Act 219 of
1990)
N N N N N
Airport (§ 285-42) (see also "Heliport") N N N C N
Amusement Arcade N P P N P
Amusement Park or Water Park N P P N P
Animal Cemetery (§ 285-42) N P P P P
Auditorium (Commercial), Arena,
Performing Arts Center or Exhibition-
Trade Show Center
N SE P P P
Auto Repair Garage or Auto Service
Station (§ 285-42) [Amended 12-8-2008
by Ord. No. 210]
C10 N SE N SE
§ 285-26 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-26
278:430
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Business Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II)
MS &
MSL3 CN CH I/M5 OTR4
Auto, Boat or Mobile/Manufactured Home
Sales (§ 285-42) (other than tractortrailer
and trailer sales)
N N P N P
Bakery, Retail P P P P P
Bed-and-Breakfast Inn (§ 285-42) P P P P P
Betting Use, in compliance with state law N N N SE N
Beverage Distributor (wholesale and/or
retail) [Amended 9-9-2013 by Ord. No.
232]
SE7 SE P P P
Bus Maintenance or Storage Yard N N P P P
Bus Stop (other than maintenance or
storage yard)
P P P P P
Camp (§ 285-42), other than Recreational
Vehicle Campground
N SE P P P
Campground, Recreational Vehicle
(§ 285-42), which may include an
accessory camp store that is primarily for
use by campers
N N SE SE SE
Car Wash (§ 285-42) N N P N P
Catering, Custom, for off-site
consumption
P P P P P
Communications Tower/Antenna,
Commercial (§ 285-42):
— Meeting § 285-42A(15)(a) pertaining
to antenna placed on certain existing
structures
P P P P P
— Antenna/tower that does not meet
§ 285-42A(15)(a) (such as
freestanding towers)
N N SE SE SE
— Note: § 285-42A(15) also allows
towers serving emergency services
stations
Conference Center [Amended 9-9-2013
by Ord. No. 232]
P11 P P P P
§ 285-26 WEAPONS § 285-26
278:431
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Business Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II)
MS &
MSL3 CN CH I/M5 OTR4
Construction Company or Tradesperson's
Headquarters (including but not limited
to landscaping, building trades or
janitorial contractor). See also as Home
Occupation. Accessory outdoor storage
shall also meet § 285-65
SE6 P P P SE6
Crafts or Artisan's Studio (see also as
Home Occupation)
P P P P P
Custom Printing, Copying, Faxing,
Mailing or Courier Service
P P P P P
Exercise Club [Amended 9-9-2013 by
Ord. No. 232]
P7 P P P P
Financial Institution (§ 285-42; includes
banks), with any "drive-through" facilities
meeting § 285-43
P P P P P
Flea Market/Auction House P7 N P P P
Funeral Home (§ 285-42) SE P P P P
Garden Center, Retail (see also
"Wholesale Greenhouses") [Amended
9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 232]
P7 P P P P
Gas Station - See "Auto Service Station"
Golf Course (§ 285-42), with a minimum
lot area of 25 acres
P P P P P
Heliport (§ 285-42) N N N SE N
Horseriding Academy - See "Stable"
under Miscellaneous Uses
Hotel or Motel (§ 285-42), which may
include condominium or time-share units,
provided that no person may occupy the
lot for more than 90 days in any calendar
year except a full-time on-site manager
[Amended 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 232]
P11 P P P P
Kennel (§ 285-42) N N SE SE SE
Laundromat P7 P P P P
Laundry, Commercial or Industrial N N P P P
Lumber Yard N N P P P
§ 285-26 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-26
278:432
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Business Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II)
MS &
MSL3 CN CH I/M5 OTR4
Medical Residential Campus - See under
Institutional Uses below.
Motor Vehicle Racetrack (§ 285-42) N N N C N
Nightclub (§ 285-42) N N C C N
Office (may include medical labs, see also
Home Occupations)
P P P P P
Pawn Shop N N P N N
Personal Services (includes tailoring,
custom dressmaking, haircutting/styling,
dry cleaning, shoe repair, "massage
therapy, certified" and closely similar
uses) (See also Home Occupation)
P P P P P8
Picnic Grove, Private (§ 285-42) SE P P P P
Plant Nursery (other than a Retail Garden
Center)
P P P P P
Propane, Retail Distributor, with a
maximum storage capacity of 100,000
cubic feet and a one-hundred-foot
minimum setback between any storage or
dispensing facilities and any residential
district, and with fire company review
N N C C N
Recording Studio, Music P P P P P
Recreation, Commercial Indoor (§ 285-42)
(includes bowling alley, roller or ice
skating rink, batting practice, and closely
similar uses); other than uses listed
separately in this § 285-26
SE SE P P N
Recreation, Commercial Outdoor
(including miniature golf course, golf
driving range, archery, paintball and
closely similar uses); other than uses
listed separately in this § 285-26
N SE P P P
Repair Service, Household Appliance P P P P P
Restaurant or Banquet Hall (§ 285-42):
— With drive-through service (§ 285-43) N N P P P
— Without drive-through service P P P P P
§ 285-26 WEAPONS § 285-26
278:433
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Business Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II)
MS &
MSL3 CN CH I/M5 OTR4
Retail Store (not including uses listed
individually in this § 285-26) or Shopping
Center:
P7 P9 P9 P9 P
— Any drive-through service shall meet
the requirements of § 285-43 for
drive-through service and shall only
be allowed in the CH District
Self-Storage Development N N P P P
Target Range, Firearms:
— Completely indoor and enclosed N P P P P
— Other than above (§ 285-42) N N N SE N
Tattoo or Body Piercing Establishment
(other than temporary tattoos or ear
piercing, which are personal service uses)
N N P N P
Tavern, which may include a statelicensed
microbrewery, (not including an
After-Hours Club or Nightclub)
N N SE SE N
Theater, Indoor Movie, other than an
Adult Use
N P P P P
Tractor-trailer, truck and trailer of such
combos, sales and rental of
N N N SE N
Trade/Hobby School N P P P P
Veterinarian Office (§ 285-42) N P P P P
Wholesale Sales - see under Industrial
Uses
c. INSTITUTIONAL/SEMIPUBLIC USES
Cemetery (see "Crematorium," listed
separately)
P P P P P
Clubhouse for a Residential Community
Association
P P P P P
College or University - educational and
support buildings (other than
environmental education center)
P P P P P
Community Recreation Center (limited to
a government-sponsored or nonprofit
facility) or Library
P P P P P
§ 285-26 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-26
278:434
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Business Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II)
MS &
MSL3 CN CH I/M5 OTR4
Crematorium N N SE SE N
Cultural Center or Museum P P P P P
Day-Care Center, Adult (§ 285-42) P P P P P
Day-Care Center, Child (§ 285-42) (See
also as an accessory use)
P P P P P
Dormitory as accessory to a college,
university or primary or secondary school
N N SE N N
Emergency Services Station (§ 285-42) P SE SE SE SE
Hospital or Surgery Center SE SE P P P
Hunting and Fishing Club. This term shall
not include uses listed separately in this
§ 285-26.
N N P P P
Maintenance Facilities for on-site
grounds maintenance, which shall be
required to be separated by landscaped
screening from any dwellings
P P P P P
Medical Residential Campus (§ 285-42) N N N C N
Membership Club meeting and
noncommercial recreational facilities,
provided that an "After-Hours Club,"
"Tavern" or uses listed separately in this
§ 285-26 shall only be allowed if so listed
in this table and if the requirements for
that use are also met.
P P P P P
Nursing Home or Personal Care Home/
Assisted Living (§ 285-42)
P P P P P
Place of Worship (§ 285-42) (includes
"Church")
P P P P P
School, Public or Private, Primary or
Secondary (§ 285-42)
P P P P P
Treatment Center (§ 285-42) N N SE SE N
d. PUBLIC/SEMIPUBLIC
Township Government Uses, other than
uses listed separately in this § 285-26
P P P P P
Government Facility, other than uses
listed separately in this § 285-26
SE SE SE SE SE
§ 285-26 WEAPONS § 285-26
278:435
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Business Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II)
MS &
MSL3 CN CH I/M5 OTR4
Prison or Similar Correctional Institution N N N SE N
Publicly Owned or Operated Recreation
Park
P P P P P
Public Utility Facility (See also § 285-14)
other than uses listed separately in this
§ 285-26
SE SE SE SE SE
Swimming Pool, Nonhousehold (§ 285-42) P P P P P
U.S. Postal Service Facility, which may
include a leased facility, with a maximum
building floor area of 50,000 square feet
in the MS, MSL and NC Districts
P P P P P
e. INDUSTRIAL USES
Asphalt Plant N N N SE N
Assembly or Finishing of Products Using
Materials Produced Elsewhere (such as
products from plastics manufactured off
site)
N N N P C
Building Supplies and Building Materials,
Wholesale Sales of
N N P P N
Distribution as a principal use (other than
Trucking Company Terminal)
N N N SE N
Industrial Equipment Sales, Rental and
Service, other than vehicles primarily
intended to be operated on public streets
N N P P N
Junk - outdoor storage, display or
processing of, other than within an
approved junkyard or solid waste disposal
area
N N N N N
Junkyard (§ 285-42) N N N C N
Liquid Fuel Storage, Bulk, for off-site
distribution, other than: Auto service
station, retail propane distributor as
listed separately, prepackaged sales or
fuel tanks for company vehicles
N N N C N
Manufacture and/or bulk processing of
the following, provided manufacturing
occurs only indoors:
§ 285-26 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-26
278:436
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Business Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II)
MS &
MSL3 CN CH I/M5 OTR4
— Agricultural Chemicals, Fertilizers or
Pesticides
N N N SE N
— Apparel, Textiles, Shoes and Apparel
Accessories (see also Crafts Studio)
N N N P C
— Cement Manufacture N N N SE N
— Ceramics Products (other than Crafts
Studio)
N N N P N
Manufacture and/or bulk processing of
the following, provided manufacturing
occurs only indoors:
— Chemicals, Manufacture or Bulk
Processing of Toxic or "Extremely
Hazardous Substances" in amounts
in excess of the U.S. EPA Threshold
Planning Quantity or substances with
similar characteristics
N N N SE N
— Chemical Products, other than
pharmaceuticals and types listed
separately (see above)
N N N SE N
— Clay, Brick, Tile and Refractory
Products
N N N P N
— Computers and Electronic and
Microelectronic Products
N N N P C
— Concrete, Cement, Lime and Gypsum
Products, other than actual
manufacture of cement
N N N SE N
— Electrical Equipment, Appliances
and Components
N N N P C
— Explosives, Fireworks or Ammunition N N N SE N
— Fabricated Metal Products (except
Explosives, Fireworks or
Ammunition) and/or Machine Shops
N N N SE N
§ 285-26 WEAPONS § 285-26
278:437
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Business Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II)
MS &
MSL3 CN CH I/M5 OTR4
— Food (Human) and Beverage
Products, at an industrial scale as
opposed to a clearly retail scale,
including but not limited to
processing, bottling and related
trucking of water removed from a
site (not including uses listed
individually in this § 285-26)
N N P P C
— Food products for animals N N N P N
— Gaskets N N N P N
— Glass and Glass Products (other than
Crafts Studio)
N N N P N
— Incineration, Reduction, Distillation,
Storage or Dumping of
Slaughterhouse Refuse, Rancid Fats,
Garbage, Dead Animals or Offal
(other than within an approved solid
waste facility)
N N N N N
— Jewelry and Silverware N N N P C
— Leather and Allied Products (other
than Crafts Studio or Tannery)
N N N P C
— Machinery N N N P N
— Manufactured or Modular Housing
Manufacture
N N N P N
— Medical Equipment and Supplies N N N P C
— Metal Products, Primary N N N SE N
Manufacture and/or bulk processing of
the following, provided manufacturing
occurs only indoors:
— Mineral Products, Nonmetallic (other
than mineral extraction)
N N N SE N
— Paper and Paper Products (including
recycling, but not including
manufacture of raw paper pulp)
N N N P C
— Paper - Raw Pulp N N N SE N
— Paving Materials, other than bulk
manufacture of asphalt
N N N SE N
§ 285-26 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-26
278:438
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Business Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II)
MS &
MSL3 CN CH I/M5 OTR4
— Pharmaceuticals and Medicines N N N P C
— Plastics, Polymers, Resins, Vinyl,
Coatings, Cleaning Compounds,
Soaps, Adhesives, Sealants, Printing
Ink or Photographic Film
N N N SE N
— Products from Previously
Manufactured Materials, such as
glass, leather, plastics, cellophane,
textiles, rubber or synthetic rubber
N N N P C
— Prototypes, as accessory to a
Research and Development principal
use
N N C P C
— Roofing Materials and Asphalt-
Saturated Materials or Natural or
Synthetic Rubber
N N N SE N
— Scientific, Electronic and Other
Precision Instruments
N N N P C
— Sporting Goods, Toys, Games,
Musical Instruments or Signs
N N C P N
— Transportation Equipment N N N P N
— Wood Products and Furniture (not
including raw paper pulp)
N N C P N
— See § 285-5 for uses that are not
listed
Mineral Extraction (§ 285-42) and related
processing, stockpiling and storage of
materials removed from the site, but
including groundwater or spring water
withdrawals
N N C C N
Packaging N N P P N
Package Delivery Services Distribution
Center
N N N SE N
Petroleum Refining N N N SE N
Photo Processing, Bulk N P P P N
Printing or Bookbinding N P P P N
§ 285-26 WEAPONS § 285-26
278:439
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Business Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II)
MS &
MSL3 CN CH I/M5 OTR4
Recycling Center, Bulk Processing,
provided all operations of an industrial
scale occur within an enclosed building
(this use does not include a solid waste
disposal or transfer facility)
N N C P N
Research and Development, Engineering
or Testing Facility or Laboratory (other
than medical laboratories, which is
considered an Office Use)
N N P P C
Sawmill/Planing Mill N N P P N
Slaughterhouse, Stockyard or Tannery,
with a four-hundred-foot minimum
setback from all lot lines
N N N SE N
Solid Waste Landfill (§ 285-42) N N N C N
Solid Waste Transfer Facility or Waste-to-
Energy Facility (§ 285-42)
N N N C N
Trucking Company Terminal (§ 285-42) N N N C N
Warehousing or Storage as a principal
use
N N N P N
Warehousing or Storage as an on-site
accessory use
N P P P P
Welding N N P P N
Wholesale Sales (other than Motor
Vehicles)
N N P P N
f. ACCESSORY USES
See list of additional permitted uses in
§ 285-26C, such as "Residential Accessory
Structure or Use"
See additional requirements in § 285-43
for specific accessory uses
Bees, Keeping of (§ 285-43) SE SE SE SE SE
Bus Shelter (§ 285-43) to shelter persons
waiting for a bus
P P P P P
Composting (§ 285-43), other than leaves,
tree bark or materials generated on site
which are permitted by right
N N SE SE N
§ 285-26 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-26
278:440
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Business Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II)
MS &
MSL3 CN CH I/M5 OTR4
Day-Care Center accessory to and on the
same lot as an existing lawful Place of
Worship, with a minimum lot area of two
acres
P P P P N
Day Care (§ 285-43) as accessory to a
dwelling:
— Day care of a maximum of 3 adults or
youth, in addition to "relatives" of the
caregiver
P P P P P
— Group Day-Care Home SE SE SE P N
— Family Day-Care Home SE SE P P N
Farm-Related Business (§ 285-43) N P P P SE
Home Occupation, General (§ 285-43) SE SE SE P P
Home Occupation, Light (§ 285-43) P P P P P
Outdoor Storage and Display as
accessory to a business use, which shall
also comply with §§ 285-43, 285-65 and
285-66
P P P P P
Parking Lot for carpooling (see also
Miscellaneous Uses below)
P P P P P
Retail Sales of Agricultural Products
(§ 285-43)
P P P P P
Temporary Retail Sales (§ 285-3G) P P P P N
Unit for Care of Relative (§ 285-43) P P P P P
g. MISCELLANEOUS USES
Crop Farming and Wholesale
Greenhouses
P P P P P
Groundwater or Spring Water
Withdrawal, averaging more than 10,000
gallons per day, removed from a tract for
off-site consumption (§ 285-42) (See also
requirements for food and beverage
bottling and processing under Industrial
Uses)
C C C C C
§ 285-26 WEAPONS § 285-26
278:441
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Uses in Primarily Business Zoning Districts
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Article II)
MS &
MSL3 CN CH I/M5 OTR4
Nature Preserve or Environmental
Education Center, with a ten-acre
minimum lot area for any use involving a
principal building
P P P P P
Parking Lot or Structure as an accessory
use
P P P P P
Parking Lot or Structure as a principal
use that does not primarily serve tractortrailer
trucks or trailers
P P P P P
Parking Lot or Structure as a principal
use that primarily serves tractor-trailer
trucks or trailers
N N N SE N
Livestock or Poultry, Raising of
(§ 285-42):
— Intensive SE SE SE SE SE
— Not intensive SE P P P P
Sewage Sludge/Biosolids, Land
Application of (§ 285-43)
SE SE SE SE SE
Sewage Treatment Plant C C C C C
Stable, Nonhousehold (§ 285-42; includes
horse-riding academy)
N SE P P P
Timber Harvesting (§ 285-42) P P P P P
Windmill, maximum of one per lot, which
shall be required to have a setback equal
to the total height from all lot lines of
existing dwellings and residential
districts, except that if placed above a
building, only the height of the pole and
windmill needs to be setback from lot
lines
P P P P P
All uses that will be unable to comply
with the performance standards of this
chapter. See the "Environmental
Protection" requirements of Article V
N N N N N
§ 285-26 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-26
278:442
1 = Multifamily dwellings shall be limited to above a street level principal
nonresidential use within a building of less than 6,000 square feet of floor
area and with each dwelling unit having a minimum floor area of 750 square
feet, and provided there is a minimum of 4,000 square feet of lot area per
dwelling unit.
2 = Except as may be allowed through the Neighborhood Design Option under
§ 285-34.
3 = See additional requirements in § 285-39.
4 = See additional requirements in § 285-38. Non-office commercial uses shall
be limited to a maximum of 20% of the tract area of a Planned Mixed-Use
Development and must be within a Planned Mixed-Use Development. No
retail establishment shall exceed a building floor area of 80,000 square
feet.
5 = In addition, a tract within the I/M District of at least 10 acres may be
developed under all of the requirements of the OTR District instead of the
requirements of the I/M District.
6 = Outdoor storage shall be limited to a maximum of 15% of the lot area.
7 = Limited to a maximum building floor area per establishment of 4,000 square
feet in the MSL and NC Districts and 10,000 square feet in the MS District.
8 = Retail sales, personal service uses and restaurants shall be limited to a total
maximum of 10% of the floor area of a building.
9 = If an individual retail store or a shopping center includes a total of more
than 50,000 square feet of new or expanded retail building floor area, then
conditional use approval shall be required. However, in the I/M District, no
retail store shall exceed 50,000 square feet of building floor area.
10 = Auto repair garages are permitted by conditional use only in the MS
District. Auto repair garages are not permitted in the MSL District. Auto
service stations are not permitted in either the MS District or the MSL
District. [Added 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 210]
11 = Conditional use approval shall be required for uses in the MSL District.
[Added 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 232]
P = Permitted by use right (zoning decision by Zoning Officer).
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing Board).
C = Conditional use (zoning decision by Board of Supervisors).
N = Not permitted.
(§ 285-42) = See additional requirements in § 285-42.
(§ 285-43) = See additional requirements in § 285-43.
C. Permitted accessory uses in all districts. An accessory use of a dwelling
is only permitted if such use is customarily incidental to the residential
use and is specifically permitted by this chapter. The following are
permitted by right as accessory uses to a lawful principal use in all
districts, within the requirements of § 285-43 and all other
requirements of this chapter:
§ 285-26 WEAPONS § 285-26
278:443
§ 285-27. Dimensional requirements in each district.
(1) Standard antennas, including antennas used by contractors to
communicate with their own vehicles.*
(2) Fence* or wall.*
(3) Garage, household.
(4) Garage sale.*
(5) Pets, keeping of.*
(6) Parking or loading, off-street, only to serve a use that is permitted
in that district.
(7) Recreational facilities, limited to use by residents of a development
or students at a primary or secondary school or center for the care
and treatment of youth and their occasional invited guests.
(8) Residential accessory structure (see definition in Article II).*
(9) Signs, as permitted by Article VII.
(10) Swimming pool, household.*
(11) Such other accessory use or structure that the applicant proves to
the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer is clearly customary and
incidental to a permitted by right, special exception or conditional
principal use.
* See standard for each in § 285-43.
D. Permitted accessory uses to business and institutional uses. The
following are permitted by right accessory uses only to a permitted by
right, special exception or conditional commercial, industrial or
institutional use, provided that all requirements of this chapter are met:
(1) Storage of fuels for on-site use or to fuel company vehicles.
(2) The following accessory uses, provided that the use is clearly
limited to employees, patients, residents and families of employees
of the use and their occasional invited guests:
(a) Internal cafeteria without drive-through service;
(b) Day-care center; or
(c) Recreational facilities.
(3) Bus shelters meeting § 285-43.
(4) Automatic transaction machine (ATM).
(5) Storage sheds meeting the requirements of § 285-27A.
§ 285-26 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-27
278:444
A. The following table of area, yard and building requirements shall apply
for the specified zoning district, unless a more restrictive requirement
for a specific use is required by §§ 285-42 and 285-43 or another section
of this chapter. All measurements shall be in feet unless otherwise
stated. See definitions of terms (such as "lot width") in § 285-20.
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Zoning District: Type
of Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
(Note E)
Minimum Lot
Width
Measured at
Minimum
Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
(Note
D)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)**
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback**
(each)
(feet)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
OSR Open Space
Residential District:
See also Open Space
Development Option in
§ 285-31, which may
allow smaller lot sizes,
smaller lot widths and
density bonuses.
130,680 (3
acres),
unless a
larger lot
area is
required by
§ 285-30
250 50 50 30 10% 20%
A Agricultural
District:
The requirements of
§ 285-35 shall apply.
RR Rural Residential
District:
See also Open Space
Development Option in
§ 285-31, which may
allow smaller lot sizes,
smaller lot widths and
density bonuses.
87,120 (2
acres)
200 50 50 15 15% 20%
R-1 Low Density
Residential District:
a) Single-family
detached dwelling:
a) - b):
30
a) - b): 35 a) - b): 15 a) - b):
30
a) - b): 40
§ 285-27 WEAPONS § 285-27
278:445
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Zoning District: Type
of Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
(Note E)
Minimum Lot
Width
Measured at
Minimum
Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
(Note
D)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)**
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback**
(each)
(feet)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
a 1) Without
Townshipapproved
central
water service and
without Townshipapproved
central
sewage service
a 1) 43,560
(1 acre)
a 1) 150
a 2) With
Townshipapproved
central
water or
Townshipapproved
central
sewage service
a 2) 39,000 a 2) 150
a 3) With both
Townshipapproved
central
water and
Townshipapproved
central
sewage services:
a 3) 15,000 a 3) 100
b) Other allowed
principal use
b) 43,560 (1
acre)
b) 150
See the Neighborhood
Design Option in
§ 285-34, which may
allow smaller minimum
lot sizes, smaller lot
widths, greater
varieties in housing
types and density
bonuses.
See also the Age-
Restricted Residential
Development Option in
§ 285-36.
§ 285-27 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-27
278:446
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Zoning District: Type
of Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
(Note E)
Minimum Lot
Width
Measured at
Minimum
Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
(Note
D)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)**
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback**
(each)
(feet)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
All dwellings shall have
a minimum principal
building width and
length of 20 feet (not
including unenclosed
structures).
R-2 Medium Density
Residential District:
a) Single-family
detached dwellings:
a) - b):
30
a) - b): 30 a 1) 15 a) - b):
50%
a) - b):
60%
a 1) Without
Townshipapproved
central
water service and
without Townshipapproved
central
sewage services
a 1) 43,560
(1 acre)
a 1) 105
a 2) With
Townshipapproved
central
water or
Townshipapproved
central
sewage service
a 2) 39,000 a 2) 105 a 2) and a
3) One
side yard
with a
minimum
of 8 feet,
provided
the total of
both side
yards is a
minimum
of 20 feet
a 3) With both
Townshipapproved
central
water and
Townshipapproved
central
sewage services
a 3) 9,000 a 3) 70
§ 285-27 WEAPONS § 285-27
278:447
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Zoning District: Type
of Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
(Note E)
Minimum Lot
Width
Measured at
Minimum
Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
(Note
D)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)**
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback**
(each)
(feet)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
b) Other allowed
principal use.
b) 20,000 b) 100 b) 15
See the Neighborhood
Design Option in
§ 285-34, which may
allow smaller minimum
lot sizes, smaller lot
widths, greater
varieties in housing
types and density
bonuses.
See also the Age-
Restricted Residential
Development Option in
§ 285-36.
R-3 Medium High
Density Residential
District:
a) Single-family
detached dwellings:
a) - c):
25
a) - c): 30 a) - c):
50%
a) - c):
60%
a 1) Without both
Townshipapproved
central
water service and
Townshipapproved
central
sewage services
a 1) 43,560 a 1) 150 a 1) 15
§ 285-27 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-27
278:448
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Zoning District: Type
of Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
(Note E)
Minimum Lot
Width
Measured at
Minimum
Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
(Note
D)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)**
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback**
(each)
(feet)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
a 2) With both
Townshipapproved
central
water and
Townshipapproved
central
sewage services
a 2) 7,000 a 2) 55 a 2) One
side yard
with a
minimum
width of 5
feet,
provided
the total of
both side
yards is a
minimum
of 15 feet.
b) The following
housing types, each
of which shall require
Township-approved
central water and
Township-approved
central sewage
services:
b): 10,
except 0 at
the shared
lot line of
lawfully
attached
dwellings.
b 1) Twin dwelling
unit
b 1), b 2)
and b 3):
Minimum
average lot
area of
7,000 per
dwelling
unit (Note
C)
b 1) 35 per
dwelling unit
b 2) Townhouse b 2) 20 per
interior
dwelling unit,
and 40 for
each end unit
(Note B)
§ 285-27 WEAPONS § 285-27
278:449
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Zoning District: Type
of Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
(Note E)
Minimum Lot
Width
Measured at
Minimum
Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
(Note
D)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)**
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback**
(each)
(feet)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
b 3) Duplex or
other multifamily
dwellings, which
shall be detached
from other
buildings
b 3) 100
b 4) Manufactured
home parks shall
meet the
requirements for
such use as stated
in § 285-42,
instead of the
requirements of
this section
c) Other allowed
principal use
c) 25,000 c) 100 c) 15
See the Neighborhood
Design Option in
§ 285-34, which allows
smaller minimum lot
sizes, smaller lot
widths, and density
bonuses. See also the
Age-Restricted Option
in § 285-36.
RV Village
Residential District:
a) Single-family
detached dwelling
a) 7,000 a) 55 a) and
b): 25
a) and b):
30
a) and b):
10
a) and
b): 50%
a) and b):
65%
b) Other allowed use b) 25,000 b) 10
§ 285-27 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-27
278:450
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Zoning District: Type
of Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
(Note E)
Minimum Lot
Width
Measured at
Minimum
Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
(Note
D)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)**
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback**
(each)
(feet)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
See the Neighborhood
Design Option in
§ 285-34, which allows
smaller minimum lot
sizes, smaller lot
widths, and density
bonuses. See also the
Age-Restricted Option
in § 285-36
MS Main Street
[Amended 12-8-2008
by Ord. No. 210;
9-9-2013 by Ord. No.
232]
a) Principal
Residential Uses - the
regulations for the
R-3 District shall
apply
b) Other allowed use b) 10,000 b) 80, except
200 feet if a
new lot is
created with
own driveway
entering
directly onto
an arterial
street
b) 10 b) 35
(Note G)
b) 10,
except 20
for a new
principal
nonresidential
building
from an
adjoining
dwelling
b) 40% b) 80%
MSL Main Street
Limited District
[Amended 12-8-2008
by Ord. No. 210;
9-9-2013 by Ord. No.
232]
§ 285-27 WEAPONS § 285-27
278:451
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Zoning District: Type
of Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
(Note E)
Minimum Lot
Width
Measured at
Minimum
Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
(Note
D)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)**
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback**
(each)
(feet)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
a) Principal
Residential Uses - the
regulations for the
R-3 District shall
apply
b) Other allowed use b) 10,000 b) 80, except
200 feet if a
new lot is
created with
own driveway
entering
directly onto
an arterial
street
b) (Note
H)
b) 35
(Notes G
and I)
b) 10,
except 20
for a new
principal
nonresidential
building
from an
adjoining
dwelling
(Note I)
b) 40% b)
65%(Note
J)
CN Neighborhood
Commercial and CH
Highway Commercial
Districts:
Allowed use
30,000 100, except
200 for a new
lot approved
after the
adoption of
this chapter
that will have
its own vehicle
access directly
onto an
arterial street
30,
except
50 feet
where
offstreet
parking
will
exist
between
the
principal
building
and an
arterial
street
30 (Note
A)
15 (Note
A)
40% 70%
I/M Industrial/Mixed
Use District:
§ 285-27 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-27
278:452
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Zoning District: Type
of Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
(Note E)
Minimum Lot
Width
Measured at
Minimum
Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
(Note
D)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)**
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback**
(each)
(feet)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
a) Residential uses
shall be allowed
under the regulations
of the R-3 District.
Residential uses shall
only be allowed on a
minimum tract of 10
acres
b) Other allowed use b) 87,120 (2
acres)
b) 200 b) 30 b) 30
(Note A)
b) 25
(Note A)
b) 40% b) 70%
In addition, a tract
within the I/M District
of at least 10 acres may
be developed under all
of the requirements of
the OTR District,
instead of the
requirements of the I/M
District.
OTR Office/
Technology/
Residential District:
a) For development
under the
Neighborhood
Development Option,
§ 285-34 shall apply
§ 285-27 WEAPONS § 285-27
278:453
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Zoning District: Type
of Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
(Note E)
Minimum Lot
Width
Measured at
Minimum
Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
(Note
D)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)**
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback**
(each)
(feet)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
b) Other allowed use b) 3 acres,
except 1
acre if the
applicant
first
receives
approval
for a
Planned
Business
Development
b) 300, except
100 feet for a
lot within an
approved
Planned
Business
Development
b) 40,
except
60
adjacent
to an
arterial
street
b) 20
each,
except 60
for a side
yard
contiguous
to an
existing
residential
lot
b) 20,
except 60
for a side
yard
contiguous
to an
existing
residential
lot
b) 50 b) 60,
unless
incentives
are
approved
under
§ 285-38
See additional
requirements for the
OTR District in
§ 285-38.
NOTES FOR THE ABOVE TABLE:
** = The following exceptions shall apply:
- For accessory structures and uses, see § 285-27C below.
- Structures shall not obstruct minimum sight clearance at intersections.
- See § 285-65B pertaining to corner lots.
- See § 285-67 regarding extension of nonconforming setbacks.
- See § 285-65 regarding permitted reductions in setbacks to reflect average
setbacks of adjacent buildings.
- See § 285-69 which may require additional setbacks along existing streets.
- See § 285-27D regarding setbacks from adjoining agricultural uses.
(Note
A)
= Except 40 feet side and 50 feet rear for a principal business use from a directly
abutting principal residential lot in a residential district. A side or rear yard shall
be increased to 100 feet for any new or expanded portion of an industrial building
or tractor-trailer truck loading dock from the lot line of a primarily residential use
in a residential district.
§ 285-27 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-27
278:454
NOTES FOR THE ABOVE TABLE:
(Note
B)
= Except if two or more side-by-side off-street parking spaces are located in the front
yard of a townhouse or if garage door(s) for two or more vehicles face onto the
street in the front of the townhouse, then the minimum building width per dwelling
along such street shall be a minimum of 24 feet. A maximum of 50% of the land
area between the front of each townhouse and the right-of-way line shall be used
for vehicle parking and driveways.
(Note
C)
= These provisions are intended to allow flexibility in the placement of individual
dwelling units, regardless of whether the homes are condominium or fee-simple,
and regardless of whether public streets, private streets or parking courts are used.
- The minimum average lot area per dwelling unit establishes the maximum
number of units permitted on a tract of land.
- The minimum average lot area per dwelling unit shall be calculated after
deleting existing street right-of-way of existing streets and alleys, but shall
include: right-of-way of proposed streets and alleys and areas of parking courts,
common open space and stormwater detention basins.
- A golf course (not including areas covered by buildings and paving) may count
towards the common open space, provided that it includes more than 50 acres
of lot area and is preserved by a permanent conservation easement at the time
of development approval.
- See also the applicable standards in § 285-42, which may require common open
space.
(Note
D)
= Setbacks shall be measured from the future/ultimate right-of-way. An unenclosed
front porch or deck may intrude up to 10 feet into the minimum front yard. This
porch or deck may be covered by a roof. Where at least two adjacent buildings
within 100 feet of a property are set back a lesser distance than required, the
average of the lesser distances becomes the required minimum front yard setback
for the property.[Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 202]
(Note
E)
= See natural feature regulations, including § § 285-28 and 285-30.
(Note
F)
= Additional lot coverage is permitted if pervious materials are utilized; however,
in no case shall a lot exceed twenty-percent lot coverage beyond that which is
specified for impervious coverage (pervious and impervious combined). [Added
12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 202]
(Note
G)
= The rear yard setback in MS and MSL Districts may be reduced to 25 feet for uses
allowed by conditional use if the Board of Supervisors determines in a conditional
use proceeding based upon substantial evidence presented by the applicant that
such reduction is necessary for the reasonable development and use of the lot and
if the lot abuts another commercial use or uses and not a residential use. If the
setback reduction is approved, the setback area between the proposed building and
the lot line must be planted with a vegetative buffer shield satisfactory to the Board
of Supervisors. [Added 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 210; amended 9-9-2013 by Ord.
No. 232]
§ 285-27 WEAPONS § 285-27
278:455
NOTES FOR THE ABOVE TABLE:
(Note
H)
= On lots abutting streets on more than one side, the front setback requirements
shall apply to each of the abutting streets. A principal structure need not be set
back more than the average of the setback of the principal structures on contiguous
abutting lots existing as of the date of the enactment of this chapter. If a vacant lot
exists on one or both sides of the lot, the front yard setback shall not be less than
40 feet.[Added 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 232]
(Note
I)
= Any new nonresidential principal structure adjacent to an existing residential lot
shall provide a landscape buffer in accordance with § 285-65D(1)-(7) within the
required setback.[Added 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 232]
(Note
J)
= See § 285-39 for additional requirements in the MSL District.[Added 9-9-2013 by
Ord. No. 232]
B. Height. Except as provided in § 285-64, or as specified otherwise in this
chapter for a particular use, the following maximum structure height
shall apply in all zoning districts:
(1) Any structure that is accessory to a dwelling on a lot of less than
five acres shall have a maximum height of two stories (with the
second story limited to nonhabitable storage areas) or 25 feet,
whichever is more restrictive, and except where a habitable second
story is allowed in a neighborhood design development;
(2) In the OTR District, § 285-38 shall apply; and
(3) The maximum height for any other structure shall be 2.5 stories or
40 feet, whichever is more restrictive.
C. Accessory structures and uses.
(1) Accessory structures and uses shall meet the minimum yard
setbacks provided for in § 285-27A, unless otherwise provided for
in this chapter, including this Subsection C.
(2) The minimum side and rear yard setback apply for a permitted
detached structure that is accessory to a dwelling shall be 10 feet
in the OSR, RR and R-1 Districts and five feet in other districts,
except in the following cases:
(a) The minimum rear setback shall be reduced to three feet for a
residential accessory storage shed having a total floor area of
less than 150 square feet.
(b) A side yard setback is not required for a structure that is
accessory to a dwelling from a lot line along which two
dwellings are attached (such as a lot line shared by twin
dwellings). However, such structure shall still meet the
minimum side yard on a lot line where the dwellings are not
attached.
§ 285-27 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-27
278:456
§ 285-28. Wetlands and lakes.
(c) A residential porch or deck that is unenclosed may extend a
maximum of 15 feet into the required rear setback. Such porch
or deck may or may not be covered by a roof or awning. Space
under an unenclosed porch may be used for household storage.
See also Note D of the Table for Dimensional Requirements at
the end of this chapter concerning front yard setbacks.
(d) See § 285-43 for swimming pools.
(e) If any accessory building or pool is constructed adjacent to a
street (such as a rear yard on a lot that is adjacent to a street
along the front lot line and another street along the rear lot
line), then the building or pool shall be separated from such
street by a buffer yard meeting § 285-65.
(3) No accessory structure and no swimming pool shall be allowed
within the front yard except as meeting the following criteria:
[Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 202]
(a) Minimum lot size of two acres.
(b) Minimum front yard setback for principal buildings: 100 feet.
(c) Screening to be provided between the accessory structure or
swimming pool and any adjoining lot or street right-of-way in
accordance with § 285-65D(6).
D. Agricultural setback requirement. No dwelling unit shall be located
within 75 feet of any actively farmed parcel within the Agricultural
Zone. In addition, no shrub nor tree shall be planted within 10 and 20
feet, respectively, of any parcel within the Agricultural Zone.
A. Lot area. Wetlands (as officially defined under federal and/or state
regulations), ponds and lakes shall not be counted toward the minimum
lot area of any lot or tract of land. This Subsection A shall only apply to
a lot within a subdivision or land development submitted for approval
after the adoption of this chapter.
B. Wetland studies. It shall be the responsibility of each applicant to
determine whether land areas proposed for alteration meet the federal
or state definition of a wetland prior to submittal of development plans
to the Township. If the Zoning Officer has reason to believe that
wetlands may be present on a site proposed for development or
subdivision, the Zoning Officer may require that the applicant provide a
suitable wetland delineation study prepared by a qualified professional.
C. Wetland setbacks. A minimum setback of 20 feet shall be required
between any new principal building for which a building permit is
issued after the effective date of this chapter and any wetland.
§ 285-27 WEAPONS § 285-29
278:457
§ 285-29. Sewage and water services.
A. Central water service. A use shall not be considered to be served by
Township-approved central water service unless:
(1) All applicable requirements of state regulations and the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance115 are met;
(2) The applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Township that there
will be an appropriate system in place to guarantee and properly
fund the long-term operation and maintenance of the system by a
qualified professional operator; and
(3) The applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Township, based
upon review of the Township Engineer, that the system will include
adequate supply, transmission capacity and pressure to serve the
development.
B. Central sewage service. A use shall not be considered to be served by
Township-approved central sewage service unless:
(1) All applicable requirements of state regulations and the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance are met;
(2) The applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Township that there
will be an appropriate system in place to guarantee and properly
fund the long-term operation and maintenance of the system by a
qualified professional operator; and
(3) The applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Township, based
upon review of the Township Engineer, that the system will include
adequate treatment capacity and conveyance capacity to serve the
development.
C. On-lot septic systems.
(1) Purpose. To ensure that a suitable location is available for a new
septic system if the original septic system should malfunction.
(2) This Subsection C shall only apply to a lot that is officially
submitted for subdivision or land development approval after the
adoption of this zoning chapter.
(3) Each lot shall include both a primary and a reserve septic system
location. Both locations shall be determined by the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer to meet Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection regulations for a septic system location
prior to approval of the final subdivision or land development plan.
(4) The requirement for a reserve septic system location shall not
apply to the following:
115. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 285-29 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-29
278:458
(a) A lot of over 10 acres;
(b) The simple merger of two or more existing lots or an
adjustment to lot lines of an existing lot;
(c) A vacant lot that includes a permanent deed restriction or
conservation easement prohibiting any construction of
buildings on the lot; or
(d) Lots within a subdivision or land development that will abut a
complete capped sewage system constructed by the developer,
the design of which has been approved by the Township.
(5) The reserve septic system location shall be kept clear of buildings
and parking and shall be shown on any subsequent applications for
new or expanded buildings or parking. The Township may require
that the location be recorded on the deed.
D. Well and septic system locations. Every plan for a subdivision or land
development and every application for a building permit for a new
principal building that will be served by a well and/or septic system
shall designate the proposed well and primary and alternate septic
system locations.
(1) Such plan shall show that the proposed locations will meet the
minimum isolation distances established by PA DEP regulations
between a well and septic systems on the subject lot and all
adjacent lots.
(2) A plan may show the outer extent of potential well locations instead
of one exact location, provided all of the potential area would still
meet the isolation distance.
(3) If the well or septic system location is proposed to be changed from
the location shown on the submitted plan, then a site plan showing
the revised location shall be submitted for approval by the Zoning
Officer and Sewage Enforcement Officer prior to issuance of the
building permit.
(4) It is requested that well sites be placed in the front yard, thereby
allowing septic systems to be placed in the rear yard. The intent is
to minimize the visibility of any septic mound systems. In addition,
if wells are located in consistent locations within a subdivision, it
will make it easier for adjacent property owners to meet minimum
separation distances between septic systems and wells.
E. Expansion of septic use. If the Zoning Officer has reason to believe that
a proposed increase in the number of dwelling units or expansion or
change of a nonresidential use would result in increased flow to a septic
system, then the application shall be referred to the Sewage
Enforcement Officer. The Sewage Enforcement Officer shall require
§ 285-29 WEAPONS § 285-29
278:459
§ 285-30. Steep slopes.
modification, expansion or replacement of the septic system if
necessary to handle the proposed flow.
A. Purposes. The following provisions are primarily intended to avoid
erosion, sedimentation, stormwater management and winter driving
hazards, particularly considering the Township's climate, in addition to
serving the overall purposes of this chapter.
B. Regrading. Non-man-made slopes of over 15% shall not be regraded
after the adoption of this chapter in such a manner that circumvents the
requirements of this chapter. This section shall not regulate slopes that
were clearly man made prior to the adoption of this chapter.
C. Slopes over 25%. A new principal building shall not be located on a
slope greater than 25%.
D. Single-family dwellings and steep slopes. The following provisions shall
only apply to any lot that is submitted for preliminary subdivision
approval after the effective date of this section or which is submitted for
final subdivision approval if a preliminary plan submittal was not
required, if the lot contains areas with slopes of 15% or greater:
(1) Any lot proposed to be used for a single-family detached dwelling
shall include a proposed building area with a minimum of 4,000
square feet of land area. Such building area shall not include land
area restricted by the minimum yard areas. Such building area
shall contain the proposed location of the dwelling. The dwelling
shall be built within the proposed building area shown on the plan,
except as may be approved under Subsection F.
(a) If such building area for each lot includes an average slope of
greater than 15%, then the minimum lot area shall be two
acres, unless a larger lot area is required by another section of
this chapter.
(b) Through designations on the Township-approved site plan, an
applicant may limit the area upon which new principal
buildings are permitted. By committing to not place a principal
building on slopes over 15%, the applicant can avoid the larger
lot size requirement of this subsection.
(2) Access. Each lot shall be accessible from an existing or proposed
street by means of a driveway with a maximum grade of 15%.
E. Steep slopes and other uses. A lot shall only be used for a building for
principal uses other than single-family detached dwellings if the
proposed building area includes an average slope of less than 15%.
(1) For such uses, the building area shall include locations of all
proposed buildings and parking areas and outdoor storage areas
§ 285-29 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-30
278:460
§ 285-31. Open space development option.
and an area 20 feet around buildings, parking and storage areas.
Such building area shall also contain the proposed locations of any
primary and alternate on-lot septic systems.
(2) Access. Each principal building and each parking area shall have
vehicle access from an existing or proposed street by means of a
driveway with a maximum grade of 10%.
F. Changes to building area. The building area may show the outer extent
of areas being considered for a proposed building without showing an
exact location, provided all of those potential areas still meet the
requirements of this section. An applicant may change the proposed
building area after subdivision approval is granted, provided that the
applicant proves that the new building area will still comply with this
section. However, the building area shall not be so large as to attempt
to circumvent the average slope provisions of this section that apply to
a building site.
G. Site plan and tree protection. If an applicant proposes to alter or build
upon slopes of 15% or greater, then a site plan shall be submitted to the
Zoning Officer. A separate site plan is not required if the same
information was included in an approved subdivision or land
development plan.
(1) Site plan. The site plan shall show:
(a) The proposed lot lines;
(b) The existing and proposed contours; and
(c) Existing and proposed building locations and the outer
perimeter of the proposed building area as described above.
(2) Mature trees. Where building or alteration is proposed on slopes of
over 15%, the applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Officer that the removal of healthy trees with a trunk width of over
six inches (measured at a height 4.5 feet above the ground level)
and other attractive natural vegetation will be minimized. The
Zoning Officer may ask for reviews by the Township Engineer or
Planning Commission. The site plan shall show wooded areas to be
removed or preserved and methods to be used to make sure trees
are protected by temporary fences or other measures during the
construction process.
A. Purposes. To allow reasonable amounts of flexibility in site planning of
residential development to: a) protect environmentally sensitive areas
and avoid severe soil erosion and sedimentation; b) avoid severely
increased stormwater flows and speeds; c) preserve areas of prime
farmland; d) provide additional recreation land; e) steer development to
those areas that are more physically suited for it; f) avoid construction
§ 285-30 WEAPONS § 285-31
278:461
of steep roads that are difficult, time-consuming, and expensive to
maintain and plow snow upon; g) avoid increased use of steep roads
and driveways that are dangerous to drive upon in snow and ice; h)
conserve forested areas that are an important part of the ecological
cycle, providing for groundwater recharge, air pollution reduction and
wildlife habitats; i) reduce construction costs and municipal
maintenance costs; j) provide for transitional forms of development
between residential and agricultural or industrial areas or highways,
with open space serving as a buffer; and k) allow each property owner
a reasonable use of his/her land related directly to the features and
location and accessibility of the land. This option will encourage the
preservation of significant areas of preserved open space.
B. Applicability. This § 285-31 allows an applicant the option to reduce the
minimum lot areas on tracts of land if the applicant proves compliance
with all of the requirements of this § 285-31 to the satisfaction of the
Township.
(1) An open space development is a residential development that
meets the requirements of this § 285-31 and is granted conditional
use approval by the Board of Supervisors as an open space
development. An open space development shall only be allowed in
zoning districts where the use is listed as allowed in § 285-26.
(2) Uses. An open space development shall only include the following
uses: single-family detached dwellings; nature preserves;
Township-owned recreation; recreation uses that the Township
approves to be within the preserved open space; crop farming; a
golf course; utilities necessary to serve the development; and
customary permitted accessory uses. A mobile home/manufactured
home park shall not qualify as an open space development.
(3) A tract may be eligible for approval for an open space development
if it includes a minimum of 10 acres of lot area in common
ownership. Such land area shall be contiguous, except that
portions of the tract may be separated only by existing or proposed
streets or creeks.
(a) The amount of preserved open space shall be based upon the
total lot area of all lots within the development, prior to
subdivision, and prior to deletion of rights-of-way of future
streets and before deleting the area of any environmental
features. Land area of future rights-of-way of existing streets
may be deleted from the total lot area before calculating the
required amount of preserved open space.
[1] Areas that were preserved by a conservation or
agricultural preservation easement or deed restriction
prior to the submittal of the subdivision shall not be
counted towards the area of the tract in calculating
preserved open space or allowed density.
§ 285-31 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-31
278:462
(b) Areas used for a principal nonresidential use (other than uses
approved by the Township to be part of the preserved open
space, such as an agricultural barn or golf course) shall not be
included within the land area used to calculate residential
density.
(c) Conservation easements or deed restrictions shall be
established on lots as necessary to make sure that the
maximum density requirement is met over time. Such
conservation easements shall prevent the resubdivision of lots
in a manner that would violate this § 285-31.
(4) An open space development shall be designed as a unified,
coordinated residential development, and shall be approved with a
single development plan proposed by a single development entity.
After final subdivision approval and within an approved
development agreement(s) and phasing plan, portions of the
development may be transferred to different entities, provided that
there is compliance with the approved development plan and this
§ 285-31.
(5) Procedures.
(a) Applicants are strongly encouraged to first submit a layout
plan with the conditional use application before completing
detailed fully-engineered preliminary subdivision plans. This
two-step process will allow the Township and applicant to
mutually agree upon the preserved open space and
development layout before large sums of money are spent by
the applicant on detailed engineering. This two-step process
can reduce the costs of re-engineering to the applicant.
Detailed stormwater, grading, utility, profile and erosion
control plans shall not be required at the conditional use stage
if such matters will be submitted later for the subdivision or
land development approval.
(b) The applicant and Township officials are strongly encouraged
to walk the tract at a time after a detailed existing features
map has been provided to the Township but before the site
layout has been finalized.
(c) An existing features map shall be required to be submitted as
part of the conditional use application for an open space
development. This existing features map shall accurately show
the locations of the following, at a minimum: wetlands; onehundred-
year floodplains; areas of woodland; existing
topography; existing buildings with a description of any
buildings over 70 years old; highlighting of fifteen-to-twentyfive-
percent slopes and twenty-five-percent-and-greater slopes;
and any major scenic views from within the tract or from
outside of the tract.
§ 285-31 WEAPONS § 285-31
278:463
C. Density, open space and lot standards. The maximum number of
dwelling units on the tract shall be determined based upon an existing
features map and a yield plan.
(1) An existing features map shall be required to be submitted as part
of the application for an open space development. This existing
features map shall accurately show the locations of the following,
at a minimum: wetlands; one-hundred-year floodplains; areas of
woodland; existing topography; existing buildings with a
description of any buildings over 70 years old; highlighting of
fifteen-to-twenty-five-percent slopes and twenty-five-percent-andgreater
slopes; and any major scenic views from within the tract or
from outside of the tract.
(2) A yield plan shall be submitted to the Township by the applicant
[except as provided in Subsection C(4) below]. The yield plan shall
accurately show the maximum number of dwelling units that would
be possible under current Township ordinances if the open space
development provisions would not be used and instead the
provisions for conventional development in the applicable zoning
district would be used. The yield plan shall be completed to an
accurate scale, including accurately showing the existing features
map information described above. The yield plan shall show
potential lots, streets and retention/detention pond locations.
However, the yield plan shall not serve as, and is not required to
contain, the engineering detail requirements of a preliminary
subdivision plan.
(3) Such yield plan shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer, with advice
by the Township Engineer, to determine whether it represents a
reasonably accurate estimate of the number of dwelling units
possible on the site, both physically and legally. If such estimates
are determined to not be accurate, the applicant shall be required
by the Zoning Officer to revise such yield plan until it is accurate.
(a) The maximum number of dwelling units allowed on the tract
through open space development shall be 25% greater than the
number of dwelling units that is determined by the Township to
be possible under the Township-accepted yield plan.
(b) The allowed number of dwelling units may be rounded to the
nearest whole number.
(4) For a tract of over 50 acres in the OSR District, a yield plan is not
required, and instead the maximum density for an open space
development shall be equal to an average of one dwelling unit for
every 2.0 acres of total lot area.
(5) All provisions of the zoning district shall apply, except for
provisions that are specifically modified by this § 285-31. The
following dimensional requirements shall apply, provided that the
total maximum density for the tract is not exceeded.
§ 285-31 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-31
278:464
(a) OSR District. Two options are available:
[1] The minimum lot area shall be one acre (43,560 square
feet) if both public water and public sewage services are
not provided. The same yard and other dimensional
requirements shall apply as are provided for conventional
development in the RR District. A minimum of 60% of the
total lot area of the tract (prior to subdivision) shall be
preserved as preserved open space.
[2] If a lot is served by both public water and public sewage
services, then the minimum lot area shall be 12,000 square
feet. The same yard and other dimensional requirements
shall apply as are provided for conventional development
in the R-2 District, except the minimum lot width shall be
80 feet. A minimum of 85% of the total lot area of the tract
(prior to subdivision) shall be preserved as preserved open
space.
(b) RR District. Two options are available:
[1] The minimum lot area shall be one acre (43,560 square
feet) if both public water and public sewage services are
not provided. The same yard and other dimensional
requirements shall apply as are provided for conventional
development in the RR District. A minimum of 40% of the
total lot area of the tract (prior to subdivision) shall be
preserved as preserved open space.
[2] If a lot is served by both public water and public sewage
services, then the minimum lot area shall be 12,000 square
feet. The same yard and other dimensional requirements
shall apply as are provided for conventional development
in the R-2 District, except that the minimum lot width shall
be 80 feet. A minimum of 65% of the total lot area of the
tract (prior to subdivision) shall be preserved as preserved
open space.
(6) Utilities. Any lot of less than one acre shall be served by Townshipapproved
central sanitary sewerage service and central water
service.
(7) Subdivision of part of a tract. This subsection addresses a situation
in which only part of a lot is proposed to be subdivided, and the
applicant at the present time does not intend to subdivide for the
maximum number of dwellings allowed by this section. In such
case, the applicant shall establish a permanent conservation
easement covering preserved open space to comply with this
section. Because only part of the tract is being subdivided, it may
not be necessary to meet the preserved open space requirement
based upon the area of the entire tract.
§ 285-31 WEAPONS § 285-31
278:465
(a) The land under the conservation easement shall be a regular
rectangle in shape and shall be located where it could adjoin
land that would be added as preserved open space in the future
if the total allowed number of dwellings would be developed.
(b) The following hypothetical example assumes a tract includes
50 acres, and the yield plan determines that the applicant for
an open space development is allowed a total of 30 new
dwellings. In this example, the applicant only wishes to
subdivide lots for 10 new dwellings at the present time, which
is 1/3 of the total number of allowed dwellings. At the present
time, only 1/3 of the open space would need to be preserved,
compared to if all of the allowed housing units would be
developed. However, the preserved open space would need to
be placed on the tract at a location where it could be joined by
the remaining acres of land under a conservation easement if
the applicant in the future decided to subdivide lots for the
remaining 20 dwelling units that are allowed.
(8) A minimum of 50% of the required preserved open space shall be in
one contiguous lot, except that the preserved open space may be
separated by creeks, lakes and a maximum of one street.
(a) As part of the conditional use approval, the Board of
Supervisors may approve the following, if the applicant proves
to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that such
configuration would serve the purposes of this section and be
in the best interests of the Township considering the unique
circumstances of the tract:
[1] A reduction of the percentage of the preserved open space
that is in one lot; or
[2] The crossing of the preserved open space by two or more
streets.
(b) An accessway limited to emergency vehicles may also cross the
preserved open space.
(9) The Board of Supervisors may require that the majority of the
required preserved open space be placed:
(a) Adjacent to an existing or planned public or homeowner
association-owned recreation area;
(b) Adjacent to existing farmland;
(c) At the edge of a neighboring undeveloped lot, where the
preserved open space could be connected in the future to open
space on that neighboring lot; or
(d) Adjacent to an arterial street or expressway where the open
space will serve to buffer homes from the traffic.
§ 285-31 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-31
278:466
D. Conditions for approval. An open space development shall only be
approved if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors, based upon review by the Planning Commission, that the
following additional conditions will be met:
(1) That the open space development would clearly serve a valid public
purpose that would result in a development that would be superior
to what would result if the land would be developed as a
conventional development. Such valid public purposes include but
are not limited to the following:
(a) The permanent preservation of dense forests, steep slopes,
wetlands, creek valleys, highly scenic areas or other sensitive
natural features.
(b) The permanent preservation of a substantial area of land in
agricultural uses, in a tract of proper size and configuration
that allows for efficient agricultural use and that properly
considers the issue of compatibility between the agricultural
uses and homes. In such case, new dwellings shall be clustered
adjacent to existing dwellings and residential zoning districts.
(c) The dedication of recreation land at a site deemed appropriate
by the Board of Supervisors and that involves land that is
clearly suitable for active and/or passive recreation.
(d) The provision of preserved open space in a location that will
allow homes to be buffered from highly noxious nuisancegenerating
uses, such as a heavily traveled street, or industrial
uses. In such case, intensive landscaping and/or planting for
eventual reforestation should be provided.
(2) The applicant shall prove that the proposed open space
development has been designed in full consideration of important
natural features, including mature woodlands, creek valleys, steep
slopes and wetlands.
(a) At a minimum, the applicant shall prove that areas along
perennial creeks shall be preserved in their natural state,
except for landscaping, erosion control improvements, public
recreation improvements and needed utility, street and
driveway crossings. Low-maintenance landscaping is
encouraged along creeks and other areas where maintenance
would otherwise be difficult.
(b) The natural features of the site shall be a major factor in
determining the siting of dwelling units and streets.
(3) The Township may require the use of conservation easements
within an open space development to limit the disturbance of
natural slopes over 15%, wetlands, mature forests, creek valleys
and other important natural features.
§ 285-31 WEAPONS § 285-31
278:467
E. Preserved open space.
(1) Preserved open space. The minimum amount of preserved open
space shall be provided, which shall meet the requirements of this
chapter and the definition in § 285-20 of "open space, preserved."
(a) The preserved open space requirements of this § 285-31 shall
be in addition to the recreation land or fee-in-lieu of land
requirements of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (SALDO), unless the applicant proves
to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors, at the time of
conditional use approval, that the proposed preserved open
space would include suitably improved land that will meet the
intent of the recreation land requirements of the SALDO.
(2) Open space standards. Required preserved open spaces shall meet
all of the following requirements:
(a) Preserved open space shall be permanently deed-restricted or
protected by an appropriate conservation easement to prevent
the construction of buildings or the use for any nonagricultural
commercial purposes or the use of the land for clear-cut
forestry. Land approved as required preserved open space
shall only be used for noncommercial active or passive
recreation, a noncommercial community center for meetings
and recreation, a Christmas tree farm, a golf course, a nature
preserve, a horse farm, a wholesale plant nursery, crop farming
and/or another Township-approved agricultural use.
(b) Improvements to open spaces. Where preserved open space is
proposed to be used for recreation and/or dedicated to the
Township, the application shall include a detailed and legally
binding (if approved) description of what improvements the
applicant will make to any land to make it suitable for its
intended purpose.
[1] Examples of such improvements include preservation and
planting of trees, development of trails, stabilization of
creek banks, removal of undesirable vegetation, and
grading of land for recreation (such as a free play field for
youth).
[2] Type of maintenance. The subdivision plan shall state the
intended type of maintenance of the open space, such as
lawn areas that are regularly mowed or natural areas for
passive recreation that are intended for minimal
maintenance.
(c) All proposed preserved open space shall be cleared of
construction debris, materials from illegal dumping and any
rocks that were not naturally on the land, unless those rocks
are incorporated into landscaping improvements.
§ 285-31 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-31
278:468
(d) The applicant shall prove that all required preserved open
space would be suitable for its intended and Townshipapproved
purposes. The Township may require the provision of
a trail easement and/or the construction of a recreation trail
through preserved open space. If a developer will install a trail,
it shall be completed prior to the final sale of any adjacent
residential lots.
(e) Lots and preserved open spaces shall be located to promote
pedestrian and visual access to preserved open spaces
whenever possible.
(f) Sufficient access points from each preserved open space shall
be provided to streets for pedestrian access and maintenance
access. The Board of Supervisors may require that
maintenance and/or pedestrian access points be paved and be
up to eight feet in width, meeting Township standards for a
bike path. Maintenance access points shall be of a slope that is
suitable for access by vehicles and equipment.
(3) Open space ownership. The method(s) to be used to own, preserve
and maintain any preserved open space shall be acceptable to the
Township. The Township shall only approve an open space
development if the applicant proves there will be an acceptable
method to ensure permanent ownership, preservation and
maintenance of land that will not be included in individual home
lots.
(a) The method of ownership and use of any required preserved
open space shall be determined prior to preliminary
subdivision or land development approval. The Township
should be given right of first refusal at the time of such review
to accept proposed open space as public open space. The
Township shall only accept ownership of open space if the
Board of Supervisors has agreed in writing in advance to
accept such ownership. If the preserved open space will not be
owned by the Township, then the preserved open space shall
be permanently preserved by one or a combination of the
following methods that are found to be acceptable to the Board
of Supervisors:
[1] Dedication to the county as public open space, if the
County Commissioners agree in writing to such
dedication.
[2] Dedication to the school district if such Board of Education
agrees in writing to accept such dedication and to use and
maintain the land for school recreation, public recreation,
environmental education and/or related open space.
[3] Dedication to a homeowners' association as preserved
open space, with the homeowners legally bound to pay
§ 285-31 WEAPONS § 285-31
278:469
fees for the maintenance and other expenses of owning
such land, and with such homeowners' association being
incorporated with covenants and bylaws providing for the
filing of assessments and/or municipal liens for the
nonpayment of maintenance costs for preserved open
space that is not publicly owned.
[a] Such responsibilities shall be specified as part of each
deed prior to sale of each lot or dwelling unit. The
Township may delay a dedication of maintenance
responsibilities by a developer to a homeowners'
association until such association is incorporated and
able to maintain such land.
[4] Dedication of the land to an established nature
conservation organization acceptable to the Board of
Supervisors for maintenance as a nature preserve or
passive recreation area.
[5] Dedication of a permanent conservation easement that
results in the land being used for a Township-approved
agricultural use, such as crop farming, a tree farm or a
horse farm, and which may include one of the allowed
dwelling units on the lot.
[6] Dedication to the State Game Commission, State Fish and
Boat Commission or similar public agency, if such agency
agrees in writing in advance to accept the dedication and
to maintain the land for public recreation.
[7] Operation as a bona fide golf course, with a minimum lot
area of 50 acres. Areas including buildings or vehicle
parking shall not count towards the minimum preserved
open space.
(b) Legal documents providing for ownership and/or maintenance
of required preserved open space shall be reviewed by the
Township Solicitor and be subject to approval by the Board of
Supervisors prior to recording of the final plan.
(c) A legally binding system shall be established to oversee and
maintain land that will not be publicly owned. The applicant
shall prove compliance with state law governing homeowners'
associations. Proper notations shall be required on the
recorded plan. For example, if the preserved open space is
intended to be owned by a homeowners' association as
recreation land, a statement should be included that the
designated open space "shall not be further subdivided and
shall not be used for the construction of any nonrecreation
buildings."
§ 285-31 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-31
278:470
§ 285-32. Setback from water bodies.
§ 285-33. Optional transfer of development rights (TDR).
F. Steep slopes. Within an open space development, no principal building
shall be placed on slopes of over 25%.
G. Phasing. The development shall include a phasing system that shall be
approved by the Board of Supervisors. Such phases shall ensure that
the requirements of this article would be met after the completion of
any one phase, and that the development could properly function
without the construction of additional phases.
H. Landscaping plan. An application for an open space development
involving over 30 acres shall include a landscape planting and
preservation plan prepared by a registered landscape architect.
(1) Such plan shall show the locations, general species and initial sizes
of landscaping to be planted within the preserved open space and
throughout the tract.
(2) Such plan shall also show that existing substantial healthy trees
will be preserved to the maximum extent reasonable. The methods
to ensure preservation during construction shall be described.
(3) Landscaping shall also be used as appropriate to filter views of
denser housing from any adjacent housing that is less dense.
A. No buildings, vehicle parking, driveways or business outdoor storage
shall be located within 75 feet from any of the following: 1) the average
water level of the Conestoga River; 2) the center of the bed of any other
perennial creek; or 3) the average water level of a pond or lake.
B. This additional setback shall not apply to boat ramps or boat or canoe
storage.
A. Purposes. In addition to serving the overall purposes of this chapter,
this section is intended to:
(1) Encourage the permanent preservation of important farmland and
environmentally sensitive areas;
(2) Direct growth to locations where public water and sewerage
services are available; and
(3) Provide a voluntary method for landowners to be compensated by
the free market to preserve their land.
B. Definitions.
(1) Sending property: A lot(s) or portion of a lot that is restricted by a
conservation easement or farmland preservation easement as a
§ 285-31 WEAPONS § 285-33
278:471
condition of approval of a higher density on the receiving property
than would otherwise be permitted.
(2) Receiving property: A lot(s) that is approved to permit a higher
density than would otherwise be permitted as a condition of the
restriction of development on the sending property.
C. Granting of transferable development rights in the sending area.
(1) A sending property shall be within the A, OSR or RR District. A
sending property shall have a minimum area of 10 acres.
(2) Transferable development rights are not granted to:
(a) Tracts of land or portions thereof owned by or subject to
easements (including, but not limited to, easements of roads,
railroads, electrical transmission lines and water, gas or
petroleum pipelines) in favor of governmental agencies,
utilities and nonprofit corporations; and/or
(b) Land restricted from development by covenant, easement or
deed restriction, unless and until such time as said covenant,
restriction or easement is dissolved or rescinded. In the event
said covenant, restriction or easement is dissolved or
rescinded, such land shall be eligible for issuance of
transferable development rights.
D. Progress of conveyance of a transferable development right from the
sending area. Transferable development rights shall be sold and/or
donated to any party, subject to the following:
(1) Application materials. Application shall be made on a form
developed for and by the Township, which shall be signed by the
transferor and the transferee. Along with said application form, the
following shall be submitted:
(a) A metes and bounds description of the property of the owner of
the land from which the rights will be transferred and a plot
plan or survey thereof, subject to easements in favor of
governmental agencies, utilities, and nonprofit corporations,
land restricted against development by covenant, easement or
deed restrictions, and any area devoted to non-farm use.
(b) A yield plan prepared in accordance with Subsection E below.
(c) If the proposed conveyance entails less than an entire parcel,
the portion of the parcel from which the development rights
are transferred shall be clearly identified on a plan of the
entire parcel, drawn to scale, the accuracy of which shall be
satisfactory to the Township. Such plan shall also include a
notation of: 1) the number of development rights applicable to
the entire parcel; 2) the number of development rights
applicable to the identified portion of the parcel from which the
§ 285-33 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-33
278:472
development rights are to be transferred; and 3) the number
of development rights which remain available to the remaining
portion of the parcel.
(d) A title search of the tract from which the transferable
development rights will be conveyed sufficient to determine all
owners of the tract and all lienholders.
(e) A copy of the proposed deed of transferable development
rights and a copy of the proposed conservation easement, as
regulated by § 285-33 of this chapter
(2) Review and determination. Upon complete submission as required
above, the Zoning Officer shall determine the number of
transferable development rights which shall be permitted to be
conveyed from the sending property. The Zoning Officer shall also
determine, with the advice of the Township Solicitor and/or the
Township Engineer, the sufficiency of: a) the plan indicating the
portion of the parcel restricted from future development if the
development rights from less than the entire parcel shall be
conveyed; b) the conservation easement; and c) the deed of
transferable development rights. The Zoning Officer shall inform
the transferor and the transferee of the development rights of his/
her determination in writing. Any appeals from the determination
of the Zoning Officer shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of § 285-11D of this chapter.
(3) Donation of intermediaries. The right to develop a sending property
may be purchased by or donated to the Township, the county or an
established incorporated nonprofit organization whose mission
includes preservation of agricultural land or natural features. A
permanent conservation easement shall be established on the
sending property at the time of such purchase or donation. In such
case, the right to develop such dwelling units may be held for a
maximum of 10 years before being used on a receiving
property(ies).
(4) Upon receipt of written approval by the Zoning Officer, as provided
in § 285-33D(2), the transferor and transferee may present the
Township with the deed of transferable development rights for
endorsement as required by the Municipalities Planning Code
§ 619.1(c). No deed of transferable development rights shall be so
endorsed until the Township is presented with evidence that the
conservation easement has been approved by the Township and has
been recorded with the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds. In
lieu of presentation of proof of recording the conservation
easement, the fully executed conservation easement may be
presented to the Township when the deed of transferable
development rights is presented for endorsement and the
Township, at the applicant's expense, shall record both documents.
§ 285-33 WEAPONS § 285-33
278:473
E. Determination of number of transferable development rights
attributable to sending property.
(1) Yield plans shall be presented by the applicant. One yield plan shall
be presented for the receiving property and one for the sending
property. Such yield plans shall be a level of detail typically found in
a sketch plan, including showing potential lots and roads, steep
slopes, one-hundred-year floodplains and suspected wetlands. Such
yield plans shall estimate the number of new dwelling units that
could be lawfully constructed on each property under Township
regulations without any transfer of development rights. Detailed
septic percolation tests are not required for such sketches, but new
septic systems shall not be assumed to be possible in areas with
severe soil and slope limitations.
(2) Such yield plans shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer, with
advice by the Township Engineer, to determine whether each
represents a reasonably accurate estimate of the number of
dwelling units possible on each site, both physically and legally. If
such estimates are determined to be accurate, the applicant shall
be required by the Zoning Officer to revise such yield plan until it is
accurate.
(3) Based upon the yield plans, permission to develop the allowed
number of dwelling units may be transferred from the sending
property to the receiving property.
F. Use of property after conveyance of TDRs is approved. The owner
conveying transferable development rights from the sending area shall,
by conservation easement, perpetually restrict the use of the parcel or
portion thereof from which transferable development rights are
conveyed. Such conservation easement shall be in a form approved by
the Township Solicitor and shall restrict future use of the site to
principal agricultural or conservation use and any accessory
agricultural uses, as determined by this chapter.
(1) All conservation easements shall designate the Township as a thirdparty
beneficiary of the restrictions imposed upon the transferor
and his/her land. Such restrictions shall be enforceable by the
Township as such third-party beneficiary.
(2) Land from which transferable development rights have been
conveyed shall continue to be owned, subject to said restrictions by
the landowner, his/her heirs, executors, administrators, successors
and/or assigns.
(3) If the development rights are conveyed from less than the entire
parcel, the plan prepared in accordance with Subsection D(1)(c)
above shall be attached to and recorded with the conservation
easement. All owners of the tract from which transferable
development rights are conveyed shall execute the conservation
easement. All lienholders of the tract from which transferable
§ 285-33 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-33
278:474
development rights are conveyed shall execute a joinder and/or
consent to the conservation easement. [Amended 12-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 202]
G. Process by which TDRs are applied to a receiving property. A receiving
property shall be within a neighborhood design option development
(NDO) in a district that allows NDO development. Transferable
development rights may only be used to increase the permitted density
of a NDO development. When transferable development rights have
been acquired by the transferee for the purposes of assignment to a
receiving property, the following shall apply. [Amended 12-10-2007
by Ord. No. 202]
(1) Effect of use of TDRs on receiving property. For each transferable
development right that is approved for conveyance, the transferee
is entitled an increase in permitted density as follows:
(a) For each dwelling unit that would have otherwise been allowed
on the sending property, one additional dwelling unit may be
approved on the receiving property. However, as an incentive
to promote agricultural preservation, for each dwelling unit
that would have been allowed in the A District, three dwelling
units shall be allowed on the receiving property.
(b) If, for example, the yield plan determines that 10 new dwelling
units would be allowed under the current zoning on the
sending property, and the sending property will be preserved
by a conservation easement, then the right to develop 30
additional dwelling units shall be transferred to the receiving
property. [Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 202]
(c) The receiving property shall be permitted to include the
increased total number of dwelling units above the number
that would otherwise be permitted, as approved by the
Township based upon the yield plan. However, in no case shall
the maximum density with incentives be exceeded, as provided
for a NDO development in § 285-34.
(d) The development of the receiving property shall still comply
with all other requirements of this chapter, except for the
maximum density, which shall be regulated by this section and
the NDO provisions.
(e) Utilities. To receive a transfer of development rights, any lot
that includes less than one acre per dwelling unit on the
receiving property shall be served by Township-approved
central sanitary sewerage service and central water service.
(f) The transfer of development rights shall not be combined with
reduced lot sizes and other incentives concerning open space
development.
§ 285-33 WEAPONS § 285-33
278:475
(2) Application materials. The transferee shall submit:
(a) A preliminary subdivision or land development plan, prepared
in accordance with the latest version of the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. The
preliminary plan must indicate: 1) that transferable
development rights are to be used; 2) the base permitted
density allowed for the site; 3) the proposed density of the site;
and 4) the number of transferable development rights to be
applied to the site.
(b) An agreement of conveyance for the development rights
between: 1) the owner of the tract to which development rights
have been granted, or the owner of development rights which
have been previously severed from the tract in the sending
areas, as evidenced by a recorded deed of transferable
development rights; and 2) the owner of the tract proposed to
be developed with the transferred development rights. The
agreement may be contingent upon approval of a final
subdivision or land development plan of the tract to which the
transferable development rights are to be conveyed.
(c) If the use of transferable development rights which were
previously severed from a tract in the sending area is
proposed, a title search of such previously severed
transferable development rights.
(d) As part of a TDR, the development of the receiving property
shall comply with all Township requirements, except for
provisions specifically modified by this section.
(3) Review, approval and recording of TDRs applied to a receiving
property. No final plan for any subdivision or land development
which utilizes transferable development rights shall be executed on
behalf of the Township until the Township has been presented with
a copy of the recorded deed of transferable development rights and
the recorded conservation easements with the customary
recording information of the Office of the Recorder of Deeds in and
for Lancaster County clearly endorsed thereon. In lieu of
presentation of proof of recording the executed deed of
transferable development rights and the fully executed
conservation easement may be presented to the Township with the
deed of transferable development rights for endorsement, and the
Township, at the applicant’s expense, shall record both documents
and then shall execute and, if applicant so desires, at applicant’s
expense, shall record the final plan.
H. Public acquisition of TDRs. The Township may purchase development
rights and may accept ownership of transferable development rights
through transfer by gift. All such TDRs may be resold or retired by the
§ 285-33 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-33
278:476
§ 285-34. Neighborhood design option (NDO).
Township. Any such purchase or gift shall be accompanied by a
Township-approved conservation easement.
I. Reservation of Township rights. The Township reserves the right to
amend this chapter in the future, and the Township expressly reserves
the right to change the manner in which the number of development
rights shall be apportioned to a tract in the sending area, the manner in
which development rights may be attached to land within the receiving
area, the locations of the sending area and the receiving areas and the
procedure by which development rights can be conveyed.
(1) The Township further expressly reserves the right to terminate its
TDR program at any time. No landowner or owner of development
rights shall have any claim against the Township for damages
resulting from a change in this chapter relating to the regulations
governing the apportionment transfer and use of development
rights or the abolition of the TDR program.
(2) If the TDR program is abolished by the Township, no developer may
attach development rights to any tract in the receiving area after
the effective date of the ordinance abolishing the TDR program
unless an application in conformity with the provisions of this
section was filed prior to the effective date of such ordinance.
A. Purposes. To encourage innovation and to promote flexibility, economy
and ingenuity in development consistent with the provisions of Articles
VI and VII-A of the State Municipalities Planning Code and the
community development objectives of this chapter and the
Comprehensive Plan. The purposes of Articles VI and VII-A of the State
Municipalities Planning Code are hereby incorporated by reference.
The provisions of this § 285-34 represent an optional form of
development and shall only be allowed if a development will achieve the
following purposes and objectives:
(1) Directing growth to areas of the Township which are the most
appropriate for development.
(2) Reducing infrastructure costs by minimizing the amount of
infrastructure necessary to adequately support new development.
(3) Providing a more efficient, varied and, most importantly, innovative
development pattern.
(4) Establishing a pedestrian-oriented community that accommodates
and encourages pedestrian and other multi-modal travel
alternatives by including sidewalks, greenways, bike paths, and/or
trails. The inclusion of a limited amount of community services and
civic uses may also be incorporated to facilitate pedestrian access
and limit motor vehicle trips.
§ 285-33 WEAPONS § 285-34
278:477
(5) Making public transit a viable alternative by encouraging
development at appropriate densities with flexible building
arrangements not afforded by conventional lot-by-lot development.
(6) Fostering a sense of community through development of
recognizable neighborhoods and direct access to public spaces
such as centrally located public commons, greens, squares or
prominent scenic vistas.
(7) Encouraging development that complements rather than
eliminates the distinctive resources of the site, including
woodlands, wetlands, stream corridors, historical and cultural
resources, steep slopes, scenic viewsheds, and prime agricultural
soils.
(8) Providing opportunities to integrate age and income groups
through the provision of a wide range of housing alternatives that
are suitably mixed within the development.
(9) Promoting development that, through the use of distinctive
architectural elements and siting criteria, creates community
character that complements the historic development style of
Lancaster County and the Township.
B. Eligibility. Within the R-1, R-2, R-3, RV, I/M and OTR Districts, the
neighborhood design option is permitted by conditional use subject to
compliance with the criteria in this § 285-34 and all other requirements
of this chapter. See also § 285-34I(3) for additional regulations within
the I/M district and § 285-38 for additional regulations within the OTR
District. A "neighborhood development" shall mean a subdivision or
land development that is developed in compliance with the NDO
requirements of this chapter.
C. Minimum requirements for development under the neighborhood
design option. Each neighborhood design development shall meet all of
the following minimum requirements:
(1) The neighborhood development tract shall be not less than 10 acres
in area.
(2) The neighborhood development tract shall be developed according
to a single plan that depicts complete build-out of the neighborhood
development tract with common authority and responsibility. If
more than one person has an interest in all or a portion of the
neighborhood development tract, all persons with interests in any
portion of the neighborhood development tract shall join as
applicants and shall present an agreement, in a form acceptable to
the Township Solicitor, guaranteeing that the neighborhood
development tract as a whole shall be developed in accordance
with any approval granted under this § 285-34 as a single
neighborhood development with common authority and governing
documents.
§ 285-34 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-34
278:478
(3) All dwelling units and principal buildings shall be provided with
public water service and public sewer service.
(4) The neighborhood development shall be provided with common
open space in accordance with this section.
(5) The neighborhood development shall be provided with a
neighborhood center.
(6) At the time of completion of construction, no more that 50% of the
neighborhood development tract may be covered with impervious
surface, unless a greater impervious surface coverage is permitted
through the use of density incentives set forth in Subsection S.
(7) The neighborhood development tract shall be located within an
urban growth boundary established by the Board of Supervisors.
D. Applicability of standards. It is the intention of the Board of Supervisors
in accordance with Section 605(3) and Article VII-A of the State
Municipalities Planning Code to encourage innovation and to promote
flexibility, economy and ingenuity in development. To that end, the
Board of Supervisors may only grant conditional use approval for a
neighborhood development if the applicant demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that the standards of this
§ 285-34 will be met, including but not limited to substantially
advancing all of the purposes in Subsection A.
(1) If the Board determines that a modification or waiver is necessary
to implement the purposes of Subsection A, the Board of
Supervisors may grant a modification or waiver to specific
requirements of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(SALDO)116 and/or the Stormwater Management Ordinance.117 If
such modification or waiver is not approved, then a neighborhood
development shall meet all requirements of the SALDO and the
Stormwater Management Ordinance.
(2) All provisions of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply, except for
provisions specifically modified by this § 285-34. See also
Subsection U concerning modifications.
E. Application procedure. An applicant who desires to develop under the
neighborhood design option shall submit an application for conditional
use approval which shall include all of the following:
(1) Site plan meeting all requirements of Subsection T below.
(2) Open space plan identifying all features required by Subsection F
below. The open space plan shall also include a written statement
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Subdivision and Land Development.
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Stormwater Management.
§ 285-34 WEAPONS § 285-34
278:479
describing the applicant's proposal for future ownership and
maintenance of the common open space.
(3) Landscaping plan providing a complete proposal for the
landscaping and planting of the neighborhood development tract
and identifying all features required by Subsection F(7) below.
(4) Streetlighting plan providing a complete proposal for the
installation of streetlighting to serve the neighborhood
development tract.
(5) Traffic impact study meeting all requirements of § 240-15E(3)(g) of
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and other
reports and studies listed in § 240-15E of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance that are necessary to show the general
feasibility of the development.
(6) Architectural guidelines for the neighborhood development, which
shall include styles, proportions, massing and detailing.
(7) Statement identifying all density incentives under Subsection S
which have been incorporated, and written support for each
density incentive. This statement must identify the specific density
incentive provided, must identify the reduction of the standard
taken, and must support the applicant's claim that the
neighborhood development as proposed provides the identified
density incentive.
(8) Statement identifying all modifications of standards under
Subsection U and written support for each modification. This
statement must identify the specific modification requested and
provide support that the modification meets all requirements of
Subsections A(1) through A(6).
(9) Required application fee. No application shall be considered
complete without all of the above-listed items. The Township shall
not accept incomplete applications for conditional use approval to
use the neighborhood design option.
F. Common open space. A minimum of 45% of the neighborhood
development tract shall be devoted to common open space. Through the
use of incentives offered in Subsection A(9), the amount of common
open space may be reduced. However, every neighborhood
development shall be designed to provide a minimum of 30% of the
neighborhood development tract as common open space.
(1) It is the express intent that this requirement for common open
space be used to protect those valuable resources that are
identified by the Comprehensive Plan and further addressed by the
regulations contained within § 240-15E of the SALDO. Common
open space shall be designed and arranged to achieve as many of
the following objectives as possible:
§ 285-34 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-34
278:480
(a) Protection of important natural, historic and cultural
resources.
(b) Preservation of scenic views from public roads and
neighboring residential properties.
(c) Provision of new and/or connection with existing trails,
greenways, linear parks or common open space on adjoining
parcels.
(d) Provision of usable play or recreation areas, or equipment, that
are conveniently accessible to residents throughout the
neighborhood development.
(e) Provision of public space as the focal point of the neighborhood
development when coordinated with greens, squares, and
public commons which are dispersed throughout the
neighborhood development.
(f) Interconnection of areas of proposed common open space
within the neighborhood development and interconnection of
common open space within the proposed neighborhood
development with existing or planned common open space or
recreational facilities on lands adjoining the neighborhood
development tract.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate the specific measures employed to
achieve the objectives in Subsection F(1) through the provision of
an open space plan depicting all proposed elements of the common
open space. Each open space plan shall identify:
(a) The location and size of proposed commons, greens, and/or
squares;
(b) Connections among proposed areas of common open space on
the neighborhood development tract and connections of
proposed areas of common open space on the neighborhood
development tract with elements of common open space on
adjoining tracts if such exists or is proposed; and
(c) Location and size of trails, greenways or other pedestrian
linkages, including the surface proposed.
(3) In all neighborhood developments, regardless of the total amount
of common open space provided and regardless of the density
incentives utilized, the applicant shall provide common open space
in the amount of at least 45% of the area of the neighborhood
development tract. This 45% may be approved to be reduced to
30% through the incentives provided in Subsection S below. Not
less than 50% of the required common open space shall meet all of
the criteria set forth in Subsections F(3)(a) through F(3)(c) below.
§ 285-34 WEAPONS § 285-34
278:481
The remaining portion of the required common open space may
contain floodplains, wetlands, steep slopes and similar features.
(a) The land shall not contain floodplains, wetlands, steep slopes
or other natural features which would render the land
unbuildable under applicable ordinances and regulations. For
the purposes of this section, unbuildable land is land on which
a principal structure cannot be constructed.
(b) The land shall not contain stormwater management facilities.
(c) The configuration of the land shall be regular. Strips of land
running around the perimeter of the neighborhood
development tract or separating proposed lots within the
neighborhood development shall not be counted as common
open space to meet the required minimum unless such land is
improved with walking trails, fitness stations or other
improvements acceptable to the Board of Supervisors or unless
such land is, in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors,
integrated and integral to the overall common open space
design.
(4) Each neighborhood development shall be provided with at least one
green containing not less than 10,000 square feet. The size of the
green shall be increased to a minimum of 15,000 square feet for a
development of 51 to 149 dwelling units, and a minimum of 20,000
square feet for a development of 150 or more dwelling units. Other
greens, squares, and commons of not less than 1,000 square feet in
area shall be dispersed throughout the neighborhood development.
A green, square or common which meets the requirements of
Subsections F(3)(a) through F(3)(c) above may be included within
the required minimum common open space.
(5) If the applicant dedicates all or a portion of the common open space
in the amount of at least 0.04 acre per proposed dwelling unit in the
neighborhood development to the Township, the applicant shall be
permitted to count the common open space provided in accordance
with this § 285-34 to satisfy the requirements of § 240-36, Park and
open space provision, of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance. If the applicant desires to maintain all of the common
open space as private land, the applicant shall have to pay a fee in
lieu of dedication to satisfy the requirements of § 240-36 of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(6) The design of a hard- or soft-surfaced pedestrian and bicycle
network system linking development within the neighborhood
development shall be provided to connect various commons,
squares and greens depicted on the open space plan. Access to all
such areas shall be provided from public streets. Where necessary,
easements shall be provided to accommodate pedestrian access as
well as access for maintenance equipment and bicycles.
§ 285-34 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-34
278:482
(7) Landscaping. A vital component of the required open space plan
shall be the design and provision of appropriate landscaping which
shall include a combination of types of shrubs, trees (both
evergreen and deciduous), and ground covers. To ensure the
proper placement of suitable materials, the applicant shall provide
a landscaping plan, prepared by a registered landscape architect,
which specifies the type and size of proposed vegetation, as well as
identifying the location of existing vegetation to be retained.
(a) The landscaping plan shall include all portions of the proposed
common open space and shall identify all lighting proposed for
all portions of the common open space, including but not
limited to common area and pathways. The landscaping plan
shall also include all areas outside of the common open space
which are required to be landscaped (such as parking areas,
dumpster locations, etc.), the location of proposed street
plantings and the type and location of street trees to be
provided.
(b) The applicant shall provide a maintenance guarantee to ensure
the health and vitality of all plant material for a period of 18
months from planting. Any of the landscaping which dies or is
removed within this time frame shall be replaced with
vegetation of the same size and species. The applicant shall
also be responsible to assure the proper care and maintenance
of all plant material within the common open space for the
duration of this 18 months and until such time as the common
open space is transferred to the Township, a homeowners'
association or other entity as authorized by this section.
(8) The applicant shall arrange for the ownership, administration and
maintenance of common open space in accordance with one or
more of the following:
(a) The Township may in its sole discretion accept dedication of
common open spaces or any interest therein for public use and
maintenance with no consideration to be paid by the Township.
Unless waived by the Board of Supervisors at time of approval,
the Township shall have the option to accept all or any portion
of the common open space at any time within 10 years of the
recording of the final subdivision and/or land development plan
for the development. The final plan shall contain a note, in
language acceptable to the Township Solicitor, that the
common open space is irrevocably dedicated to the Township
for a period of 10 years from the date of the recording of the
final plan. Said note shall also state that the Township shall
have no duty to maintain or improve the dedicated common
open space unless and until it has been accepted by formal
action of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 285-34 WEAPONS § 285-34
278:483
(b) The applicant may establish an automatic-membership
property owners' association made up of the owners of
property in the neighborhood development as a nonprofit
corporation for the purpose of owning, administering and
maintaining common open space; provided, however, the
association shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of the
common open space by sale or otherwise (except to an
organization conceived and established to own, administer,
and maintain common open space approved by the Board of
Supervisors) without first offering the common open space for
dedication to the Township. The property owners' association
shall be empowered to levy and collect assessments from the
property owners of the neighborhood development to cover
replacements, working capital, operating expenses, insurance
against casualty and liability, and contingencies.
(c) The applicant may establish a deed or deeds of trust, approved
by the Board of Supervisors, for the purpose of owning,
administering and maintaining common open space, with the
Trustee empowered to levy and collect assessments from the
property owners of the neighborhood development to cover
replacements, working capital, operating expenses, insurance
against casualty and liability and contingencies.
(d) With permission of the Township and with appropriate deed
restrictions in favor of the Township and in language
acceptable to the Township Solicitor, the applicant may
transfer the fee simple title in the common open space or a
portion thereof to a private, nonprofit organization among
whose purposes is the conservation of common open space
land and/or natural resources, provided that:
[1] The organization is acceptable to the Township and is a
bona fide conservation organization with a perpetual
existence;
[2] The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for
proper retransfer or reverter in the event that the
organization becomes unable to continue to carry out its
functions; and
[3] A maintenance agreement acceptable to the Township is
entered into by the applicant, organization and Township.
(9) If the Township does not accept dedication of the common open
space, the applicant shall grant to the Township, in a form
acceptable to the Township Solicitor, all of the rights to maintain
common open space described in Article VII of the State
Municipalities Planning Code.
G. Streetlighting. The applicant shall provide streetlights within the
neighborhood development in a manner consistent with the
§ 285-34 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-34
278:484
architectural guidelines and acceptable to the Township. Lighting shall
be used to increase the safety of pedestrians as well as vehicles while
contributing to the character of the overall neighborhood development.
H. Allowed uses. The following uses are allowed within a neighborhood
development, in accordance with the requirements in Subsections I and
J below:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwellings (twin dwellings).
(3) Duplexes.
(4) Townhouses.
(5) Multifamily dwellings.
(6) Accessory apartment units.
(7) Neighborhood facilities within a neighborhood center.
(8) Within a neighborhood center or a commercial center (where
allowed), the following uses shall be allowed: retail sales, offices,
exercise clubs, child or adult day-care centers, financial
institutions, and personal service establishments. The retail and
service uses may include but are not limited to a newsstand, coffee
shop, drugstore, restaurant, hair and/or nail salon, gift shop,
bakery, specialty food store, dry cleaner (dropoff only), bike sales/
rental, copy center, barbershop or another use which the Board of
Supervisors determines during the conditional use approval
process is substantially similar to the listed uses. The applicant may
list a proposed range of uses that will be allowed. If such range of
uses is approved as part of the conditional use approval, then each
such use shall become permitted by right, provided the use and
development conforms to the conditional use approval.
(a) In a neighborhood center, the total of all commercial uses shall
not exceed 50% of the building floor area of the neighborhood
center.
(b) In addition to a neighborhood center, a commercial center shall
be allowed if all of the following standards are met:
[1] The neighborhood development will be adjacent to a street
classified by the Township Comprehensive Plan as an
arterial street or a major collector street;
[2] The commercial center will have vehicle access available
to reach a second street that is classified as an arterial or
major or minor collector street;
§ 285-34 WEAPONS § 285-34
278:485
[3] The traffic from the commercial center will be able to
access an arterial street or major or minor collector street
without having to travel through a residential area;
[4] The commercial center shall have shared parking among
the various uses and an internal vehicle access system that
avoids the need for a commercial use to have its own
driveway onto a preexisting public street; and
[5] The total land area occupied by a commercial center and
related parking areas shall not exceed a maximum of 10%
of the buildable area of the neighborhood development
tract. The buildable area shall be the total tract area minus
the ultimate/future right-of-way of preexisting public
streets and minus 50% of all land areas that are wetlands,
have 15% or greater slope, or are within the one-hundredyear
floodplain.
(c) Drive-through facilities shall be prohibited, except for a
drugstore or financial institution. A drive-through facility shall
not have direct vehicle access onto an existing arterial or
collector street.
(d) Each commercial establishment shall have a maximum first
floor building floor area of 4,000 square feet, except as part of
the modification process allowed through the conditional use
approval, this 4,000 square feet may be increased to 8,000
square feet for uses compatible with the NDO. Further, as part
of the modification process allowed through the conditional
use approval, the first floor square footage for one
freestanding commercial establishment may be increased to
15,000 square feet, provided such freestanding commercial
establishment is integrated into and made a part of the overall
commercial center and such commercial establishment is a use
expressly provided for in Subsection H(8) above. [Amended
12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 203]
(e) Fuel shall not be sold within a commercial center.
(f) For a nonresidential principal building, a minimum setback of
60 feet shall apply from the perimeter lot lines of the
neighborhood development and a minimum setback of 30 feet
shall apply from the future/ultimate right-of-way of preexisting
public streets that form a perimeter of the neighborhood
development. In other cases, a minimum front, each side and
rear setback of 20 feet shall apply.
(9) Township-owned uses and government offices.
(10) Museums.
§ 285-34 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-34
278:486
(11) Places of worship and related uses, subject to the provisions of
§ 285-42, other than the minimum lot area requirement.
I. Required mix of uses; development standards. To accommodate a
variety of age and income groups, each development shall contain a mix
of each of the permitted residential uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings within a neighborhood
development shall be dispersed throughout the neighborhood
development.
(a) A minimum of 20% of the single-family detached dwellings
shall be located immediately adjacent to or immediately across
a street which is not greater than 32 feet in width from singlefamily
semidetached dwellings, duplexes or townhouses.
(b) No more than 15% of the single-family detached dwellings
shall be designed to include an accessory apartment. An
accessory apartment shall only be allowed on a lot that was
designated for such use at the time of conditional use approval.
(2) The amount of each dwelling type or other permitted use shall be
within the ranges listed in the Table of Required Mix of Uses that
follows.
TABLE OF REQUIRED MIX OF USES FOR AN NDO DEVELOPMENT
R-1 R-2 or RV R-3
Minimum Maximum MinimumMaximum MinimumMaximum
Single-Family
Detached
Dwelling
40% 60% 25% 40% 0% 30%
Single-Family
Semidetached
Dwelling (Twin
Dwelling)
20% 60% 20% 70% 20% 50%
Townhouses or
Duplexes, with a
maximum
building length
and width of 150
feet
0% 35% 25% 50% 25% 50%
Multifamily, with
a maximum of 12
dwelling units per
building
0% 15% 0% 20% 25% 50%
§ 285-34 WEAPONS § 285-34
278:487
TABLE OF REQUIRED MIX OF USES FOR AN NDO DEVELOPMENT
R-1 R-2 or RV R-3
Minimum Maximum MinimumMaximum MinimumMaximum
Neighborhood
Center - square
feet refers to
building floor
area across the
entire tract
10 square
feet per
dwelling
unit
20 square
feet per
dwelling
unit
10 square
feet per
dwelling
unit
20 square
feet per
dwelling
unit
10 square
feet per
dwelling
unit
20 square
feet per
dwelling
unit
Commercial
Center - shall
comply with
§ 285-34H
Township-Owned
Use or
Government
Offices
20,000
square feet
lot
20,000
square feet
lot
20,000
square feet
lot
Museum 20,000
square feet
lot
20,000
square feet
lot
20,000
square feet
lot
Place of Worship
and closely
related
customarily
accessory uses
43,560
square feet
lot
43,560
square feet
lot
43,560
square feet
lot
(3) I/M Districts. A neighborhood development shall also be allowed as
a conditional use in the I/M District, provided it shall not occupy
more than 50% of a lot, based upon lot area that exists at the time
of enactment of this chapter. In the I/M District, a neighborhood
development shall comply with the same standards that would
apply to the R-3 District, except that a neighborhood development
may include 100% multifamily dwellings or 100% townhouses.
(4) Height. The maximum building height shall be 35 feet, except that
a peak or pitch of a roof may have a maximum height of 40 feet,
provided that the area above 35 feet is not occupied by persons.
(5) Impervious coverage. The maximum impervious coverage shall be
applied for each phase of construction, at the time of completion of
construction. The maximum impervious coverage for the tract shall
be 70%. A maximum impervious coverage and maximum building
coverage shall not apply to each lot.
J. Requirements for residential development. The maximum density for
dwelling units within a neighborhood development shall be based upon
the lot area of the neighborhood development tract after deleting land
areas occupied by principal commercial uses and the related off-street
§ 285-34 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-34
278:488
parking and after deleting future/ultimate right-of-way of preexisting
public streets. The maximum density without the use of density
incentives set forth in Subsection S and the maximum density if the
applicant makes full use of allowed density incentives are as follows:
Development
without Density
Incentives
Development Using
Density Incentives
R-1 District 3.2 dwelling units/
acre
5.5 dwelling units/acre
R-2 or RV District 5.1 dwelling units/
acre
6.75 dwelling units/acre
R-3 or I/M
Districts
9 dwelling units/acre 12 dwelling units/acre
(1) Not less than 50% of all dwelling units within a neighborhood
development shall be designed to permit individual conveyance
(which may include condominium or other fee simple ownership).
Dwellings units designed to permit individual conveyance shall be
constructed to meet all building code requirements necessary to be
considered a separate dwelling unit and shall be capable of sale or
other transfer without further subdivision approvals.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) All dwelling units shall be situated so as to retain a view of some
portion of the common open space and shall be located within 800
feet of a commons, square, green or trail.
(4) All lots shall maintain minimum front, rear and side yard setbacks
of six feet, except as follows:
(a) A minimum setback of 30 feet shall apply from the perimeter
lot lines of the neighborhood development and from the future/
ultimate right-of-way of preexisting public streets that form a
perimeter of the neighborhood development.
(b) As provided otherwise in this § 285-34, such as in Subsection
J(7) for townhouses.
(c) Any building including townhouses or three or more
multifamily dwelling units shall be set back a minimum of 60
feet from the lot line of an existing single-family detached
dwelling that is not within the neighborhood development.
(5) No more than two contiguous dwelling units shall have the same
continuous roof ridgeline. In addition, no more than two dwelling
units in any one building shall have a substantial portion of their
front facade on the same vertical plane as any other dwelling unit
in the same building. Offsets must be staggered. No two units shall
have the same front yard setback.
§ 285-34 WEAPONS § 285-34
278:489
(6) No dwelling units within a neighborhood development shall have
direct access to preexisting Township or state streets surrounding
the neighborhood development tract. All access shall be from an
internal street system designed to service the neighborhood
development.
(7) Where several townhouse buildings are located on one lot, the
following separation distances shall be applicable:
(a) Front to front, rear to rear or front to rear parallel buildings
shall have at least 50 feet between faces of the building. If the
front or rear faces are obliquely aligned, the above distances
may be decreased by as much as 10 feet at one end, if
increased by similar or greater distance at the other end.
(b) A minimum yard space of 30 feet is required between end walls
of buildings where both end walls contain windows, and 20 feet
otherwise. If the buildings are at angles to each other, the
distance between the corners of the end walls of buildings
where both end walls contain windows may be reduced to a
minimum of 20 feet.
(c) A minimum yard space of 30 feet is required between end walls
and front or rear faces of buildings.
K. Neighborhood centers. Each neighborhood development shall include a
minimum of one neighborhood center. Each neighborhood center shall
comply with the following:
(1) Uses are limited to those that residents are likely to need on a daily
or regular basis.
(2) The overall size and type of each use within the neighborhood
center is restricted to prevent the establishment of intensive
commercial-type facilities that exceed the local orientation. See
maximum size of commercial establishments in Subsection H.
(3) Each use other than a neighborhood facility within a neighborhood
center shall be designed to provide basic convenience commercial
goods and services to existing and future nearby residences.
(4) The maximum land area permitted to be devoted to the total of all
neighborhood center buildings shall be no more than 5% of the
gross land area of the neighborhood development tract, except
where provided otherwise under Subsection I(2).
(5) All neighborhood centers shall be provided with convenient
pedestrian access. Any necessary off-street parking facilities shall
be located to the side or rear of the principal building.
(6) The adaptive use of historical structures on the neighborhood
development tract is a preferred option for the siting of a
neighborhood center. However, when new construction must be
§ 285-34 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-34
278:490
undertaken, the design of such structure(s) shall not detract from
the community character of the neighborhood development and the
surrounding area.
(7) The applicant may initially use the neighborhood center as a sales
office. If the applicant uses the neighborhood center as a sales
office, the applicant shall ensure that not less than 50% of the floor
area of the neighborhood center shall be converted to
neighborhood facilities and/or retail sales and personal service
establishments authorized in Subsection H above upon the sale of
30% of the dwelling units. The applicant shall further ensure that
not less than 75% of the floor area of the neighborhood center shall
be converted to neighborhood facilities and/or retail sales and
personal service establishments authorized upon the sale of 75% of
the dwelling units in the neighborhood development.
(8) See also perimeter setbacks for nonresidential buildings in
Subsection H.
L. Required parking. All uses within the neighborhood development shall
be provided parking in accordance with this Subsection L.
(1) The amount of off-street parking required for all dwelling units and
for noncommercial uses shall be in accordance with Article VI of
this chapter.
(2) The amount of parking for commercial uses shall be one parking
space for each 350 square feet of gross floor area. The parking
shall be provided either on the neighborhood/commercial center lot
or in designated on-street or off-street parking areas within 500
feet of the neighborhood/commercial center buildings or by a
combination thereof.
(a) As part of the conditional use process, the Board of
Supervisors may reduce the amount of required off-street
parking for principal nonresidential uses by up to 10% if three
or more principal nonresidential uses will share the same
parking area.
(3) Where necessary, parking requirements may be met through the
provision of off-street parking compounds. No more than 50% of
the required parking should be provided by means of off-street
parking lots. When required to accommodate the parking
requirements of any specific use, off-street parking lots shall be
located to the side or rear of the buildings they are intended to
serve. The size and/or location of parking lots shall not compromise
the design or interfere in any manner with provision of pedestrian
access. All nonresidential uses shall adequately accommodate both
handicap parking and bicycle parking.
M. Architectural guidelines. It is not the intent of the Board of Supervisors
to dictate architectural styles. However, a set of standards shall be
§ 285-34 WEAPONS § 285-34
278:491
chosen by the applicant and adhered to consistently throughout the
development. Standards selected shall enhance the design objectives
and goals as specified by Subsection A. See submission requirements in
Subsection E(6).
(1) Architectural guidelines shall be established and approved as a
condition of the conditional use approval. The applicant shall
submit a set of guidelines which shall include styles, proportions,
massing and detailing. To the extent necessary on each site, these
features shall be compatible with the design of historical resources
on and adjacent to the neighborhood development tract. The
architectural guidelines shall be recorded with or be part of
documentation imposing covenants and conditions upon the
neighborhood development. The architectural guidelines shall
include, but not be limited to, provisions to avoid monotony in
architectural designs, to establish minimum roof pitches, to
address window sizes and to address front porches.
N. Overall development form. In meeting the design objectives and goals
specified by Subsection A, new construction shall, to the greatest extent
possible, be sited so as to preserve natural vistas and existing resources
of the neighborhood development tract as delineated by the required
site plan.
(1) Components of the neighborhood development shall be designed in
a pattern of blocks and interconnecting streets and alleys, defined
by buildings, street furniture, landscaping, sidewalks, on-street
parking, and public space.
(2) A minimum of 35% of the dwelling units shall be provided with all
vehicle garage(s) that are accessed from the rear or that enter the
garage from a side street or that have a one-lane driveway leading
to vehicle garages that are located a minimum of 60 feet from the
street and are designed to minimize their visual impact from the
street. Density incentives are also offered in Subsection S below.
O. Streets. Streets within the neighborhood development shall provide
safe and convenient access and circulation patterns and shall meet the
design standards of this Subsection O. Where a requirement of this
§ 285-34 is in direct conflict with a street requirement in the SALDO,118
the provision of this § 285-34 shall apply.
(1) Streets shall be designed to establish a hierarchy which shall:
(a) Avoid alteration of cultural or historical resources as identified
by the Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Minimize alteration of natural resources as identified by the
Comprehensive Plan.
118. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 285-34 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-34
278:492
(c) Provide a view to prominent natural vistas.
(d) Promote pedestrian movement and calm traffic speeds as
necessary.
(e) Be aligned so that the terminal vista is of elements depicted in
the open space plan.
(f) Provide for on-street parking (except along alleys).
(g) Be provided with sidewalks on both sides.
(h) Accommodate nonmotorized traffic.
(2) Street patterns shall form a network, with variations as needed for
topographic, environmental and other design considerations.
Proposed streets within the neighborhood development designed
as collector streets shall have a minimum center line turning radius
of 150 feet. All other streets within the neighborhood development
shall be designed with a minimum center line turning radius of 80
feet.
(a) Sight triangle. All intersections of streets and all intersections
of access designs with streets shall maintain a clear sight
triangle. The minimum clear sight triangle side length shall be
60 feet for intersections of access drives and streets and for
intersections of streets with streets other than existing
collector or arterial streets or proposed collector streets. All
intersections of streets with existing or proposed collector
streets shall have minimum clear sight triangle side length of
100 feet. All intersections of streets with existing arterial
streets shall have a minimum clear sight triangle side length of
150 feet.
(3) Street width and design standards shall be as set forth in the table
below:
Street
Type
No. of
Travel
Lanes Parking Sidewalks
Cartway
Width
(feet)
R-O-W
Width
(feet) Curb
Collector 2 No Yes 28 50 Yes
N 2 No Yes 20 40 Yes
N-1 2 1 side Yes 26 40 Yes
N-2 2 2 sides Yes 32 50 Yes
Lane 1 No No 10 12 No
§ 285-34 WEAPONS § 285-34
278:493
Key to street types
N: Neighborhood street with neither homes or parking on
either side of the street.
N-1: Neighborhood street with homes and parking on just one
side of the street; the parking must be on the same side of
the street as the homes.
N-2: Neighborhood street with homes and parking on both sides
of the street.
Lane: May have two-way traffic and/or on-street parking only
when design objectives and width are shown to warrant
such travel. A lane shall be designed to not provide for
through traffic.
(4) Any street, lane or alley that may be allowed to have a cartway
width of less than 20 feet shall be maintained by a homeowners'
association. The Township is under no obligation to accept the
dedication of any street, lane or alley.
P. Sidewalks. Sidewalks are to be provided on both sides of all streets
within the neighborhood development as well as along existing streets
connecting the neighborhood development to existing or future
development adjacent to the neighborhood development tract.
(1) Sidewalks shall be no less than four feet wide in residential areas
and no less than five feet wide in areas providing access to
neighborhood facilities within the neighborhood development or
commercial areas within or adjacent to the neighborhood
development tract.
(2) Sidewalks shall be separated from street curbs by a planting strip
or tree lawns not less than three feet wide.
Q. Transit facilities. If the neighborhood development tract is located on
an existing or proposed street which is on an existing or proposed Red
Rose Transit Authority (RRTA) bus route, a transit shelter and bench
shall be provided. A bus pullout lane shall also be provided to
accommodate the safe boarding of passengers and smooth transition of
traffic. Where the neighborhood development has been designed to
provide one or more through-street connections, the provision of
multiple transit sites may be warranted. If RRTA notifies the Township
that it will provide service within the neighborhood development tract
prior to approval of a final subdivision or land development plan, the
applicant shall provide a transit site to serve the neighborhood center
or, if more than one neighborhood center building is constructed, to
serve the neighborhood development center building selected by RRTA
or the Board of Supervisors.
R. Shade trees and street plantings. Shade trees shall be provided and
installed in accordance with the required landscaping plan. At a
§ 285-34 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-34
278:494
minimum, they shall be located along each side of all existing or
proposed streets. Shade trees may be located no closer than 10 feet
from the rear of curb, unless specifically approved otherwise by the
Board of Supervisors. A minimum of one tree shall be provided for every
50 feet of street right-of-way on each side of the street.
(1) All trees shall be at least two to 2 1/2 inches in diameter, measured
at six inches above the ground when planted. In locations where
healthy and mature trees currently exist, they may be counted
towards the fulfillment of these standards.
(2) The type of plant material provided shall be consistent with the
standards of § 240-33C of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
(3) Street plantings may be used to complement the street tree and
landscaping requirements within public areas not included within
the common open space. If permanent containers are used to
accommodate such plantings, they shall contain vegetation which
is hardy in all seasons or shall be replanted according to the change
in seasons. The perpetual care and maintenance of such plantings
shall be the responsibility of the entity responsible for the common
open space.
(4) Alleys or other rear access to residential units shall not be required
to provide either sidewalks or street trees.
S. Incentives. Neighborhood developments which incorporate one or more
of the following elements shall qualify for reductions in the percentage
of common open space required, or an increase in the permitted density
of a neighborhood development, or other modification of the
requirements as specified herein. In no event shall density exceed the
maximum density with density incentives as set forth in Subsection J.
(1) For every two-percent increase in the number of single-family
detached dwelling units which meet the requirements of
Subsection I(1)(a), the density of the neighborhood development
may be increased by 0.1 dwelling units per acre, up to a maximum
increase of 0.3 dwelling units per acre.
(2) For every ten-percent increase in the total percentage of dwelling
units designed to permit individual conveyance beyond the
minimum established in Subsection J, the density of the
neighborhood development may be increased by 0.1 dwelling unit
per acre, up to a maximum increase of 0.3 dwelling units per acre.
(3) The minimum amount of the tract that is provided in common open
space may be reduced from 45% to 30% through use of the
following incentives:
(a) If the applicant provides evidence to the Board of Supervisors
that improvements will be provided to active recreational
§ 285-34 WEAPONS § 285-34
278:495
areas, such as construction of specific equipment, athletic
courts or fields, or jogging/stretching/fitness stations, the
Board of Supervisors may approve a reduction in the required
common open space by up to a maximum of 5%. The amount
of the reduction shall be dependent upon the extent of the
proposed improvements.
(b) If the applicant provides evidence that improvements will be
provided to passive recreational areas, such as extensive
landscaping beyond the minimum requirements, fountains,
benches, ADA-compliant trail surfacing or educational signage
related to natural or historic features, then each type of such
amenity provided shall qualify for consideration of a decrease
in the required common open space by 1%, with the total
reduction of common open space not to exceed 5%.
(c) If the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that the common open space layout and
improvements will protect and make available for public visual
and active enjoyment natural vistas, overlooks, watercourses
and wooded areas (which are in excess of 10,000 contiguous
square feet), then the Board of Supervisors may approve a
reduction in the required common open space by a maximum
of up to 5%.
(4) Subsection N(2) above includes provisions regarding the location
of driveways. The following is an incentive above that requirement.
This incentive shall apply if a minimum of 50% of the dwelling units
shall be provided with all vehicle garage(s) that are accessed from
the rear or that enter the garage from a side street or that have a
one-lane driveway leading to vehicle garages that are located a
minimum of 60 feet from the street and are designed to minimize
their visual impact from the street. If such 50% minimum is met,
then the density of the tract may be increased by 0.2 dwelling units
per acre. Alternatively, if a minimum of 70% of the dwelling units
meet such standard, then the density of the tract may be increased
by 0.4 dwelling units per acre.
(5) If a transfer of development rights is approved under § 285-33,
then the density of the neighborhood development may be
increased up to the maximum density with incentives. The amount
of dwelling units that are allowed to be transferred shall be
determined by § 285-33.
(6) Workforce housing is defined as dwelling units that meet the
standards of this Subsection S(6). If a neighborhood development
will include a minimum of 10% of the total dwelling units that are
be sold or leased as workforce housing, then a density bonus shall
be allowed. Such density bonus shall result in an ability to build two
additional dwelling units for every workforce housing dwelling
unit, up to the maximum density allowed by Subsection J using
§ 285-34 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-34
278:496
density incentives. Such dwelling units shall only be sold, leased or
subleased to individual(s) within a household that has an income
of less than 80% of the Lancaster County median income for
households as determined by the most recent data issued by the
United States Census Bureau. The census median income data
shall be increased by a standard U.S. government measurement of
inflation to update the median income to the present.
(a) The restriction upon the workforce housing shall continue for
15 years after each dwelling unit is initially occupied. The
restriction upon the workforce housing shall apply at the time
of the initial sale or lease of the dwelling units and any
subsequent sale, lease or sublease of the dwelling units. The
income determination shall be based upon the income of the
inhabitants of the dwelling unit during the previous calendar
year.
(b) The applicant shall, as part of its conditional use application,
provide documentation as to how this program shall be funded,
monitored, implemented and enforced and shall agree that the
program conditions and requirements will be made a condition
of conditional use approval under Article I. Applicants are
encouraged to propose to involve a third-party nonprofit
organization in overseeing compliance with this section, with
that organization responsible to periodically certify compliance
in writing to the Zoning Officer.
(c) The proposed workforce housing shall be integrated
throughout the development, as opposed to being isolated to
one area of land. In addition to complying with the
architectural guidelines established per Subsection M, the
workforce housing dwelling units shall be, to the greatest
extent possible, indistinguishable as viewed from the front
from other dwelling units within the development.
(d) This Subsection S(6) shall not by itself limit the sales price or
rental price of a dwelling unit.
(e) At the time of initial occupancy, a minimum of 50% of the
workforce housing dwelling units shall be available for
purchase as opposed to lease.
T. Site plan requirements and effect of site plan approval.
(1) Each applicant for a neighborhood development shall submit a site
plan that includes the following information, at a minimum:
(a) The project name or identifying title.
(b) The name and address of the landowner of the tract, the
applicant, and the firm that prepared the plan.
§ 285-34 WEAPONS § 285-34
278:497
(c) The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared
the plan, the plan date, and the dates of all plan revisions.
(d) A North arrow, a graphic scale, and a written scale.
(e) The entire tract boundary with bearings and distances, and
identification of all corner markers.
(f) A location map for the tract at a minimum scale of 2,000 feet to
the inch, showing the relation of the tract to existing and
proposed streets, municipal boundaries, and streams existing
within 1,000 feet of the tract boundaries.
(g) The plotting of all existing adjacent land uses and lot lines
within 200 feet of the proposed development, including the
location of all public and private streets, drives or lanes,
railroads, historic sites, utilities, easements and other
significant natural or man-made features.
(h) The names of all immediately adjacent landowners and the
names and plan book numbers of all previously recorded plans
for adjacent projects.
(i) Contours at vertical intervals of two feet for land with average
natural slope of 12% or less and at vertical intervals of five feet
for more steeply sloping land; location of benchmark and
datum used.
(j) The delineation of all those areas which have been identified as
being subject to the one-hundred-year flood in accordance with
§ 285-47 of this chapter.
(k) The delineation of all soil types as indicated by the most recent
U.S. Soil Survey information for Lancaster County.
(l) The plotting of all existing landmarks within the proposed
development, including the location of all existing streets,
buildings, easements, rights-of-way, sanitary sewers, water
mains, storm drainage structures and watercourses.
(m) A list of site data, including but not limited to the following:
[1] Total acreage of the tract.
[2] Zoning district.
[3] Proposed use of the land.
[4] Proposed gross area of the development.
[5] Proposed gross residential density.
[6] Proposed number of dwelling units and the mix of dwelling
types.
§ 285-34 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-34
278:498
[7] Proposed number of lots.
[8] Acreage of all street rights-of-way proposed for dedication.
[9] Acreage and percentage of common open space.
[10] Acreage to be sold to individual owners.
[11] Acreage to be retained by landowner.
[12] Acreage of any commercial, public or semipublic use
areas.
[13] Proposed number of parking spaces.
[14] Any proposed density incentive, including the provision
under which the incentive is authorized, the improvement
proposed to qualify for the incentive, the increase in
density, the change in the mix of dwelling types, the
decrease in common open space, the increase in
impervious coverage or the decrease in landscaping
claimed.
(n) The proposed location and dimensions of all streets, access
drives, parking compounds, sidewalks, bikeways, and curbing.
(o) The proposed location of all lot lines with approximate
dimensions.
(p) The approximate size of all lots in square feet or acreage.
(q) The proposed location and configuration of all buildings.
Single-family detached, single-family semidetached and duplex
dwelling units may be schematic in configuration.
Identification of building type with number of dwelling units in
each multiunit building.
(r) The proposed location, size and use of all common open space
areas, structures and recreation facilities.
(s) Proposed landscaping, buffering, screening, walls and fences.
(t) A proposed phasing plan of the development.
(u) A descriptive narrative of the proposal's impact on each of the
following resources, and the specific measures undertaken or
which will be undertaken to incorporate and protect such
features in accordance with the objectives and goals identified
by Subsection A. The applicant shall take appropriate steps to
conserve these resources and shall identify what efforts have
been made to mitigate necessary impacts to these resources.
Features depicted on the plan shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following:
§ 285-34 WEAPONS § 285-34
278:499
[1] Existing vegetation and woodlands.
[2] Natural habitats.
[3] Slopes in excess of 15%.
[4] Ponds, lakes, streams and rivers.
[5] Wetlands.
[6] Ridgelines.
[7] All areas identified as being subject to the one-hundredyear
flood in accordance with § 285-47 of this chapter.
[8] Surface drainage characteristics.
[9] All cultural, historical, known archeological and natural
features on and adjacent to the neighborhood
development tract.
(v) Lot numbers in consecutive order for proposed lots.
(w) Sufficient information to demonstrate the general feasibility of
the proposed stormwater system, road system and utilities, but
not including detailed grading plans, erosion and
sedimentation control plans, road and utility profiles,
construction details, stormwater calculations, and state
permits, which may be submitted later as part of subdivision or
land development plans.
(2) The Board of Supervisors in approving conditional use applications
shall make compliance with the site plan and any revisions thereto
required by the Board of Supervisors a part of the approval. The
applicant shall develop the neighborhood development tract in the
manner set forth on the site plan and any required revisions thereto
unless a change to the site plan is authorized in accordance with
the following subsections. This procedure for revisions to the site
plan shall supersede the provisions for changes to the site plan set
forth in Article I of this chapter.
(3) The Township has an objective of seeking to work with an applicant
to coordinate conditional use and subdivision approvals. A review
period for a conditional use may overlap the review period under
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, provided the
requirements for each ordinance are met.
(a) At the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, the Board of
Supervisors may take additional action to waive preliminary
plan submittal requirements. However, if such action is taken,
the Board may require compliance with § 240-10L of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. A substantial
amount of detailed engineering submittal requirements may be
§ 285-34 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-34
278:500
deferred by the Board of Supervisors from the preliminary
subdivision plan stage to the final plan stage if the applicant
makes a legally binding commitment that no construction and
no major grading will begin until after final plan approval is
granted.
(4) Provided that any change is approved under the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance, an applicant may make minor
revisions to the neighborhood development site plan without
needing an additional conditional use approval for the following
changes:
(a) Alteration of any of the following items:
[1] Increase in the number of dwelling units or decrease in the
number of dwelling units not in excess of 10%.
[2] Change in the percentage or mix of each type of dwelling
unit by no more than 10% and still within the parameters
of Subsection I(2).
[3] Change in the amount of nonresidential building area or
land area to be devoted to nonresidential uses of not more
than 10%.
[4] Change in the amount by not more than 10% or location of
open space areas by not more than 800 feet.
[5] Change in the minimum lot sizes for the residential
dwellings by not more than 10%.
[6] Change in any improvement proposed to qualify for a
density incentive authorized by Subsection S.
(b) An applicant may make minor revisions to the site plan as may
be necessary to accommodate fully engineered stormwater
management facilities, public sewer facilities, public water
facilities, floodplains and changes to street design as may be
required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT) as part of a highway occupancy permit. The Board
of Supervisors during the subdivision and land development
process shall determine whether the applicant's proposed
changes to the approved site plan constitute minor revisions
necessary to accommodate fully engineered stormwater
management facilities, public sewer facilities, public water
facilities, floodplains, and changes to street design as may be
required by PennDOT as part of a highway occupancy permit.
(5) An applicant who desires to make a change to an approved site plan
which the Board of Supervisors determines does not constitute a
revision authorized by Subsection T(4) above shall apply for and
obtain an additional conditional use approval.
§ 285-34 WEAPONS § 285-34
278:501
(a) Any applicant for a change to an approved site plan shall
demonstrate that the change continues to meet all
requirements of this § 285-34.
(b) An applicant who desires to make a revision to an approved
site plan which affects a matter in excess of the modifications
allowed in Subsection T(4) above, or that affects a matter not
addressed by such section, shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors during the additional
conditional use approval process that such change will:
[1] Generally enhance the development plan, or in any case
not have an adverse impact on its physical, visual or
spatial characteristics.
[2] Generally enhance the streetscape and neighborhood, or
in any case not have an adverse impact on the streetscape
and neighborhood.
[3] Not result in configurations of lots or street systems which
shall be impractical or detract from the appearance of the
proposed neighborhood development.
[4] Not result in any danger to the public health, safety or
welfare by making access to the dwellings by emergency
vehicles more difficult, by depriving adjoining properties
of adequate light and air or by violating the other purposes
for which zoning ordinances are to be enacted under
Section 604 of the State Municipalities Planning Code.
[5] Allow for equal or better results than the originally
approved site plan and represent the minimum
modification necessary.
U. Modification of standards. The Board of Supervisors may, by conditional
use approval, permit the modification of the design standards in order
to encourage the use of innovative design. An applicant desiring to
obtain such conditional use approval shall, when making application for
conditional use approval for a neighborhood development using the
neighborhood design option, also make application for conditional use
approval under this Subsection U. The Board of Supervisors shall
consider both conditional use approval requests simultaneously. Any
conditional use to permit a modification of the design standards shall be
subject to the following standards:
(1) Such modifications of design standards better serve the intended
purposes and goals of the neighborhood design option as expressed
in Subsection A.
(2) Such modifications of design standards would not result in adverse
impact to adjoining properties nor future inhabitants within the
neighborhood development.
§ 285-34 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-34
278:502
§ 285-35. Additional requirements in the A District.
(3) Such modifications will not result in an increase in residential
densities permitted for the neighborhood development tract.
(4) Such modifications will not result in a decrease in common open
space below that required in Subsection F for the neighborhood
development tract.
(5) The extent of modification provides the minimum amount of relief
necessary to ensure compliance with the preceding criteria in this
§ 285-34.
V. Signs.
(1) As part of the final subdivision or land development plan for a
neighborhood development, a set of standards shall be submitted
that will be used to guide the design of signs in the development.
(2) The design, size and location of signs at entryways into the
neighborhood development shall be submitted with the conditional
use application.
(3) Internally illuminated signs shall be prohibited within a
neighborhood development.
(4) Signs in a commercial center or neighborhood center of a
neighborhood development shall comply with the same
requirements that apply to the MS Main Street District.
A. Limitations on subdivision/land development.
(1) In order to preserve the agricultural tracts, it is the express intent
of the A District regulations that the subdivision of lots from farms
or the development of nonagricultural uses and structures on
existing farms shall be limited. In addition, it is the express intent
of these provisions that the maximum size of lots created for any
use other than agriculture be limited in order to provide for the
retention of tracts of sufficient size to be used for agricultural
purposes. It is the intent of the Board of Supervisors to implement
the mandate of Section 604(3) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code to preserve prime agricultural land through the
enactment of these regulations.
(2) Each tract existing on April 20, 1988, shall be permitted to
subdivide new lots from the tract or establish new principal uses on
the tract based upon the lot area of the tract as it existed on April
20, 1988, as follows:
§ 285-34 WEAPONS § 285-35
278:503
Lot Area
(acres)
Number of New Lots Which May Be
Subdivided and/or Number of New
Principal Uses Which May Be
Established
At Least Less Than
2 20 1
20 40 2
40 60 3
60 80 4
80 100 5
100 120 6
120 140 7
140 160 8
160 180 9
180 200 10
200 220 11
(3) A purpose of the A District is to limit the development of
agricultural tracts. It is the further purpose of this A District to
limit the number of single-family dwellings or other principal uses
which may be established on any tract within the A District. The
condition of the tract on April 20, 1988, or on the date on which the
tract was first zoned A District shall be the basis from which the
maximum development set forth in § 285-35A(2) above shall be
calculated.
(4) See § 285-33, which may allow transfers of the rights to develop
dwelling units from the A District to other districts. A density
incentive is offered.
(5) No subdivision shall be permitted which shall increase the lot size
of a lot used for residential purposes in excess of the maximum lot
size, except as provided in Subsection B(2). Any lot existing as of
March 16, 1996, which is two or fewer acres in size, shall be
presumed to be used for residential purposes.
(6) A subdivision, the sole purpose of which is to transfer land to
increase the size of a tract being used for agricultural purposes,
where both the tract from which the land is taken and the tract to
which the land is added will be 20 acres or greater after such
subdivision, shall not be included when computing the permissible
number of lots to be subdivided from a tract as set forth in
Subsection B(2) above.
(7) A subdivision to create a lot which will be transferred to the
Township or a municipal authority created by the Township shall
§ 285-35 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-35
278:504
not be included when computing the permissible number of lots to
be subdivided from a tract as set forth in Subsection A(2) above.
(8) Any subdivision or land development plan hereafter filed with the
applicable approving body for subdivision or land development of a
parent tract shall specify which lot or lots shall carry with it a right
of further subdivision or establishment of principal uses, if any such
right remains from the quota allocated to the parent tract on April
20, 1988, or on the date when such land was first included within
the A District. The right of further subdivision or establishment of
principal uses shall also be included in the deed for the newly
created lot. If the designation of the right of further subdivision or
establishment of principal uses was not included on a subdivision
or land development plan of a parent tract, it shall be conclusively
presumed that the largest lot remaining after subdivision shall
carry the right of further subdivision or establishment of principal
uses.
(9) In the event that a tract which was not classified as part of the A
District on April 20, 1988, is or was thereafter classified as part of
the A District, the size and ownership of the tract and the
development existing on the tract on the effective date of the
change in zoning classification shall determine the number of lots
which may be subdivided from or the number of principal uses
which may be established on such tract.
(10) The number of lots which may be created or principal uses which
may be established shall be fixed according to the size of the parent
tract. This number shall not be increased by the subdivision of such
parent tract. Any subsequent owner of a parent tract, land
remaining in the parent tract after subdivision or land which was
formerly part of a parent tract shall be bound by the actions of his
predecessor.
(11) In submitting an application for a subdivision/land development for
a dwelling unit within the A District, the applicant shall
demonstrate that measures have been used to:
(a) Minimize the loss of valuable farmland;
(b) Cluster residential lots on the subject property and, if
applicable, with those lots contained on adjoining farms;
(c) Minimize the length of property lines shared by all residential
lots and adjoining farms;
(d) Assure adequate vehicular access to future residences not
currently proposed;
(e) Assure that the proposed plan can comply with the Township's
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance;
§ 285-35 WEAPONS § 285-35
278:505
(f) Make use of existing public sewer and/or public water
facilities; and
(g) Minimize the clearing or cutting of mature trees and
hedgerows.
(h) The applicant shall furnish evidence regarding how these
objectives have been satisfied.
B. Lot area requirements.
(1) Agricultural, horticultural and/or forestry-related uses: 20 acres
minimum for uses existing as of March 16, 1996; 50 acres minimum
for uses established after March 16, 1996.
(2) Single-family detached dwellings: 35,000 square feet, minimum lot
area; two acres, maximum lot area.
(a) The maximum lot area shall not apply if the applicant can
demonstrate by credible evidence that the area proposed for
the dwelling lot: 1) does not predominately consist of Class I, II
and/or III soils, as identified in the soil survey; or 2) is
generally unsuitable for agricultural purposes; or 3) where
additional lot area is needed to improve septic or water supply
facilities for the lot. Where an applicant proposes to subdivide
an existing dwelling from the parent tract, the applicant may
opt to impose the maximum lot area requirements of this
section upon such existing dwelling rather than on a proposed
dwelling to be constructed on the remainder of the parent
tract.
(b) The Township may also allow one lot to exceed the two-acre
maximum lot area if the applicant proves that the resulting
land that is removed from the parent tract will not be greater
than would result if a larger number of allowed lots would be
subdivided. For example, if an applicant was allowed three new
lots on a tract and only proposed one new lot, then that one
new lot could have a six-acre maximum lot area, which is
equivalent to three lots of two acres each. However, in this
example, that six-acre lot would be designated on deeds and
the record plan as having the right to subdivide the two
additional lots, and the remaining parent lot would not have a
right of further subdivision.
(3) Other allowed uses. Unless otherwise specified, all other principal
uses shall contain at least one acre. Except as specifically stated, in
no case shall any nonagricultural use contain more than five acres.
(4) See § 285-63, which may allow a lot to include two single-family
detached dwellings if the applicant proves to the Township that
each dwelling could be lawfully subdivided in the future to have
each dwelling on its own lot meeting Township requirements.
§ 285-35 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-35
278:506
C. Minimum lot width: 200 feet at the minimum front yard setback line;
150 feet at the lot frontage.
D. Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
E. Minimum setbacks and maximum height requirements.
(1) Agricultural uses (other than farm dwellings).
(a) Front yard setback: 50 feet.
(b) Side yard setback: 50 feet on each of two sides.
(c) Rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(d) Additional setbacks. Except as provided for in the following
paragraph, no new slaughter area, area for the storage or
processing of garbage, or spent mushroom compost, or
structures for the cultivation of mushrooms shall be permitted
within 300 feet of any land within the R-1, R-2 and/or R-3
Zones. See additional setbacks in § 285-42 under "Livestock
and Poultry, Raising of."
[1] The Zoning Hearing Board may as a special exception,
however, reduce the above special setback requirements
where it is shown that, because of prevailing winds,
unusual obstructions, topography or other conditions, a
lesser distance would protect adjoining lands from odor,
dust or other hazards. In no case, however, shall the
Zoning Hearing Board reduce the special setback
requirement to less than 100 feet. The burden shall be
upon the applicant to prove that a lesser distance would
not be detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the community.
(2) Single-family detached dwellings (including farm dwellings).
(a) Front yard setback: 50 feet.
(b) Side yard setbacks: 25 feet on each of two side yards.
(c) Rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(d) Maximum permitted height: 35 feet. [Amended 12-10-2007
by Ord. No. 202]
(3) Other permitted or special exception uses. Unless otherwise
specified, the following requirements shall apply to all other
principal uses permitted within the A District:
(a) Front yard setbacks: 50 feet.
(b) Side yard setbacks: 50 feet each of two side yards.
(c) Rear yard setback: 50 feet.
§ 285-35 WEAPONS § 285-35
278:507
(4) Residential accessory uses. Unless otherwise specified, the
following requirements shall apply to accessory uses:
(a) Front yard setback: No accessory use (except permitted signs)
shall be located within the front yard.
(b) Side yard setbacks: 10 feet on each of two side yards.
(c) Rear yard setback: 10 feet.
(d) Maximum permitted height: 15 feet. [Amended 12-10-2007
by Ord. No. 202]
(5) Maximum permitted mso-element-frame-height: 35 feet for
principal nonagricultural buildings; 150 feet for agricultural
buildings and structures, provided all structures are set back a
distance at least equal to their height from all property lines.
F. Maximum total impervious coverage.
(1) Agricultural uses: 10%.
(2) Single-family dwellings: 20%.
(3) Places of worship or primary or secondary schools: 60%.
(4) Other uses (unless otherwise specified): 20%.
G. Driveways. All lanes exclusively serving agricultural, horticultural and/
or forestry-related activities shall be exempt from driveway and access
drive requirements.
H. Warehousing and storage as a principal use. Warehousing and storage
shall be permitted as a principal use when meeting all of the following
criteria: [Added 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 202119]
(1) Minimum lot size of two acres and maximum lot size of 10 acres.
(2) Maximum of one such building per lot.
(3) The use shall not be used for any commercial purposes.
(4) The storage area may not be sublet.
(5) Maximum floor area of 5,000 square feet.
(6) All buildings shall maintain a residential or agricultural
appearance, as viewed from the street.
(7) All other requirements shall be in compliance except as specified in
this chapter.
119. Editor's Note: This ordinance also relettered former Subsection H, Agricultural nuisance
disclaimer, as Subsection I.
§ 285-35 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-35
278:508
§ 285-36. Age-restricted residential development.
§ 285-37. Historic buildings. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
243]
I. Agricultural nuisance disclaimer. All lands within the A District are
located within an area where land is used for commercial agricultural
production. Owners, residents and other users of this property may be
subjected to inconvenience, discomfort and the possibility of injury to
property and health arising from normal and accepted agricultural
practices and operations, including but not limited to noise, odors, dust,
the operation of machinery of any kind including aircraft, the storage
and disposal of manure, the application of fertilizers, soil amendments,
herbicides and pesticides. Owners, occupants and users of this property
should be prepared to accept such inconveniences, discomfort and
possibility of injury from normal agricultural operations, and are hereby
put on official notice that the Right to Farm Law, 3 P.S. § 951 et seq., as
amended, may bar them from obtaining a legal judgment against such
normal agricultural operations. [Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No.
202]
A. This § 285-36 provides a density bonus for a residential development
that is age-restricted in compliance with the federal requirements for
housing for older persons as specified in the United States Code. (Note:
As of 2005, such provisions were in 42 U.S.C. 3607).
B. In order to be approved by the Township as age-restricted residential
development, every dwelling unit (except a unit for one manager) on a
tract of land shall be permanently restricted by deed, by any lease and
by notes on the recorded plan to the following occupancy limitations: 1)
a minimum of one head of household of each dwelling unit shall be age
55 years or older or physically disabled as defined by social security
disability regulations; and 2) no person under age 18 shall live in the
dwelling unit for more than 30 days in any calendar year. Any violation
of such age restrictions shall be a violation of this Zoning Ordinance. In
addition, in order to be approved as elderly housing, the applicant shall
establish an appropriate legal entity, such as a property owners'
association that has the duty, authority and responsibility to enforce
such age restrictions over time.
C. If a residential development is approved under this § 285-36, then the
minimum lot area or the minimum average lot area per dwelling unit, as
applicable, shall be reduced by 15%. An age-restricted residential
development shall meet all other requirements of Township ordinances.
A medical residential campus development shall not be eligible for agerestricted
residential development bonus.
A. Historic Buildings Table and Historic Buildings Map. The Historic
Buildings Table120 lists historic buildings within the Township. The
Historic Buildings Map121 shows the locations of the historic buildings
§ 285-35 WEAPONS § 285-37
278:509
by map numbers corresponding to the numbers on the Historic
Buildings Table. The Historic Buildings Table and the Historic Buildings
Map are hereby incorporated by reference. The Historic Buildings
Table and the Historic Buildings Map may be revised or replaced by an
amendment to this chapter.
B. Purposes. This section implements the mandatory requirements of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code to use zoning to preserve
historic buildings. This section implements Sections 603(b), 603(g),
604(1) and 605 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
which address protecting and facilitating the preservation of historic
values through zoning and using zoning to regulate uses and structures
at or near places having unique historic, architectural or patriotic
interest or value.
C. Consideration of demolition. The following shall apply to buildings that
are identified on the Historic Buildings Table. Unless an accessory
building is specifically included on the Historic Buildings Table, this
§ 285-37 shall only apply to principal buildings.
(1) General requirement. A building identified on the Historic
Buildings Table shall not be demolished in part or in whole or be
removed without first obtaining conditional use approval for the
demolition, followed by a Township demolition permit.
(2) Application procedures. In addition to meeting the conditional use
requirements in § 285-17, a demolition permit application under
this section shall include the following:
(a) A site plan drawn to scale, showing the specific location of the
structure proposed to be demolished and its relationship to
adjacent property lines and all other buildings, structures and
improvements (such as sidewalks, driveways, parking areas,
landscape beds, mature trees), and shall indicate the general
topography of the property. In addition to the location of the
structure(s) to be demolished, the site plan shall include a
separate sheet showing the proposed future use of the lot,
including any proposed buildings and a scaled elevation/facade
drawing of the proposed use/structure.
(b) An explanation of why the building is being considered for
demolition, removal or relocation. The application shall include
an evaluation by a qualified historic preservation professional
of the historic and/or architectural significance of the historic
building.
(c) Proposed use for the property or portion thereof from which
the building will be removed and a time line for the
120. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
121. Editor's Note: Said map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 285-37 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-37
278:510
implementation of the proposed use (including other local,
county, state and federal approvals).
(d) Photographs of the existing building proposed to be
demolished.
(3) Approval or disapproval of a demolition permit.
(a) Demolition permits for the partial or entire demolition of a
building regulated by this section shall need conditional use
approval by the Board of Supervisors, after an opportunity for
review by the Township Planning Commission and by any
appointed Township historical commission or Township
historic preservation task force that may exist. A partial
demolition shall include, but not be limited to, removal of an
attached porch roof, removal of porch columns, and removal of
architectural features.
[1] A building regulated by this section shall not be
demolished, in whole or in part, or removed unless the
applicant proves by credible evidence to the satisfaction of
the Board of Supervisors that one or more of the following
conditions exists:
[a] The existing building cannot feasibly and reasonably
be reused, for a use allowed by this chapter, and that
such situation is not the result of intentional neglect or
demolition by neglect by the owner, and that the
potential for reuse shall consider sale to another
party;
[b] The denial of the demolition would result in
unreasonable economic hardship to the owner, based
upon credible evidence, and the hardship was not selfcreated;
or
[c] The demolition is necessary to allow a project to occur
that will have substantial, special and unusual public
benefit that would greatly outweigh the loss of the
building regulated by this section, and the project
needs to occur at this location. For example, a
demolition may be needed for a necessary expansion
of an existing public building or to allow a street
improvement that is necessary to alleviate a public
safety hazard.
[2] An applicant is only required to meet one of the conditions
provided in Subsection C(3)(a)(1) above. However, the
applicant shall also describe how other conditions in
Subsection C(3)(a)(1) apply or do not apply.
§ 285-37 WEAPONS § 285-37
278:511
[3] For approval of a demolition, the standards of this § 285-37
shall apply in addition to any relevant general conditional
use standards. In reviewing the application, the Board of
Supervisors shall consider the following:
[a] The effect of the demolition on the historical
significance, streetscape and architectural integrity of
neighboring historic buildings and on the historic
character of the surrounding neighborhood.
[b] The feasibility of other alternatives to demolition.
[4] Evidence. The applicant shall provide sufficient credible
evidence to justify any claims that a building cannot
feasibly be repaired or reused. The conditions that justify
the proposed demolition shall not have been self-created
by the applicant.
[5] Exceptions. Conditional use approval shall not be needed
for the following:
[a] Interior renovations or removal of features (such as a
rear porch) that do not harm the structural stability of
the building and that are not visible from a public
street (not including an alley).
[b] Removal of features that were added less than 60
years previously, such as a modern porch or aluminum
siding or carport.
[c] Relocation of a building within the Township, provided
that the relocation does not result in a partial or
complete demolition that is regulated by this section.
(4) Conditions. Applicants whose applications for demolition, removal,
or relocation are approved shall be subject to conditions that
include, in addition to any other appropriate conditions, the
following:
(a) The Township shall have the right, at the Township's expense,
to hire and send a person who is skilled in documenting
historic structures to the subject property, and the applicant
shall have the obligation to cooperate with the Township's
efforts to record all relevant information relating to the history
of the subject property.
(5) Demolition by neglect. Demolition by neglect is defined as the
absence of routine maintenance and repair which leads to
structural weakness, decay and deterioration in a building or
structure to the point where the building or structure meets the
criteria for condemnation set forth in Chapter 197 of this Code,
§ 285-37 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-37
278:512
§ 285-38. Additional requirements for the OTR District.
known as the West Lampeter Township Property Maintenance
Code.
(a) Code violations: If the Code Enforcement Officer has cited a
property owner of an historic building for conditions that could
lead to structural weakness, decay or deterioration in a
building or structure and the property owner fails to correct
the condition(s) in the time specified, that property owner may
be cited also for demolition by neglect under these provisions
and be subject to the penalties contained herein.
(b) The owner of unoccupied principal or accessory buildings or
structures that have been cited for violations shall develop a
written maintenance program for the protection of any and all
unoccupied historic buildings. Said maintenance program shall
be established in accordance with the West Lampeter Property
Maintenance Code, as previously enacted and amended. A
copy of the maintenance program shall be filed with the Code
Enforcement Officer and implementation begun in accordance
with an established time-table.
[1] The maintenance program shall address measures to
assure that structural components are protected and
reinforced to stabilize and maintain the essential form of
the building or structure. Structural features requiring
stabilization include, but are not be limited to, roofs,
chimneys, cornices, soffit, fascia, spouting, columns,
beams, posts, and window and door sills, lintels and jambs.
[2] The exterior and interior of the building or structure shall
be inspected no less than annually by the Code
Enforcement Officer with the owner or the owner's agent
to determine compliance with the established
maintenance program.
D. In addition to or in lieu of the penalties and enforcement remedies
provided in this chapter, any violations of the provisions of this § 285-37
may be abated or enforced by proceedings seeking equitable relief
against the violator.
A. Planned mixed-use development. Section 285-27A establishes the
minimum lot area for the OTR District. That section allows a reduction
in the minimum lot area and the minimum lot width if conditional use
approval is first obtained for a planned mixed-use development. A
planned mixed-use development shall have a minimum tract size of 10
acres.
§ 285-37 WEAPONS § 285-38
278:513
(1) A planned mixed-use development shall only be approved if the
applicant proves to the Board of Supervisors that the following
conditions will be met:
(a) That the applicant submits a master site plan for the entire
tract that shows the approximate layout of lots and roads,
ranges of intended uses, and the methods to buffer adjacent
dwellings. Substantial compliance shall be required with that
master site plan, unless the applicant receives conditional use
approval for a revised planned mixed-use development in the
future. The master site plan shall be prepared to scale and
based upon accurate existing features. However, fully
engineered subdivision or land development plans may be
submitted as a later step, after conditional use approval is
granted.
(b) That the development will maximize use of interior streets, as
opposed to driveways from individual lots entering onto
exterior public streets.
(c) That the development will include an appropriate system to
minimize the number of stormwater basins and to ensure
proper maintenance of stormwater basins over time.
(d) That the subdivider will establish an appropriate set of
covenants or deed restrictions on each lot to ensure proper
development of individual lots. The substance of those
covenants or deed restrictions shall be provided to the Board of
Supervisors for its information. It is requested, but not
required, that the covenants or deed restrictions include
restrictions on exterior materials of the facades of buildings.
(2) Definition of planned mixed-use development. This term shall mean
a development approved as a planned mixed-use development as a
conditional use under the standards of § 285-38. A planned mixeduse
development is a tract designed with fully coordinated interior
road access, stormwater management, landscaping and buffering.
(3) Once a planned mixed-use development is granted conditional use
approval, then individual uses shall only be allowed if they are
consistent with the conditional use approval, unless a revised
conditional use approval is granted.
(4) Information on covenants. A planned mixed-use development shall
include a reasonable set of deed restrictions or covenants imposed
by the developer on each lot. These covenants should cover types of
uses, maintenance of lots and industrial operations, with a proper
means for enforcement. The covenants shall also be written to
carry out the purposes and requirements of a planned mixed-use
development. The substance of these covenants shall be presented
before a planned mixed-use development is approved.
§ 285-38 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-38
278:514
(5) See the note in the Table of Allowed Uses for restrictions on retail
sales, personal service and restaurant uses, including the
percentage of the development tract that can be occupied by such
uses.
(6) Within the OTR District, a neighborhood development developed in
compliance with the NDO regulations of § 285-34 shall be allowed
as a conditional use if the following additional requirements are
met:
(a) The land within the OTR District shall be allowed to have the
same density as would apply to an NDO development in the R-2
District. Only the portion of the tract that is developed as an
NDO shall count towards determining the allowed density.
(b) The NDO development shall be within a planned mixed-use
development, with an interior road system, stormwater
management system and landscaping design that is fully
coordinated between the business development and the
residential development within the OTR District. An access
management plan shall be presented for all lands that are in
common ownership.
(c) For the portion of the tract that is developed as an NDO
development, the dimensional, architectural, density, parking,
design and similar requirements of § 285-34 shall apply in
place of the corresponding requirements of other subsections
of this § 285-38.
(d) As part of the conditional use approval, the applicant shall
prove to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that a
sufficient buffer is provided between residential areas and any
incompatible business areas, particularly uses that would
involve nighttime noise or regular trucking activities. The
Board of Supervisors may require additional setbacks,
landscaping, earth berming and/or limits upon hours of
operation as a condition of conditional use approval to ensure
compatibility.
(e) The NDO development shall not comprise more than 40% of
the total land area of a tract within the OTR District. The
maximum percentage of an OTR tract that can be developed in
retail, restaurant and service uses shall also apply to any
portion of the OTR developed in commercial uses. Therefore,
the percentage of land that can be developed in retail uses
under the OTR District may not be added together with the
percentage of an NDO that is allowed to be developed
commercial to result in a higher percentage of commercial
uses.
B. Additional setbacks.
§ 285-38 WEAPONS § 285-38
278:515
(1) Any industrial use or area routinely used for the parking, storage,
loading or unloading of two or more tractor-trailer trucks or
refrigerated trucks shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet from
the lot line of an existing dwelling. Such setback shall be reduced to
120 feet if a principal building or Township-approved sound wall or
six-foot minimum height landscaped earth berm will completely
buffer such activity from all adjacent residential lots. An earth berm
may include a suitable retaining wall on the business side, provided
a 3:1 minimum slope is maintained on the residential side.
(2) No new loading dock that is routinely used by tractor-trailer trucks
shall be located within 75 feet of the right-of-way of a public street.
C. Impervious coverage. The maximum impervious coverage provided in
§ 285-27A may be modified as follows within a planned mixed-use
development, if the flexibility is used to provide a substantial buffer
adjacent to existing dwellings:
(1) Within an approved planned mixed-use development, the maximum
impervious coverages of certain individual lots may be approved to
be a maximum of 80%, provided that deed restrictions are put into
place to restrict the maximum impervious coverage of other lots to
a lower percentage so as to ensure that a maximum impervious
coverage of 65% is maintained for the total land area of all lots.
This provision is intended to allow for substantial buffer areas
adjacent to dwellings or for common recreation areas.
(a) For example, by deed restrictions, one lot of two acres might
have a maximum impervious coverage of 75% while another
two-acre lot is approved with a maximum impervious coverage
of 55%, resulting in an average impervious coverage of 65%.
D. Height. A maximum height of 45 feet or four stories, whichever is more
restrictive, shall apply. However, for portions of a building that are
within 100 feet from an existing residential lot, a maximum height of 35
feet or three stories, whichever is more restrictive, shall apply.
Customary extensions of a building that are not occupied by persons
may exceed this height limit, such as elevator equipment, skylights,
water towers, chimneys, smokestacks and similar features.
E. Landscaping and screening.
(1) See §§ 285-65 and 285-66.
(2) Planting strips shall be provided adjacent to each public street. The
planting strip shall have a minimum width of 40 feet adjacent to the
curbline of an arterial street and 15 feet adjacent to the curbline of
any other street. If curbing is not provided, then such width shall
be measured from the street right-of-way line. A sidewalk of
approved width and approximately perpendicular driveways of
approved width may be placed within this planting strip. The
§ 285-38 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-38
278:516
planting strip shall be maintained in deciduous shade trees, shrubs
and an attractive vegetative ground cover.
(3) As part of land development review for each new principal building,
a landscaping plan shall be submitted to the Township. A minimum
of 20% of each lot shall be landscaped, which shall include grass or
other vegetative ground cover and an appropriate distribution of
trees and shrubs.
F. Utilities. Each principal use shall be served by public water and public
sewage service. All new electric and telephone service lines within the
development shall be placed underground.
G. Nuisances and hazards. An applicant for a new industrial use shall
provide a written description of methods that will be used to control
significant nuisances and hazards, including noise, dust, toxic hazards,
hazardous spill and leak hazards, explosion hazards, flammable
hazards, radiation hazards and similar nuisances and hazards.
H. Pedestrian access and amenities.
(1) See the provisions of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance122 regarding sidewalks along streets. An applicant may
apply for a modification under such ordinance to allow a
bituminous asphalt bicycle/walking trail in place of concrete
sidewalks.
(2) Consideration should be given to providing pedestrian routes (such
as crushed stone paths in areas that are not along a public street)
and outdoor lunch areas with picnic tables and trees within a
subdivision for the use of employees of businesses within the
subdivision.
I. Additional OTR provisions.
(1) The applicant shall establish a set of architectural standards
through deed restrictions or a similar method that will be binding
upon each lot owner and developer. A draft of such provisions shall
be provided to the Township for review. It is strongly encouraged
that a minimum of 75% of the facades of buildings facing onto
streets consist of glass, brick or other decorative masonry. This
provision is intended to avoid metal or cinder block construction, at
least as visible from a street. Subdividers are strongly encouraged
to place such a requirement on each lot through deed restrictions.
(2) Landscaped front yards. A maximum of 80% of the required
minimum front yard setback area shall be maintained in
landscaped green space. The intent is that the remaining 20%
would be used for driveways, fire lanes, visitor parking,
122. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 285-38 WEAPONS § 285-38
278:517
§ 285-39. Additional requirements in the MS and MSL Districts.
handicapped parking and walkways. Other vehicle parking is
intended to primarily be placed to the side or rear of buildings.
(3) Loading docks. An applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the
Township that loading docks routinely serving three or more
tractor-trailer trucks have been located within reason to seek to
minimize their visibility from dwellings, public streets and existing
and planned expressways. No loading dock routinely served by
tractor-trailer trucks shall be located within 75 feet of the existing
right-of-way of a public street.
(4) Coordinated stormwater management. The OTR shall include a
coordinated system of stormwater management. At best, where
feasible, this should include sufficient land set aside for a minimal
number of stormwater basins, with each lot owner assessed
sufficient fees each year to properly maintain the basins.
(5) Berming. The Board of Supervisors may require an earth berm to
be constructed between industrial uses and any existing or
prospective residential lots if the Board determines it will be
necessary to ensure compatibility between uses.
(a) The height of the berm shall average at least five feet, unless
the Board of Supervisors determines that a differing height is
appropriate considering the topography of the site.
(b) The maximum slope of the berm (on sides visible from outside
of the business) shall be three feet measured horizontally for
each one foot measured vertically.
(c) The plant screening required by § 285-65 shall be placed
towards the top, on the residential side, of the berm. Portions
of the berm that are visible from outside of the business
development shall be maintained with attractive vegetation.
A. Purposes. In addition to the overall purposes of this chapter, the MS
and MSL Districts are intended to: improve the appearance of the
Willow Street Corridor to help attract desirable types of development;
encourage appropriate infill development and adaptive reuse; attract
new sources of employment and tax revenue; encourage a proper mix of
uses; avoid development that would be inconsistent with the character
of the community; provide for reasonably safe and convenient
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicle circulation; encourage persons to live,
work, shop, and enjoy recreation within the Township; encourage the
creation of a sense of place, feelings of belonging, and a community
spirit that promotes social interaction and volunteerism; and further
the purposes and objectives of and utilize the authority for traditional
neighborhood development that are set forth in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code. [Amended 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 232]
§ 285-38 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-39
278:518
B. Additional provisions within the MS and MSL Districts:
(1) Buildings may be developed in a condominium arrangement
without each building being on its own minimum-sized lot, provided
the applicant proves that the same dimensional requirements could
be met as if the dwellings were in fee-simple ownership. For
example, if a ten-foot side yard is required on each side of two
buildings, then a twenty-foot separation shall be provided, although
a lot line would not need to exist between the two buildings.
(2) Before zoning approval is granted for any new principal building, a
conceptual architectural plan shall be submitted to the Township
for review. Such plans shall show the front elevation of the building
and shall list the types of exterior building materials of the front
facade. A Township disapproval decision shall not be based upon
such architectural plans.
(3) Individual buildings and pedestrian entrances and parking areas
shall be laid out to promote pedestrian access among different
uses.
(4) Buildings of over 100 feet in length should be designed to have the
appearance of interconnected buildings and to avoid the
appearance of monotony. This should be accomplished through
variations in rooflines, overhangs, setbacks, colors and facade
materials and use of canopies, porches and awnings.
(5) Buildings should have the appearance of having a pitched or
peaked roof as viewed from a street or have a decorative cornice
roof.
(6) Retail stores should have display windows facing onto the street.
(7) Buildings should be designed and arranged to provide a character
similar to an older village. Street level storefronts shall be inviting
to pedestrians.
(8) No off-street parking spaces shall be located within: a) 40 feet from
the right-of-way of Route 272 Willow Street Pike or Village Road;
and b) 10 feet from the curbline of any other street. To the
maximum extent feasible, off-street parking should be located to
the rear or side of nonresidential buildings. Existing parking spaces
may be rearranged, provided they do not result in an increase in
the land area covered by off-street parking spaces in such location.
(9) Walkways through parking lots shall be well-defined and separated
from major vehicle corridors, except where crosswalks are
provided.
(10) Loading and unloading spaces for trucks shall not block major
pedestrianways or create blind spots.
§ 285-39 WEAPONS § 285-39
278:519
(11) Bike racks shall be provided in commercial developments of over
three acres.
(12) As viewed from a street, buildings should be constructed of
materials using the following exterior materials or other materials
with a closely similar appearance: brick, stone or clapboard.
(13) Maximum building setback. If a new principal building is
constructed on a lot adjacent to Willow Street Pike, at least a
portion of such building shall have a building setback from Willow
Street Pike that is not more than 15 feet greater than the average
building setback of all buildings on that same side of the block
along Willow Street Pike.
(14) Design guidelines. The following design guidelines are
recommended to be used by the Township and applicants when
considering changes to the MS and MSL Districts.
(a) Every effort should be made to preserve and reuse older
buildings and to rehabilitate historic features. Modern
additions and features should be placed towards the rear of the
property.
(b) Uninterrupted continuity of pedestrian-related uses and
activities should be encouraged along Willow Street Pike,
particularly in areas of present activity. Outward street
orientation is encouraged, with storefronts, entrances, window
displays and other windows relating to Willow Street Pike.
(c) Lighting. Privately installed light fixtures should be similar in
design to decorative public streetlights. Excessive illumination
and glare should be avoided.
(d) Signs. If more than one sign is used, the signs should be
consistent in design. Signs should not cover historic
architectural features.
(e) Parking. Parking areas should be well-screened from Willow
Street Pike by landscaping and a decorative masonry wall.
(f) Patterns. Where existing older buildings have a certain
horizontal or vertical orientation or pattern, that orientation or
pattern should be continued in new construction. Where
existing older buildings have a certain spacing of windows and
doors, similar spacing (and similar sizes of windows and doors)
should be continued. When larger buildings are proposed, they
should be articulated so that the major elements of the facade
reflect the width and proportion of the surrounding buildings.
(g) Blank walls. Blank walls without door and window openings
should be avoided along a street. Overly modernistic or bland
§ 285-39 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-39
278:520
buildings devoid of details should be avoided when adjacent
buildings have architectural details.
(h) Fencing. Chain link metal fencing should be avoided in the
front yard.
(i) Materials. On sides visible from a street, new construction
should use building materials that are similar to appearance to
older buildings. Artificial materials are acceptable if they have
a truly realistic appearance.
(15) Subject to any special or more particular provisions of this chapter,
any building exceeding 100 feet in length which is proposed as part
of multiple buildings on a lot may be set back greater than the
maximum setback required under § 285-39B(13), provided it is
screened and buffered from the front of the lot by plantings or
other approved materials. [Added 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 209]
(16) Design features/bonus incentives. Because of the intended purpose
of the MSL District to promote adaptive reuse and preserve its
historic character, the following bonus incentives may be applied to
individual uses in the MSL District if an applicant demonstrates
that the applicable standards and criteria set forth in this
subsection will be met. These bonus incentives permit development
in a manner which exceeds the type of development otherwise
permitted in the MSL District, and therefore entitlement to the
bonus incentive is strictly limited to those uses or types of
development or redevelopment meeting the standards and criteria
set forth herein. [Added 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 232]
(a) If the applicant adaptively reuses the existing structure, which
may include an addition not to exceed 20% of gross floor area
of the existing structure, then the maximum impervious
coverage may be increased by not more than 10% and the total
required parking spaces may be decreased by not more than
5% for a principal use.
(b) If the applicant provides coordinated vehicular access between
two or more adjoining lots that make use of only one shared
access driveway onto adjoining roads, the maximum
impervious coverage may be increased by not more than 5%,
subject to the submission of a long-term agreement defining
the joint use of the access drive which has been executed by all
parties concerned, approved by the Zoning Officer, and
recorded.
(c) If the applicant provides clear and convincing evidence that a
reduced number of parking spaces is justified because more
than one principal use will safely and efficiently share access
and the same off-street parking facility, then the total number
of spaces may be decreased by not more than 50% of the
§ 285-39 WEAPONS § 285-39
278:521
§ 285-40. Flag lots.
required spaces based on the calculation for all principal uses
intended to share parking subject to the following
requirements:
[1] The applicant must demonstrate that the peak parking
demand and principal operating hours for each use are
suitable for a shared parking facility.
[2] Shared parking areas shall not be located greater than 200
feet from buildings intended to share parking.
[3] Shared parking facilities containing greater than 50 total
spaces adjacent to an adjoining lot used primarily for a
principal residential purpose shall be planted with a plant
screen in accordance with § 285-65D(6)-(7).
[4] A long-term agreement defining the joint use of the
common parking facility shall be executed by all parties
concerned, approved by the Zoning Officer, and recorded.
[5] Any subsequent change in land uses for which the shared
parking proposal was approved that results in the need for
additional parking spaces shall require approval by the
Zoning Officer. Failure to obtain approval for required
parking shall be a violation of this chapter.
C. Circulation, traffic access and streets.
(1) Street standards. As authorized by the traditional neighborhood
provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code, the Board of
Supervisors shall have the authority to modify specific street
requirements of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
to result in a development that is pedestrian-oriented and that
promotes low-speed traffic.
(a) For example, the Board of Supervisors may approve reduced
street cartway widths, street right-of-way widths and street
curve radii.
(b) The applicant shall submit a request for modifications in
writing, which shall state the reasons why the modification
would be consistent with the purposes for a traditional
neighborhood development as stated in the State
Municipalities Planning Code and would be in the public
interest while protecting public safety.
A. A flag lot is defined as a lot intended for a single-family detached
dwelling that does not meet the minimum required lot width at the
minimum front yard building setback line. A flag lot may involve a more
§ 285-39 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-40
278:522
narrow "flagpole" extension of the lot that includes a driveway that
connects the bulk of the lot to a street.
B. As a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors may approve the
subdivision of land to create a flag lot in response to a written request
that states the reasons why the flag lot is needed. A flag lot shall not be
used to increase the number of dwelling units that otherwise would be
allowed on a tract of land. A flag lot shall only be allowed if the
applicant proves that a flag lot is necessary to minimize the amount of
disturbance of natural features on the tract, such as steep slopes and
mature woodland.
C. A maximum of one flag lot shall be allowed in any subdivision or land
development, except that if a subdivision or land development involves
more than 50 dwelling units, then one flag lot may be approved for
every 50 dwelling units.
D. A lot that is deed-restricted or restricted by a conservation easement to
not include any building or that only includes a water supply well or
wastewater pumping station may be approved by the Township as a flag
lot as a permitted by right use.
E. If a flag lot is approved, the lot shall meet the minimum lot width
requirement at the proposed front yard building setback line, instead of
the minimum building setback line. The principal building shall only be
placed on portions of the lot where the minimum lot width requirement
is met.
F. The flag lot shall have a minimum of 25 feet of frontage along a public
street, measured at the street right-of-way line. The driveway and the
street frontage shall be part of the same lot as the proposed building
site. No portion of the flag lot shall be less than 25 feet in width.
G. A flag lot shall only be approved if the applicant agrees to place a
permanent deed restriction on the flag lot that prevents the future
subdivision of the flag lot.
§ 285-40 WEAPONS § 285-40
278:523

ARTICLE IV
Additional Requirements for Specific Uses
§ 285-41. Applicability.
§ 285-42. Additional requirements for specific principal uses.
A. This article establishes additional specific requirements for certain
specific uses, in addition to the sign, parking, environmental and other
general requirements of this chapter and the requirements of each
district. Wherever two requirements conflict, the stricter requirement
shall apply.
(1) For uses allowed within a specific zoning district as special
exception uses, see also the procedures and standards in § 285-16.
For conditional uses, see also § 285-17.
A. Each of the following uses shall meet all of the following requirements
for that use:
(1) Adult use. (This is limited to the following: adult bookstore, adult
movie theater, massage parlor, or adult live entertainment facility.)
(a) Purposes. The regulations on adult uses are intended to serve
the following purposes, in addition to the overall objectives of
this chapter.
[1] To recognize the adverse secondary impacts of adult uses
that affect health, safety and general welfare concerns of
the Township. These secondary impacts have been
documented in research conducted across the nation.
These secondary impacts typically include, but are not
limited to, increases in criminal activity, increases in
activities that increase the risk of transmission of sexually
transmitted diseases, increases in activities that increase
the risk of transmission of other communicable diseases,
increases in blight, decreases in the stability of residential
neighborhoods and decreases in property values for
surrounding homes, and decreases in the marketability of
nearby commercial business space. The research
conducted across the nation concludes that adult uses
typically involve insufficient self-regulation to control
these secondary effects.
[2] To limit adult uses to locations where these secondary
impacts can be minimized, particularly as they affect
residential neighborhoods and commercial revitalization.
[3] To not attempt to suppress any activities protected by the
free speech protections of the State and U.S.
Constitutions, but instead to control secondary effects.
§ 285-41 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:525
(b) An adult use and its parking area shall not be located within
any of the following distances, whichever is most restrictive:
[1] Two hundred lineal feet from the lot line of an existing
dwelling;
[2] Two hundred lineal feet from the lot line of any residential
zoning district,
[3] One thousand lineal feet from the lot line of any primary or
secondary school, place of worship, library, public park,
day-care center or child nursery.
(c) No adult use shall be located within 200 lineal feet from any
existing adult use.
(d) A fifty-foot buffer yard shall be provided, regardless of zoning
district, along the side and rear lot lines. If such buffer area
does not include substantial mature trees that will be
preserved, it shall include continuous screening by evergreen
trees with an initial height of five feet.
(e) No pornographic material, displays or words shall be placed in
view of persons who are not inside of the establishment.
Definite precautions shall be made to prohibit minors from
entering the premises.
(f) No adult use shall be used for any purpose that violates any
federal, state or municipal law.
(g) Obscene or pornographic signs shall be prohibited.
(h) The adult use shall not include the sale or display of obscene
materials, as defined by Pennsylvania Criminal Law, as may be
amended by applicable court decisions.
(i) An adult use shall only be allowed within the I/M Zoning
District.
(j) A minimum lot area of two acres is required.
(k) For public health reasons, private or semiprivate viewing
booths of any kind are prohibited. This specifically includes,
but is not limited to, booths for viewing adult movies or nude
dancers.
(l) No use may include live actual or simulated sex acts nor any
physical or sexual contact between employees and entertainers
nor between employees or entertainers and customers. At an
adult live entertainment use, employees or entertainers shall
maintain a minimum distance of three feet from customers.
(m) Only "lawful" massages, as defined by state court decisions,
shall be performed in a massage parlor.
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:526
(n) All persons within any adult use shall wear nontransparent
garments that cover their genitals and the female areola,
except within a permitted lawful adult live entertainment
facility.
(o) Any application for such use shall state the names and home
addresses of: a) all individuals intended to have more than a
five-percent ownership in such use or in a corporation owning
such use; and b) an on-site manager responsible to ensure
compliance with this chapter on a daily basis. Such information
shall be updated at the beginning of each year in writing to the
Zoning Officer.
(p) The use shall not operate between the hours of 12:00 midnight
and 7:00 a.m.
(q) As specific conditions of approval under this chapter, the
applicant shall prove compliance, where applicable, with the
following state laws, as amended: the Pennsylvania Liquor
Code, Act 219 of 1990 (which pertains to sale or consumption
of alcohol between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.); Act 207 of 1990
(which pertains to obscenity); and Act 120 of 1996 (which
pertains to adult-oriented establishments and which limits
enclosed viewing booths, among other matters).
(r) An adult use shall not exist within the same building as a use
with a liquor license.
(s) The use shall comply with the Township Obscenity Ordinance
(Ordinance No. 86, 1986), as amended.123
(2) Adult day-care center.
(a) The use shall be fully licensed by the state, if required by the
state.
(b) The use shall include constant supervision during all hours of
operation.
(c) The use shall not meet the definition of a "treatment center."
(3) After-hours club. This use is effectively prohibited by State Act 219
of 1990, as amended (Section 7327 of Title 18 of the Pennsylvania
Statutes).
(4) Airport.
(a) As part of a conditional use approval, the Board of Supervisors
shall have the authority to establish reasonable conditions that
limit the types, sizes and weights of aircraft and the hours of
operation in order to minimize noise nuisances to dwellings.
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Adult Entertainment.
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:527
(b) As part of a conditional use application, the applicant shall
provide evidence that flight patterns will be designed to
minimize noise nuisances to dwellings.
(c) Each end of a runway shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet
from all lot lines. Each side of a runway shall be set back a
minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines.
(5) Animal cemetery.
(a) All the regulations for a cemetery in this section shall apply.
(b) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Officer that the use will be conducted in such a manner that
the public health and groundwater quality will not be
threatened.
(6) Assisted living facility/personal care center. The standards for
nursing homes in this section shall apply.
(7) Auto, boat or mobile/manufactured home sales.
(a) No vehicle, boat or home on display shall occupy any part of
the existing or future street right-of-way or required customer
parking area. See buffer yard provisions in § 285-65.
(b) See light and glare standards in § 285-50.
(c) Any mobile/manufactured homes on a sales site shall meet the
required principal building setbacks from the perimeter lot
lines.
(8) Auto repair garage.
(a) All paint work shall be performed within a building, with a
fume collection and ventilation system that directs fumes away
from any adjacent dwellings. Outdoor major repairs (such as
body work and grinding) and outdoor welding shall not occur
within 250 feet of a residential lot line.
(b) All reasonable efforts shall be made to prevent or minimize
noise, odor, vibration, light or electrical interference to
adjacent lots. See standards in Article V. See buffer yard
requirements in § 285-65.
(c) Outdoor storage of motor vehicles shall not be within any
required buffer yard or street right-of-way.
(d) Overnight outdoor storage of junk other than permitted junk
vehicles shall be prohibited within view of a public street or a
dwelling.
(e) Any junk vehicle (as defined by Article II) shall not be stored
for more than 20 days within view of a public street or a
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:528
dwelling. A maximum of six junk vehicles may be parked on a
lot outside of an enclosed building at any one time. Any junk
vehicle stored outside overnight shall be screened from view of
adjacent dwellings.
(f) Service bay doors shall not face directly towards an abutting
dwelling (not including a dwelling separated from the garage
by a street) if another reasonable alternative exits.
(g) Any auto repair garage as defined in § 285-20 proposed to be
located within the MS District as a conditional use must also
comply with all requirements of § 285-17 as well as the
additional provisions and design guidelines for uses within the
MS and MSL Districts contained in § 285-39B(1) through (14).
[Added 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 210]
(h) Any building housing an auto repair garage as defined in
§ 285-20 proposed to be located in the MS District as a
conditional use which is located on a lot with multiple buildings
and which exceeds 100 feet in length shall be located within
the interior of the lot and must be screened and buffered from
the front of the lot by plantings or similar means as determined
by the Board of Supervisors. Any building proposed for such a
use which exceeds 50 feet in length must submit design
guidelines at the time of application for the conditional use.
[Added 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 210]
(9) Auto service station.
(a) See definition of this term and "auto repair garage" in Article
II. The uses may be combined, if the requirements for each are
met.
(b) All activities except those to be performed at the fuel or air
pumps shall be performed within a building. The use shall not
include spray painting.
(c) Fuel pumps shall be at least 30 feet from the existing street
right-of-way and shall meet side yard principal building
setback requirements. [Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No.
202]
(d) Overnight outdoor storage of junk shall be prohibited within
view of a public street or dwelling. Any junk vehicle stored
outside overnight shall be screened from view of adjacent
dwellings.
(e) Any junk vehicle (as defined by Article II) shall not be stored
more than 20 days within view of a public street or a dwelling.
No junk vehicles shall be stored within 20 feet of an existing
street right-of-way. No more than six junk vehicles shall be
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:529
stored on the lot outside of an enclosed building at any point in
time.
(f) The use may include a convenience store if the requirements
for such use are also met.
(g) A canopy shall be permitted over the gasoline pumps with a
minimum front yard setback of 20 feet from each street rightof-
way line.
[1] Such canopy may be attached to the principal building.
The canopy shall not include any signs, except for the
following: a) a sign may be attached to each of two sides of
the canopy in place of an allowed freestanding sign; b) an
allowed wall sign may be placed on a portion of the canopy
that is behind the minimum front yard setback line; and c)
necessary warning signs.
[2] Within the minimum front yard building setback, the
distance between the ground level and the bottom of the
canopy shall not be greater than 20 feet. Parts of a sloped
canopy may have a taller height if the purpose of the taller
height is to deflect soot and glare away from the street or
neighboring properties.
(h) Fuel tanks and dispensers and ventilation equipment shall be
set back a minimum of 100 feet from the lot line of any
residential or institutional use (such as a school or nursing
home). [Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 202]
(10) Bed-and-breakfast inn.
(a) Within an agricultural or residential district (where permitted
under Article III), a maximum of five rental units shall be
provided and no more than three adults may occupy one rental
unit. No maximums shall apply within other permitted
districts. Only one bed-and-breakfast inn shall be permitted
per lot. In the A District, a bed-and-breakfast inn may be placed
on the same lot as a separate single-family detached dwelling.
(b) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each rental
unit, plus employee parking. To the maximum extent feasible,
off-street parking spaces for the bed-and-breakfast inn shall
be: a) located either to the side or rear of the principal
building; and b) screened from the street and abutting
dwellings by landscaping. Off-street parking spaces shall be set
back a minimum of 10 feet from lot lines.
(c) There shall not be any signs, show windows or any type of
display or advertising visible from outside the premises, except
for a single sign with a maximum sign area of eight square feet
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:530
on each of two sides and with a maximum height of eight feet.
No internal lighting of the sign shall be permitted.
(d) Within a residential district, the use shall have a residential
appearance and character. Within the A District, the use shall
have a residential or agricultural appearance and character.
(e) The use shall be owned, operated or managed by permanent
residents of the lot.
(f) There shall not be separate cooking facilities in any guest
room. Food shall only be served to guests who are staying
overnight, unless a restaurant is also permitted.
(g) No guest shall stay for more than 14 days in any month.
(h) In a residential district, a bed-and-breakfast shall only be
allowed in an existing building that contains more than 2,500
square feet of indoor floor area and that was constructed prior
to January 1, 1950.
(11) Boardinghouse (includes rooming house).
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) Minimum side yard building setback: 30 feet side.
(c) Minimum lot mso-element-frame-width: 200 feet.
(d) Maximum density: six bedrooms per acre, but in no case shall
the lot serve a total of more than 20 persons.
(e) Each bedroom shall be limited to two adults each.
(f) A buffer yard with screening meeting § 285-65 shall be
provided between any boardinghouse building and any
abutting dwelling.
(g) Note: There are separate standards for an assisted living
facility, which is not considered a boardinghouse.
(h) Signs shall be limited to two wall signs with a maximum of two
square feet each.
(i) Rooms shall be rented for a minimum period of five
consecutive days.
(12) Campground, camp or recreational vehicle campground
(a) Within a residential district, for each acre of total lot area,
there shall be a maximum average of: a) five recreational
vehicle sites (where allowed); b) 10 tent sites; or c) cabin
sleeping capacity for 20 persons. Such sites may be clustered
in portions of the tract. Such maximum density shall not apply
within a commercial district.
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:531
(b) Retail sales shall be allowed as an accessory use. Within a
residential district, any store shall be limited to sales of
recreational, household, food, gift and camping items. Within a
residential district, any store shall be primarily intended to
serve persons camping on the site.
(c) For a campground (which includes a recreational vehicle
campground), the requirements of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance shall also apply.
(d) Minimum lot area: five acres in an allowed commercial or
industrial district, 10 acres in any other district where the use
is permitted under Article III.
(e) All campsites, recreational vehicle sites and principal
commercial buildings shall be set back a minimum of 75 feet
from any contiguous lot line of an existing dwelling that is not
part of the campground or camp. Within this buffer, the
applicant shall prove to the maximum extent feasible that any
existing healthy trees will be maintained and preserved. Where
healthy mature trees do not exist within this buffer and if
practical considering soil and topographic conditions, new
trees shall be planted within this buffer.
[1] The screening of evergreens provided in § 285-65 between
business and residential uses is not required if the tree
buffer would essentially serve the same purpose or if
removal of mature trees would be needed to plant the
shrubs.
[2] Removal of trees within this buffer shall be allowed for
necessary approximately perpendicular street, stormwater
channel, driveway and utility crossings and to provide safe
sight distance.
(f) Buildings used for sleeping quarters shall not be within the
one-hundred-year floodplain. See maximum steep slope
disturbance provisions in the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.124
(g) Maximum impervious coverage. Within a residential district:
10%, which shall include the typical lot area covered by
recreational vehicles at full capacity. Within any other district,
the maximum impervious coverage shall be the percentage
that applies to that zoning district in § 285-27A.
(h) No person other than a bona fide resident manager/caretaker
shall reside on the site for more than six months in any
calendar year. No recreational vehicle shall be occupied on the
site for more than six months in any calendar year by any one
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:532
individual or one family, other than a resident manager/
caretaker.
(13) Car wash.
(a) Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards
on adjacent streets. On-lot traffic circulation channels and
parking areas shall be clearly marked.
(b) Adequate provisions shall be made for the proper and
convenient disposal of refuse. The applicant shall provide
evidence that adequate measures will be in place to prevent
pollutants from being washed into the groundwater or
waterways. Any chemicals or polluted runoff that may be
hazardous to aquatic life shall be stored within an area that
will completely contain any leaks, spills or polluted runoff.
(c) Water from the car wash operation shall not flow onto
sidewalks or streets in such a manner as could cause ice
hazards.
(d) Any car wash that is located within 250 feet of an existing
dwelling shall not operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
(e) No portion of a car wash shall be located within 100 feet from
the center line of a perennial waterway.
(f) Minimum lot area: five acres, which shall be reduced to one
acre if the applicant proves that most of the water used in the
operation will be recycled on site.
(14) Cemetery.
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres, which may be on the same lot as
an allowed place of worship.
(b) A crematorium, where allowed by Article III, shall be set back a
minimum of 250 feet from all lot lines of existing dwellings and
all undeveloped residentially zoned lots.
(c) All structures and graves shall be set back a minimum of: 30
feet from the future right-of-way of any public street, 10 feet
from the cartway of an internal driveway, and 20 feet from any
other lot line. Any buildings with a height greater than 20 feet
shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from all lot lines.
(d) No grave sites and no structures shall be located within the
one-hundred-year floodplain.
(e) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Officer, based upon review by the Township Solicitor, that the
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:533
use will include an appropriate financial system to guarantee
perpetual maintenance.
(15) Commercial communications antenna/tower as principal or
accessory use.
(a) An accessory commercial communications antenna shall be
permitted by right in any district if it meets the following
requirements:
[1] In a district other than a commercial or industrial district,
the antenna shall extend a maximum of 20 feet beyond the
existing structure to which it is attached. The antenna
shall be attached to one of the following existing lawful
structures:
[a] A principal agricultural building or silo;
[b] An electric high voltage transmission tower;
[c] An existing lawful commercial communications tower;
[d] A fire station or steeple or bell tower of a place of
worship; or
[e] A water tower.
[2] In a commercial or industrial district, the antenna shall
extend a maximum of 40 feet beyond an existing building
or structure (other than a dwelling), provided the antenna
is set back a distance equal to its total height above the
ground from any lot line of a dwelling on another lot.
(b) Any commercial communications antenna/tower that does not
meet Subsection A(15)(a) above (such as a new freestanding
tower) shall only be allowed where specifically authorized in
§ 285-26 and in compliance with the following additional
regulations:
[1] Such antenna/tower shall be set back from all lot lines and
street rights-of-way a distance that is greater than the
total height of the antenna/tower above the surrounding
ground level. The Board of Supervisors may permit an
easement arrangement to be used without meeting the
setback requirement from the edge of the leased area,
provided that there are legal safeguards to ensure that the
setback will continue to be met over time from a lot line.
[2] A new tower, other than a tower on a lot of an emergency
services station, shall be set back the following minimum
distance from any existing dwelling: 300 feet plus the total
height of the tower above the surrounding ground level.
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:534
[3] A tower attached to the ground shall be surrounded by a
security fence/gate with a minimum height of eight feet
and evergreen plantings or preserved vegetation with an
initial minimum height of four feet.
[4] The applicant shall provide a written statement sealed by a
professional engineer stating that the communications
antenna/tower will meet the structural and wind
resistance requirements of the Construction Code.125
[5] The applicant shall describe in writing the policies that will
be used to offer space on a tower to other communications
providers, which shall serve to minimize the total number
of towers necessary in the region. This policy shall be
designed to minimize the total number of towers necessary
in the Township.
[6] An applicant for a new commercial communications tower
shall provide evidence to the Board of Supervisors (the
Board) that they have investigated collocating their
facilities on an existing tower and other tall structures and
have found such alternative to be unworkable. The reasons
shall be provided.
[7] A maximum total height of 200 feet above the ground shall
apply in a commercial and industrial district and 150 feet
in any other district where it may be allowed, unless the
applicant proves to the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use that a taller height is absolutely necessary
and unavoidable.
[8] The application shall describe any proposed lighting. The
Board may require lighting of an antenna even if it will not
be required by the Federal Aviation Administration. Such
lighting is intended to provide protection for emergency
medical helicopters. Strobe lighting shall not be used, but
flashing lights may be used.
[9] A new tower shall be designed in a manner that minimizes
its visual intrusiveness and environmental impacts to the
maximum extent feasible. For example, monopole designs
or designs worked into a flagpole are preferred over lattice
designs. Self-supporting towers are preferred over towers
with guy wires that would require removal of larger
numbers of trees.
(c) Purposes. These provisions for commercial communications
antennas/towers are primarily designed to serve the following
purposes, in addition to the overall objectives of this chapter:
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:535
[1] To protect property values.
[2] To minimize the visual impact of antennas/towers,
particularly considering the importance of the scenic
beauty of the area in attracting visitors for outdoor
recreation.
[3] To minimize the number and heights of towers in a manner
that still provides for adequate telecommunications
services and competition.
(d) A tower/antenna that is intended to primarily serve emergency
communications by a Township-recognized police, fire or
ambulance organization and is on the same lot as an
emergency services station shall be permitted by right. Such
tower/antenna may also serve commercial purposes.
(e) Any antenna and tower that is no longer in active use shall be
completely removed within six months after the discontinuance
of use. The operator shall notify the Zoning Officer in writing
after the antenna or tower use is no longer in active use. Any
lease shall require such removal by the owner of the antenna/
tower. Any lease should provide that the lease shall expire once
the antenna/tower is removed. The Board of Supervisors may
require that a financial guarantee be posted to pay for removal
of the tower if the Board determines such guarantee is needed.
(f) All accessory utility buildings or cabinets shall: have a
maximum total floor area of 400 square feet (which may
divided among adjacent buildings serving separate
companies), have a maximum height of 10 feet and meet
principal building setbacks.
(g) No new or existing antenna shall cause interference with
public safety telecommunications. The Township may require
the applicant for a new commercial communications tower to
submit a study by a radio frequency engineer or other qualified
professional to analyze the threat of interference. The study
shall also show that the tower and antenna will not create
interference with other communications systems, such as
amateur ham radio operators.
NOTE: Composting as a principal use: The provisions for
composting in § 285-43 shall apply.
(16) Conversion of an existing building (including an existing dwelling)
into dwelling units.
(a) See Article III, which regulates where conversions are
permitted. Applicable state firesafety requirements shall be
met.
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:536
(b) The following regulations shall apply to the conversion of an
existing one-family dwelling into a greater number of dwelling
units:
[1] The building shall maintain the appearance of a one-family
dwelling with a single front entrance. Additional entrances
may be placed on the side or rear of the structure. The
dwelling units may internally share the single front
entrance.
[2] The conversion shall not be permitted if it would require
the placement of an exterior stairway on the front of the
building or would require the placement of more than
three off-street parking spaces in the required front yard.
(c) A previously residential building shall maintain a clearly
residential appearance, except as may be necessary for
restoration of a historic building.
(d) Dumpster screening. See § 285-68.
(e) A maximum total of four dwelling units may be developed per
lot unless a more restrictive provision is established by another
section of this chapter, unless the building included more than
4,000 square feet of existing aboveground building floor area
at the time of adoption of this chapter, in which case a
maximum of one dwelling unit shall be allowed for each 1,000
square feet of existing interior aboveground building floor
area.
(f) Each unit shall meet the definition of a dwelling unit and shall
meet the minimum floor area requirements of § 285-63C.
(17) Day-care center, child.
(a) See also "day care: family day-care home or group day care" as
an accessory use in § 285-43.
(b) The use shall comply with any applicable state and federal
regulations, including having an appropriate Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare (or its successor agency)
registration certificate or license.
(c) Convenient parking spaces within the requirements of Article
VI shall be provided for persons delivering and waiting for
children.
(d) In residential districts, where permitted as a principal use, a
day-care use shall have a minimum lot area of 30,000 square
feet and a minimum setback for buildings and outdoor play
areas of 25 feet from an abutting residential lot line.
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:537
(e) The use shall include secure fencing around outdoor play
areas.
(f) This use shall not be conducted in a dwelling that is physically
attached to another dwelling that does not have a common
owner.
(g) In residential districts, any permitted day-care use shall
maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is
compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
(h) A day-care use may occur in a building that also includes
permitted or nonconforming dwelling units.
(i) See also the standards for a place of worship in this section,
which allow a day-care center as an adjunct use.
(18) Emergency services station.
(a) The following uses shall be allowed as accessory uses to the
principal use of a fire company station: a banquet hall, bingo
games, fairgrounds for periodic special events, indoor rental
storage, and auction house. Any building(s) detached from the
fire company station that are used for such purposes shall: 1)
not cover more than 10% of the total lot area; and 2) be set
back a minimum of 60 feet from the lot line of an existing
dwelling and be separated from such residential lot line by a
buffer yard meeting § 285-65.
(19) Forestry. See "timber harvesting" in this section.
(20) Golf course. A golf course may include a restaurant or clubhouse,
provided that such building is located a minimum of 150 feet away
from any lot line of an existing dwelling. The maximum impervious
area covered by man-made surfaces shall not exceed 5% of the total
lot area of the golf course.
(21) Groundwater or spring water withdrawal involving removal of an
averaging of more than 10,000 gallons per day from a lot for off-site
consumption. (Note: If the water is being utilized for uses on
adjacent lots or as part of a public water system, it shall not be
considered off-site consumption.)
(a) See § 285-29G. The regulations of this Subsection A(21) shall
not apply to water used by a principal agricultural use within
the Township.
(b) If the water will be trucked off site, the applicant shall provide
a written report by a professional engineer with substantial
experience in traffic engineering. Such study shall analyze the
suitability of the area street system to accommodate the truck
traffic that will be generated. The application shall only be
approved if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:538
Board of Supervisors that the area street system is suitable
in terms of structure, geometry, safety and capacity to
accommodate the additional truck traffic.
(c) If the water will be trucked off site, any area used for loading
or unloading of tractor-trailer trucks shall be set back a
minimum of 150 feet from any adjacent residential lot.
(d) Minimum lot area: five acres, plus an additional five acres for
each 20,000 gallons per day of capacity of withdrawal, up to a
maximum of 100 acres.
(e) Any bottling or processing operations shall be considered a
distinct use and shall only be allowed if "food or beverage
manufacturing" is an allowed use under § 285-26.
(22) Group homes. Group homes are permitted within a lawful dwelling
unit, provided the following additional requirements are met:
(a) The use shall meet the definition in § 285-20.
(b) A group home shall not include any use meeting the definition
of a treatment center.
(c) A group home shall include the housing of a maximum of six
unrelated persons, except:
[1] If a more restrictive requirement is established by another
Township Code;
[2] The number of bona fide paid professional staff shall not
count towards such maximum; and
[3] As may be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board under
§ 285-11D.
(d) The facility shall have adequate trained staff supervision for
the number and type of residents. If the facility involves five or
more residents, then twenty-four-hour on-site staffing shall be
provided.
(e) The applicant shall provide evidence of any applicable federal,
state or county licensing or certification to the Zoning Officer.
(f) The group home shall register in writing its location, general
type of treatment/care, maximum number of residents and
sponsoring agency with the Zoning Officer.
(g) Any medical or counseling services shall be limited to a
maximum of three nonresidents per day. Any staff meetings
shall be limited to a maximum of five persons at one time.
(h) Parking. See § 285-51.
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:539
(i) If a group home is in a residential district, an appearance shall
be maintained that is closely similar to nearby dwellings, and
no sign shall identify the use.
(j) The persons living on site shall function as a common
household unit.
(k) The applicant shall notify the local ambulance and fire services
of the presence of the group home and the type of residents.
(l) An off-street parking space shall be provided for the largest
vehicle that serves the use.
(m) The building shall have lighted exit lights, emergency lighting
and interconnected smoke alarms.
(23) Heliport.
(a) The applicant shall prove that the heliport has been located
and designed to minimize noise nuisances to other properties.
(b) The Zoning Hearing Board may place conditions on the size of
helicopters, frequency of use, fueling facilities and hours of
operation to minimize nuisances and hazards to other
properties.
(24) Hotel or motel.
(a) See definitions in § 285-20, which distinguish a hotel/motel
from a boardinghouse.
(b) Buildings and tractor-trailer truck parking shall be a minimum
of 50 feet from any residential lot line.
(25) Junkyard (includes automobile salvage yard).
(a) Storage of garbage or biodegradable material is prohibited,
other than what is customarily generated on site and routinely
awaiting pickup.
(b) Outdoor storage of junk shall be at least: a) 100 feet from any
residential lot line; and b) 50 feet from any other lot line and
the existing right-of-way of any public street.
(c) The site shall contain a minimum of two exterior points of
access, each of which is not less than 20 feet in width. One of
these accesses may be limited to emergency vehicles. Cleared
driveways shall be provided throughout the entire use to allow
access by emergency vehicles. Adequate off-street parking
areas shall be provided for customers.
(d) Outdoor storage shall be completely enclosed (except at
approved driveway entrances) by a forty-foot wide buffer yard
which complies with § 285-65, unless such storage is not
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:540
visible from an exterior lot line or street. The initial height of
the evergreen planting shall be six feet. Secure fencing with
a minimum height of eight feet shall be provided and wellmaintained
around all outdoor storage areas. Such fencing
shall be provided inside of the evergreen screening.
(e) Burning or incineration is prohibited.
(f) See the noise or dust regulations of Article V.
(g) All gasoline, antifreeze and oil shall be drained from all
vehicles and properly disposed of. All batteries shall be
removed from vehicles and properly stored in a suitable area
on an impervious and properly drained surface.
(h) Lot area: two acres minimum; 20 acres maximum.
(i) Tires. See the "outdoor storage and display" standards in
§ 285-43.
(j) Any storage of junk shall be maintained a minimum distance of
100 feet from the center line of any waterway and shall be kept
out of a drainage swale.
(26)Kennel.
(a) All buildings in which animals are housed (other than buildings
that are completely soundproofed and air conditioned) and all
runs outside of buildings shall be located at least 150 feet from
all residential lot lines. This one-hundred-fifty-foot setback
shall be increased to 200 feet if more than 20 dogs are kept
overnight on the lot and be increased to 250 feet if more than
50 dogs are kept overnight on the lot.
(b) Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds
generated within the buildings cannot routinely be heard
within any principal building on another lot.
(c) No animal shall be permitted to use outdoor runs from 9:00
p.m. to 8:00 a.m. that are within 250 feet of an existing
dwelling. Runs for dogs shall be separated from each other by
visual barriers a minimum of four feet in height, to minimize
dog barking.
(d) See state law regulating kennels.
(e) Minimum lot area: six acres, unless a larger lot area is required
by another section of this chapter.
(27) Livestock and poultry, raising of.
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres; except a minimum lot area of 25
acres shall apply for an "intensive raising of livestock or
poultry" use.126
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:541
(b) Except for an intensive raising of livestock or poultry use, any
building or concentrated feeding areas for the keeping of
livestock or poultry shall be located a minimum of: 1) 300 feet
from a lot in a residential district; 2) 200 feet from an existing
dwelling that is not within a residential district; 3) 50 feet from
all other exterior lot lines. As a special exception use, the
Zoning Hearing Board may approve a smaller setback for the
expansion of facilities that existed prior to the adoption of this
section where the applicant proves that there is no reasonable
and feasible alternative and where the applicant proves that
the lesser distance would not be detrimental to public health or
safety or create significant hazards or nuisances.
(c) For an intensive raising of livestock or poultry use, any
building or concentrated feeding areas for the keeping of
livestock or poultry shall be located a minimum of: 1) 600 feet
from a lot in a residential district; 2) 200 feet from an existing
dwelling that is not within a residential district; and 3) 100 feet
from all other exterior lot lines. As a special exception use, the
Zoning Hearing Board may approve a smaller setback for the
expansion of facilities that existed prior to the adoption of this
section where the applicant proves that there is no reasonable
and feasible alternative and where the applicant proves that
the lesser distance would not be detrimental to public health or
safety or create significant hazards or nuisances.
(d) The setbacks from property lines provided in this Subsection A
for this use shall not apply from:
[1] Dwellings or lots owned by the operator or owner of the
livestock use;
[2] Dwellings or lots owned by a property owner providing a
written notarized letter waiving such setback; and/or
[3] Dwellings that did not exist at the time of adoption of this
chapter.
(e) Fencing shall be used as necessary and practical to prevent
livestock from entering streets or unauthorized property.
(f) The keeping of putrescent garbage-fed swine shall meet the
setbacks for an intensive raising of livestock or poultry use.
See the State Domestic Animal Law provisions regarding
garbage-fed animals.
(g) For a new or expanded raising of livestock or poultry use,
evidence shall be provided by the operator/applicant to the
Township to show that there will be compliance with
126. Editor's Note: See § 285-20 for the definition of “intensive raising of livestock or poultry.”
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:542
procedures and requirements of the State Nutrient
Management Act and accompanying state regulations.
(h) Buildings used for the keeping of livestock or poultry shall:
[1] Meet Township floodplain regulations;
[2] Not be located within 100 feet of a perennial stream, river,
spring, lake, pond or reservoir; and
[3] Not be located within 100 feet of an active public water
supply drinking well or an active intake for a public water
supply.
(i) For manure storage facilities that are specifically required to
have a setback from lot lines under the State Nutrient
Management Regulations, that state setback shall apply. For
any other manure storage facilities, a one-hundred-foot
minimum setback shall apply from all lot lines.
(j) The following additional requirements shall apply to an
intensive raising of livestock or poultry use:
[1] The applicant shall provide a soil and erosion control plan
to the County Conservation District for review and pay its
review fees.
[2] The applicant shall describe in writing or on site plans
methods that will be used to address water pollution and
insect and odor nuisances. The applicant shall provide a
written comparison of proposed methods of controlling
insect and odor nuisances and avoiding water pollution to
applicable sections of the Pennsylvania Soil and Water
Conservation Technical Guide as published by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture and the State Department of
Environmental Protection's Manure Management Manual
for Environmental Protection, or their successor
publications. The applicant may meet this requirement by
providing a cross-reference to certain sections of such
manuals or other written industry standards to describe
the methods that will be used.
[3] The Township is not intended to be the enforcement body
for water pollution, odor and insect issues involving
livestock and poultry uses. This Subsection A(27)(j) shall
not apply to land application of biosolids.
[4] The location of the facility is requested to consider
prevailing wind patterns as they may affect the nearest
existing dwellings.
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:543
[5] An area shall be provided for trucks to turn around on the
property that avoids the need to back out onto a public
road.
(28) Medical residential campus (MRC).
(a) The MRC shall primarily serve the needs of retirement-aged
persons. At least one resident of each household shall be at
least 55 years old, or possess a physical disability or illness
that causes a need for a setting like the medical residential
campus.
(b) The MRC shall achieve a balanced residential/medical
environment which cannot be achieved through the use of
conventional zoning techniques.
(c) Residences shall be functionally, physically and architecturally
integrated with medical service and recreational activity
centers.
(d) Commercial, medical and recreational uses shall be grouped
together and located near the populations being served.
(e) Minimum tract area: 25 contiguous acres.
(f) The site shall front on and have access to a collector or arterial
road as identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
(g) All buildings or structures containing nonresidential use(s), offstreet
parking lots and loading areas shall be set back at least
75 feet from all adjoining residentially zoned land and 50 feet
from all other lot lines of the campus property. All other
requirements relating to buffering and screening shall be
applied in accordance with § 285-65D. [Amended
12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 202]
(h) The maximum permitted overall density is 10 dwelling units
per acre, except such density shall be six dwelling units per
acre in the R-1 District. The R-1 District may be increased to a
maximum of up to eight dwelling units per acre if transfer of
development units is used under § 285-33. For purposes of this
section, any two beds that are not within a dwelling unit shall
be calculated as one dwelling unit for the purposes of density.
No more than 50% of the total number of permitted dwelling
units shall consist of beds that are not within dwelling units.
Examples of such beds would include, but not be limited to,
those associated with medical and/or nursing care or those
associated with congregate or communal living quarters.
(i) All buildings or structures used solely for residential purposes
shall be set back at least 50 feet from all lot lines of the campus
property. Within the R-1 District, the only type of principal
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:544
building that shall be allowed within 150 feet from an existing
lot that is occupied by a dwelling as of the enactment date of
this chapter, and that is zoned R-1 or R-2, shall be a singlefamily
detached dwelling. [Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord.
No. 202]
(j) The maximum permitted height is 60 feet, provided that an
additional two feet of required building setback shall be
provided for that portion of building height exceeding 35 feet.
However, within the R-1 District, no building shall exceed 35
feet.
(k) No more than 60% of the subject property shall be covered
with buildings, parking and loading areas and/or other
impervious surfaces.
(l) Parking spaces for persons with disabilities shall meet the
requirements of Article VI. Such spaces shall be located
throughout the campus in such a manner to be conveniently
accessible to the buildings/uses for which they serve.
(m) Only those uses which provide a harmonious, balanced mix of
medical, residential, limited commercial and recreational uses,
primarily serving campus residents, and public, quasi-public
and medical services for the off-campus retirement-aged
community will be permitted. Allowed uses in a district other
than R-1 shall include the following:
[1] Dwellings, nursing homes, personal care/assisted living
centers, and congregate living facilities for persons aged
55 or older or persons with physical disabilities;
[2] Medical facilities, including offices, laboratories, clinics,
professional or para-medical training centers, and
ambulatory care facilities;
[3] Commercial uses which are strictly related and
subordinate to the residential/medical character of the
campus and which directly serve the residents and
employees of, or visitors to, the center. The uses should be
chosen to reflect their local orientation to the immediate
campus vicinity and should be of a size and scope so as not
to interfere with existing or proposed retail uses located in
the off-campus area;
[4] Recreational and social uses, such as athletic facilities,
community centers and assembly halls, limited to use only
by campus residents, employees or visitors.
(n) Allowed uses in the R-1 District shall only include the
following:
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:545
[1] Single-family detached dwellings, twin dwellings,
townhouses and apartments, provided at least one
resident of each dwelling shall be aged 55 or older or a
person with physical disabilities.
[2] Personal care/assisted living centers.
[3] Accessory recreational facilities and activity rooms for
residents of the MRC.
[4] Accessory maintenance and housekeeping facilities to
serve the MRC.
[5] Nursing and emergency medical services to serve
residents of the MRC.
[6] A nonresidential building in the R-1 District shall not
exceed a total aboveground building floor area of 3,000
square feet.
(29) Membership club.
(a) See definition in Article II.
(b) Any active outdoor play areas shall be set back at least 30 feet
from any abutting residential lot line.
(c) This use shall not include an after-hours club.
(30) Mineral extraction.
(a) If a mineral extraction use involves mining activities over more
than two acres of land in any calendar year, then the following
additional requirements shall be met:
[1] The applicant shall prove that a continuous route over
roads will be available and will be used by trucks leaving
the use that entirely involves roads with a minimum paved
cartway width of 18 feet from the exit driveway of the
mineral extraction use to reach Routes 222, 30 or 272.
This route shall consider any improvements that the
applicant proposes to fund.
[2] A copy of all information submitted to state agencies shall
also be submitted to the Zoning Officer at the same time.
[3] A detailed and appropriate land reclamation and reuse
plan of the area to be excavated shall be submitted to the
Zoning Officer. Compliance with such plan shall be a
condition of Township permits.
[4] After areas are used for mineral extraction, those areas
shall be reclaimed in phases to a nonhazardous and
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:546
environmentally sound state, permitting some productive
or beneficial future use.
[5] A fifty-foot-wide yard covered by natural vegetative
ground cover (except at approved driveway crossings)
shall be required along all exterior lot lines that are within
200 feet of an area of excavation. This yard shall include
an earth berm with a minimum average height of six feet
and an average of one shade tree for each 40 feet of
distance along the lot lines. Such shade trees shall be
planted outside of any berm and any fence.
[a] New trees shall not be required where preserved trees
will serve the same purpose.
[6] The following minimum setbacks shall apply for the
excavated area of a mineral extraction use from property
that is not owned by the owner or operator of the mineral
extraction use:
[a] One hundred feet from the existing right-of-way of
public streets and from all exterior lot lines of the
property;
[b] One hundred fifty feet from a nonresidential principal
building, unless released by the owner thereof;
[c] Four hundred feet from the lot line of a dwelling;
[d] One hundred fifty feet from the lot line of a publicly
owned recreation area that existed at time of the
application for the use or expansion.
[7] The excavated area of a mineral extraction use shall be set
back 150 feet from the average waterline of a perennial
stream or the edge of a natural wetland of more than two
acres.
[8] Truck access to the use shall be located to reasonably
minimize hazards on public streets and dust and noise
nuisances to residences.
[9] Fencing. Fencing shall be required in locations where
needed to protect public safety. As an alternative, the
Board of Supervisors may approve the use of thorny
vegetation to discourage public access. Also, warning
signs shall be placed around the outer edge of the use.
[10] Hours of operation. The Board of Supervisors, as a
condition of conditional use approval, may reasonably limit
the hours of operation of the use and of related trucking
and blasting operations to protect the character of
adjacent residential areas.
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:547
[11] The activities and residual effects shall not create
conditions that are significantly hazardous to the health
and safety of neighboring residents.
[12] The Township may require that the applicant post financial
security to cover the costs of damage that may occur to
entrances and exits to public roads as a result of the trucks
carrying mining materials.
[13] A plan shall be submitted showing sequential phases of
mining activities on the land. Mining activities shall be
conducted on a maximum of 50 acres at a time.
Reclamation shall be initiated on one phase before the
next phase is opened for mining.
[14] A plan shall be submitted showing how dust will be
controlled.
(31) Mobile/manufactured home. Installed on an individual lot or within
a mobile/manufactured home park approved after the adoption of
this chapter.
(a) Construction. Any mobile/manufactured home placed on any
lot after the adoption of this chapter shall be constructed in
accordance with 1976 or later Safety and Construction
Standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development. (Note: These federal standards supersede local
construction codes for the actual construction of the home
itself.)
(b) Each site shall be graded to provide a stable and well-drained
area.
(c) Each home shall have hitch and tires removed.
(d) Anchoring. A mobile/manufactured home on an individual lot
or mobile/manufactured home park shall include a system that
properly secures the home to the ground to prevent shifting,
overturning or uneven settling of the home. The requirements
of the construction codes shall apply, in addition to the
manufacturer's specifications for installation.
(e) Foundation treatment. The space between the bottom of the
home and the ground and/or home pad shall be enclosed using
a durable fire-resistant material that has the appearance of a
foundation of a site-built home, such as material with a
concrete-type or stucco facing. This Subsection A(31)(e) shall
not apply within a manufactured/mobile home park. Metal
skirting may only be permitted within a manufactured/mobile
home park. Provisions shall be provided for access to utility
connections under the home.
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:548
(f) If a mobile/manufactured home is in a R-1 or R-2 District and is
not within a mobile/manufactured home park, it shall have a
minimum roof pitch of 5/12.
(32) Mobile/manufactured home park.
(a) Plans and permits. Plans shall be submitted and reviewed by
the Township for all mobile/manufactured home parks in
compliance with the mobile/manufactured home park
provisions of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance127 and all other provisions of such ordinance that
apply to a land development, including the submission,
approval and improvements provisions (other than specific
provisions altered by this section).
(b) The minimum tract area shall be three contiguous acres,
unless a larger tract area is required by § 285-26 in a particular
zoning district. This minimum tract area shall be under single
ownership.
(c) Density. The maximum average density of the tract shall be
four dwelling units per acre.
[1] To calculate this density land in common open space or
proposed streets within the park may be included, but land
within the one-hundred-year floodplain, wetlands and
slopes over 25% shall not be included.
(d) Landscaped perimeter. Each mobile/manufactured home park
shall include a thirty-five-foot-wide landscaped area including
substantial attractive evergreen and deciduous trees around
the perimeter of the site, except where such landscaping would
obstruct safe sight distances for traffic. A planting plan for
such area shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors as
part of any required conditional use approval. Such landscaped
area shall not be required between adjacent mobile home park
developments. The same area of land may count towards both
the landscaped area and the building setback requirements.
(e) A dwelling, including any attached accessory building, shall be
set back a minimum of 25 feet from another dwelling within the
mobile home park, except that unenclosed porches, awnings
and decks may be 15 feet from the walls of another dwelling.
(f) The minimum separation between homes and edge of interior
street cartway or parking court cartway shall be 25 feet.
(g) The minimum principal and accessory building setbacks from
exterior/boundary lot lines and rights-of-way of preexisting
public streets shall be 50 feet.
127. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:549
(h) Each home shall comply with the requirements for "mobile/
manufactured homes" stated in the preceding subsection.
(i) Accessory structures. A detached accessory structure or
garage shall be separated a minimum of 15 feet from any
dwelling units which the accessory structure is not accessory
to.
(j) Common open space for a mobile home park. A minimum of
20% of the total lot area of the entire mobile home park shall
be set aside as common open space for the residents. The
applicant shall prove that these areas will be suitable for active
or passive recreation. If a development will not be restricted to
persons over age 55, then the common open space shall at a
minimum include a rectangular grass field 100 feet by 200 feet
suitable for free play by young persons. If a development will
be restricted to persons over age 55, then the common open
space shall at a minimum include landscaped paved trails. A
recreation building or pool available to all residents of the
development may count towards this requirement.
(k) Streets.
[1] Access to individual mobile home spaces shall be from
interior parking courts, access drives or private streets
and shall not be from public streets exterior to the
development.
[2] Streets within the mobile home park that provide access to
reach 20 or more dwellings shall have a minimum paved
cartway of 24 feet, and other local private streets or
parking courts serving less than 20 homes shall have a
minimum paved cartway of 20 feet.
[3] Curbs and sidewalks are not required on the private
streets, but all private streets shall meet all other
Township cartway construction standards.
(l) Utilities. All units within the mobile home park shall be
connected to a central water and a public sewage system. The
system shall meet appropriate minimum water pressure/fire
flow and hydrant requirements. The applicant shall prove that
adequate provisions are made for solid waste disposal.
(m) Along through-streets, a minimum nighttime lighting level of
0.2 footcandle shall be maintained, at no expense to the
Township.
(33) Motor vehicle racetrack.
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:550
(a) All areas used for the racing, testing and maintenance of motor
vehicles shall be set back a minimum of 400 feet from the lot
line of an existing dwelling.
(b) All buildings, parking, loading and unloading areas shall be set
back a minimum of 150 feet from the lot line of an existing
dwelling.
(c) The applicant shall prove that the standards of Article V will be
met, including noise, lighting and dust.
(d) Minimum lot area: 50 acres.
(34) Multifamily dwellings. See "Townhouses and multifamily
dwellings" in this section.
(35) Nursing home.
(a) Licensing. See definition in Article II.
(b) A minimum of 20% of the lot shall be suitable and developed
for passive recreation. This area shall include outdoor sitting
areas and pedestrian walks.
(36) Outdoor storage and display. The provisions listed for this use
under § 285-43 shall apply.
(37) Picnic grove, private.
(a) All activity areas shall be a minimum of 250 feet from an
existing dwelling on another lot. All parking areas shall be set
back 100 feet from any residential lot line. The use shall not
operate between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(b) See noise and glare standards in Article V.
(c) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(38) Place of worship.
(a) Minimum lot area: Two acres in a residential district, unless a
larger lot area is required by the applicable zoning district. In
any other district, a place of worship shall meet the minimum
lot area provided in Article III for that district. Maximum lot
area in the A District: five acres.
(b) Weekly religious education rooms and meeting rooms are
permitted accessory uses, provided that such uses are of such
a character and intensity that they would be clearly customary
and incidental to the place of worship. A primary or secondary
school and/or a child or adult day-care center may be approved
on the same lot as a place of worship, provided the
requirements for such uses are also met. Noncommercial
buses used primarily to transport persons to and from religious
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:551
services or a permitted school on the lot may be parked on the
lot. Other uses shall only be allowed if all of the requirements
for such uses are also met, including being permitted in the
applicable district.
(c) A maximum of one dwelling unit may be accessory to a place of
worship on the same lot to house employees of the place of
worship and/or an employee and his/her family. Such dwelling
shall meet the maximum number of unrelated persons in the
definition of a family. No other residential use shall be allowed.
(d) If within a residential district, any new place of worship shall
be adjacent to an existing collector or arterial street that is in
public ownership.
(e) Minimum building setback from a lot line of an existing
dwelling in a residential district: 60 feet.
(f) Minimum parking setback from a lot line of an existing
dwelling in a residential district: 20 feet.
(g) Maximum impervious coverage: 60%, unless a less restrictive
standard is provided in the applicable zoning district under
§ 285-27.
(39) Recreation, outdoor.
(a) Active outdoor recreation facilities (not including trails) and
buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the lot
line of an existing dwelling.
(b) This term shall not include "publicly owned recreation" or a
golf course.
(c) See provisions for a nonhousehold swimming pool in this
section.
(d) Lighting, noise and glare control. See Article V.
(e) In a residential district, the minimum lot area shall be 2.5
acres, unless a more restrictive lot area is established by
another section of this chapter.
(f) Maximum impervious coverage in any residential district: 20%.
In any other district, the use shall meet the district provisions
of § 285-27A.
(g) Maximum building coverage in any residential district: 15%.
(h) A site plan meeting the requirements of Article I shall be
submitted to the Township.
(i) Where woods exist adjacent to an exterior lot line of the use
adjacent to a residential lot line, such woods shall be preserved
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:552
within at least 20 feet of such lot line, except for approved
driveway, utility and trail crossings. Where such woods will
not exist, a twenty-foot-wide buffer yard in accordance with
§ 285-65 shall be required.
(j) Hours of operation. In a residential district, active recreation
facilities shall be conducted only between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m., unless differing hours are established as a
condition of any needed Zoning Hearing Board or Board of
Supervisors approval.
(k) Any restaurant, tavern, retail store, target range, camp,
campground or commercial picnic ground use shall only be
allowed if those uses are permitted in the applicable district
and if all requirements for each such use(s) are also met.
(40) Recycling collection center.
(a) This use shall not be bound by the requirements of a solid
waste disposal facility.
(b) All materials shall be kept in appropriate containers, with
appropriate sanitary measures and frequent enough emptying
to prevent the attraction of insects or rodents and to avoid fire
hazards.
(c) Adequate provision shall be made for movement of trucks if
needed and for off-street parking.
(d) A twenty-foot-wide buffer yard with screening as described in
§ 285-65 shall be provided between this use and any abutting
residential lot line.
(e) This use may be a principal or accessory use, including being
an accessory use to a commercial use, an industrial use, a
public or private primary or secondary school, a place of
worship or a Township-owned use, subject to the limitations of
this section.
(f) Materials to be collected shall be of the same character as the
following materials: paper, fabric, cardboard, plastic, metal,
aluminum and glass. No garbage shall be stored as part of the
use, except for that generated on site and that accidentally
collected with the recyclables. Only materials clearly being
actively collected for recycling may be stored on site.
(g) The use shall only include the following operations: collection,
sorting, baling, loading, weighing, routine cleaning and closely
similar work. No burning or landfilling shall occur. No
mechanical operations shall routinely occur at the site other
than operations such as baling of cardboard.
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:553
(h) The use shall not include the collection or processing of pieces
of metal that have a weight greater than 50 pounds, except
within an industrial district.
(i) The use shall include the storage of a maximum of 50 tons of
materials on the site if the use is within a residential district
and within 500 feet of an existing dwelling.
(41) Residential conversions. See "Conversions of an existing building"
within this section.
(42) Restaurant.
(a) Screening of dumpster and waste container: see § 285-68.
(b) See "drive-through" service in § 285-43. Drive-through service
shall only be provided where specifically permitted in the
applicable district regulations.
(43) Retreat center.
(a) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(b) A retreat center may be used for scheduled activities for
groups, which shall include seminars, lectures and worship
and accessory overnight accommodations, meals and active or
passive recreation for persons attending the scheduled activity.
A retreat center may also be used for individually scheduled
events such as weddings or family reunions, provided that
meals are restricted to persons attending the event and there
is no separate charge or donations for the meals. Active and
passive recreation facilities may be open to the general public.
(c) A retreat center shall not contain a commercial recreation or
entertainment facility.
(d) Overnight accommodations shall be provided for participants
at retreats only. Overnight accommodations shall not be
provided to individuals who are not part of a scheduled retreat
being held at the facility.
(e) Meals shall be provided only to persons participating in an
activity at the center. Dining areas shall not be open to the
general public.
(f) Outdoor activities shall conclude by 11:00 p.m., and any lights
for outdoor recreational facilities shall be extinguished by
11:15 p.m.
(g) Retreat centers may contain facilities for active recreation or
passive recreation. Amusement arcades, amusement rides and
adult-related facilities shall not be permitted within a retreat
center.
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:554
(h) For any use not listed in § 285-51, a minimum of one parking
space shall be provided for each 200 square feet of gross floor
area of such building area. For any use not listed in § 285-51
and which does not contain a building, it shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to provide credible evidence that
adequate parking is provided for such use.
(i) All water facilities, sewage disposal systems, rest rooms, solid
waste disposal and vector control shall be approved and
maintained in accordance with the requirements of DEP.
(j) The applicant shall furnish credible evidence that the proposed
use will not be detrimental to the use of adjoining properties
due to hours of operation, noise, light, litter, dust, pollution and
traffic.
(k) All lighting shall be arranged and shielded so that no glare or
direct illumination shall be cast upon adjacent properties or
public streets.
(l) Where existing buildings or sites of historical significance exist
on the property, the applicant shall show how these buildings
or sites will be utilized by the proposed use and, if any such
buildings or sites are to be removed, the applicant shall
provide credible evidence as to why such buildings or sites
need to be removed and cannot be utilized for the proposed
use. Where such buildings or sites are to be renovated, the
applicant shall provide credible evidence that the renovations
will not adversely alter the historic significance of the building
or site. Buildings or sites of historic significance shall include
any building or site identified as a historic site by the West
Lampeter Township Comprehensive Plan, the National
Register of Historic Places or the Historic Preservation Trust of
Lancaster County.
(m) A public greenway easement shall be provided along any
watercourse within or adjacent to the retreat center where
such easement could be an extension of an existing greenway
easement or public open space area or where a greenway
easement could be consistent with any designated greenway as
shown in a plan or study by the Township or by any state,
county or regional governmental agency. The location and
dimensions of the easement shall be adequate to accommodate
the existing or planned greenway.
(44) School, public or private, primary or secondary.
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres in a residential district. In any
other district, the use shall meet the standard minimum lot
area requirement for that district.
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:555
(b) No children's play equipment, basketball courts or illuminated
recreation facilities shall be within 30 feet of a residential lot
line.
(c) The use shall not include a dormitory unless specifically
permitted in the district.
(45) Self-storage development.
(a) Outdoor storage shall be limited to recreational vehicles, boats
and trailers. No junk vehicles shall be stored within view of a
public street or a dwelling.
(b) Trash, radioactive or highly toxic substances, garbage, refuse,
explosives or flammable materials, hazardous substances,
animal carcasses or skins, or similar items shall not be stored.
(c) Nothing shall be stored in interior traffic aisles, required offstreet
parking areas, loading areas or accessways.
(d) The use shall not include a commercial auto repair garage
unless that use is permitted in the district and the use meets
those requirements.
(e) Adequate lighting shall be provided for security, but it shall be
directed away or shielded from any adjacent residential uses.
(f) See § 285-65 concerning buffer yards. In addition, any outdoor
storage or garage doors within 200 feet of a street right-of-way
and visible from the street shall be screened from that street
by a buffer yard meeting § 285-65. Any fencing shall be placed
on the inside of the plantings.
(g) Minimum separation between buildings: 20 feet. Maximum
length of any building: 300 feet.
(46) Solid waste transfer facility, solid waste landfill or solid waste-toenergy
facility.
(a) All solid waste storage, disposal, incineration or processing
shall be at least 200 feet from the following: public street rightof-
way, exterior lot line, one-hundred-year floodplain, edge of a
surface water body (including a water-filled quarry) or wetland
of more than 1/2 acre in area.
(b) All solid waste storage, disposal, incineration or processing
shall be a minimum of 500 feet from any residential district,
perennial creek, publicly owned park or any existing dwelling
that the applicant does not have an agreement to purchase.
(c) The use shall be served by a minimum of two paved access
roads, each with a minimum cartway width of 24 feet. One of
these roads may be restricted to use by emergency vehicles.
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:556
(d) No burning or incineration shall occur, except within an
approved waste-to-energy facility.
(e) The operation and day-to-day maintenance of the solid waste
disposal area shall comply with all applicable state and federal
regulations as a condition of the continuance of any permit of
the Township. Violations of this condition shall also be
considered to be violations of this chapter.
(f) Open dumps and open burning of refuse are prohibited.
(g) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that the existing street network can handle the
additional truck traffic, especially without bringing
extraordinary numbers of trash-hauling trucks through or
alongside existing residential or residentially zoned areas and
especially considering the width and slopes of streets in the
Township.
(h) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that the use would not routinely create noxious
odors off of the tract.
(i) A chain link or other approved fence with a minimum height of
eight feet shall surround active solid waste disposal areas to
prevent the scattering of litter and to keep out children, unless
the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that this is unnecessary. The Board shall require
earth berms, evergreen screening and/or shade trees, as
needed, be used to prevent landfill operations from being
visible from an expressway or arterial streets or dwellings.
(j) A minimum lot area of 15 acres shall be required for the first
250 tons per day of capacity to treat or dispose of waste, plus
one acre for each additional 100 tons per day of capacity. A
solid waste facility shall have a maximum total capacity of 500
tons per day.
(k) Health hazards. Any facility shall be operated in such a manner
to prevent the attraction, harborage or breeding of insects,
rodents or vectors.
(l) Attendant. An attendant shall be present during all periods of
operation or dumping.
(m) Gates. Secure gates, fences, earth mounds and/or dense
vegetation shall prevent unauthorized access.
(n) Emergency access. The operator of the use shall cooperate
fully with local emergency services. This should include
allowing practice exercises on the site and the provision of all
information needed by the emergency services to determine
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:557
potential hazards. Adequate means of emergency access shall
be provided.
(o) Under authority granted to the Township under Act 101 of
1988, the hours of operation shall be limited to between 7:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(p) Tires. See "outdoor storage and display" in § 285-43.
(q) Litter. The operator shall regularly police the area of the
facility and surrounding streets to collect litter that may
escape from the facility or trucks.
(r) Dangerous materials. No radioactive, hazardous,
chemotherapeutic or infectious materials may be stored,
processed, disposed or incinerated. Infectious materials are
defined as medical wastes used or created in the treatment of
persons or animals with seriously contagious diseases.
(s) The applicant shall provide sufficient information for the
Township to determine that the requirements of this chapter
will be met.
(t) State requirements. Nothing in this chapter is intended to
supersede any state requirements. It is the intent of this
chapter that when similar issues are regulated on both the
Township and state levels, that the stricter requirement shall
apply for each aspect, unless it is determined that an individual
state regulation preempts Township regulation in a particular
aspect. The applicant shall provide the Zoning Officer with a
copy of all written materials and plans that are submitted to PA
DEP at the same time as they are submitted to the Department
of Environmental Protection.
(u) For a solid-waste-to-energy facility or solid waste transfer
facility, all loading and unloading of solid waste shall only
occur within an enclosed building and over an impervious
surface which drains to a holding tank that is then adequately
treated. All solid waste processing and storage shall occur
within enclosed buildings or enclosed containers.
(v) A solid waste landfill shall only be approved if the applicant
proves that a continuous route over roads is available that
entirely involves roads with a minimum paved cartway width of
18 feet between the exit driveway of the landfill and Route 222
or 272.
(47) Stable, nonhousehold. (Includes riding academies; see also
"keeping of pets" in § 285-43.)
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:558
(a) Minimum lot area: 2.5 acres for the first horse or similar
animal, plus one acre for each additional horse or similar
animal.
(b) Any horse barn, feed areas, manure storage areas or stable
shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any residential lot line.
Any corral or fenced-in area shall be set back a minimum of 50
feet from any residential lot line.
(c) Manure shall be regularly collected and disposed of in a
sanitary manner that avoids nuisances to neighbors. Manure
shall be stored in a manner that prevents it from being carried
off by runoff into a creek. Manure shall not be stored within
100 feet of a perennial waterway.
(48) Swimming pool, nonhousehold.
(a) The water surface shall be set back at least 50 feet from any
existing dwelling.
(b) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(c) Any water surface within 100 feet of an existing dwelling shall
be separated from the dwelling by a buffer yard meeting
§ 285-65.
(d) The water surface shall be surrounded by a secure, wellmaintained
fence at least six feet in height.
(e) Drainage. A proper method shall be provided for drainage of
the water from the pool that will not flood other property.
(49) Target range.
(a) All target ranges shall have a barrier behind the target area
which is of sufficient height and thickness to adequately
protect the public safety.
(b) The design of the outdoor firearms target range shall be
compared by the applicant with applicable published
guidelines of the National Rifle Association. The Zoning
Hearing Board may consider such guidelines to be the
generally accepted standard for the safety of these facilities.
(c) An outdoor firearms target range and any firing stations shall
be located a minimum of 250 feet from any residential lot line,
unless all firing would occur within a completely enclosed
sound-resistant building. Clay pigeon shooting shall be
directed away from homes and streets.
(d) An outdoor firearms target range shall be properly posted. The
Zoning Hearing Board may require fencing as necessary.
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:559
(e) The applicant shall provide evidence that the noise limits of
Article V will be met.
(f) An indoor firearms target range shall be adequately ventilated
and/or air conditioned to allow the building to remain
completely enclosed.
(g) A target range shall only be used for types of firearms or other
weapons for which it was specifically designed. Automatic
weapons shall not be used.
(h) An outdoor target range shall not be used during nighttime
hours. Maximum hours and days of operation may be
established as a condition of the zoning approval.
(i) Minimum lot area for an outdoor firearms target range: 10
acres, unless a more restrictive provision is established by
another provision of this chapter.
(j) See § 285-65. Wherever woods exist adjacent to an exterior lot
line of an outdoor firearms target range, such woods shall be
preserved within at least 100 feet of each such lot line, except
for approved driveway, utility and trail crossings.
(50) Timber harvesting.
(a) Purposes: to promote management of forests for long-term
benefits; promote good forest stewardship; protect adjoining
property owners; minimize the potential for adverse
environmental impacts; and avoid unreasonable restrictions on
forestry.
(b) Applicability: Timber harvesting shall be permitted by right in
all zoning districts, provided it complies with the requirements
of this chapter. This section shall regulate all timber harvesting
when the total harvesting area is 1/2 acre or greater in a
calendar year, which shall require a permit.
[1] These provisions shall not regulate the following:
[a] Cutting of up to 10% of trees with a trunk diameter of
six inches or greater (measured 3.5 feet above the
ground level) on a lot in any calendar year, provided
such cutting does not involve clear-cutting but instead
involves routine thinning of woods;
[b] Cutting of trees with a trunk diameter of less than six
inches (measured 3.5 feet above the ground level);
[c] Cutting of dead trees; and
[d] Cutting of trees that the applicant proves to the
Zoning Officer is necessary to accommodate a
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:560
Township-approved subdivision, land development,
street, driveway, building, utility or use.
(c) Application requirements. An application for timber harvesting
shall be made a minimum of 30 days prior to the start of work.
No forestry shall occur until a permit has been issued by the
Zoning Officer.
[1] The application shall include a written timbering plan,
which shall be prepared by a qualified professional. The
provisions of the plan shall be followed throughout the
operation. The plan shall be available for inspection at the
harvest site at all times during the operation.
[2] The landowner, the applicant and the timber operator shall
be jointly and separately responsible for complying with
the terms of the timber harvesting plan and permit.
(d) Timber harvesting plan.
[1] The applicant shall specify, in writing, the land on which
harvesting will occur, the expected size of the harvest
area, and the anticipated starting and completion date of
the operation. The zoning permit shall be valid for up to
two years from the date of issuance.
[2] The timber harvesting plan shall include, at a minimum,
the following information:
[a] A narrative of proposed cutting practices and/or stand
prescription(s) for each stand in the proposed harvest
area and the construction, maintenance and
retirement of the access system, including haul roads,
skid roads, skid trails and landings;
[b] An erosion and sedimentation control plan approved
by the County Conservation District if over one acre
will be disturbed;
[c] All timbering activities shall use best management
practices (BMPs), which shall be shown on the plan;
[d] A narrative of all stream and road crossings, including
required permits from the appropriate agency;
[e] All Township and/or PennDOT highway occupancy
permits, if applicable;
[f] An application shall be submitted to the Township,
with a map showing waterways, drainageways,
approximate wetlands, lakes, roads, lot lines and
proposed harvest areas.
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:561
[g] The application shall also include the name and
address of the property owner and the person who will
be responsible to oversee the timber harvesting.
[h] The application shall also show proposed erosion and
sedimentation control measures, proposed crossings
of waterways and proposed vehicle entrance and exit
points onto streets.
(e) Timber harvesting practices.
[1] Felling or skidding on or across any public thoroughfare is
prohibited without the express written consent of the
Township or PennDOT, whichever is responsible for
maintenance of the street.
[2] No tops or slash shall be left within 25 feet of any public
thoroughfare, property line or private roadway providing
access to adjoining residential property.
[3] All tops and slash between 25 and 50 feet from a public
street right-of-way or private road providing access to
adjoining residential property or within 50 feet of
adjoining residential property shall be lopped so that they
do not extend more than four feet above the surface of the
ground.
[4] Streams are an important natural resource that provide
for water quality, flood control, bank stabilization and
other ecological benefits. To insure their adequate
protection, timber harvesting is prohibited within 100 feet
of the top of the bank on each side of all perennial
waterways, except this distance may be reduced to 50 feet
if all of the following conditions are met:
[a] The basal area of trees in that area within the onehundred-
foot setback shall not be reduced below 50%
of the basal area present before cutting.
[b] Trees to be cut within the one-hundred-foot zone
described shall be marked with paint or ribbons prior
to the start of timber harvesting.
[c] All earthmoving within this area shall be minimized or
fully avoided.
[5] No tops or slash shall be left within a stream channel or
floodway. Unless fully delineated, a floodway shall be
assumed to be all that area within 50 feet from the center
of a waterway.
[6] The use of clear-cutting must be fully justified by a timber
harvesting plan prepared by a qualified professional.
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:562
Detailed information concerning increased stormwater
runoff, erosion control and a plan to assure regeneration
shall be provided. Clear-cutting shall not be allowed on
contiguous areas greater than 1/2 acre. Clear-cutting shall
be prohibited on slopes greater than 25%.
[7] A twenty-foot minimum setback shall be maintained for
timber harvesting from a public street right-of-way and
from any lot line of property, except such lot line setback
shall not apply if the adjoining property owner provides a
written, notarized and signed waiver of the setback to the
Zoning Officer.
[8] If timber harvesting involves more than two acres, a
minimum of 30% of the forest cover (canopy) shall be kept
and the residual trees shall be well distributed to promote
reforestation.
(f) Public road responsibility. The landowner and the operator
shall be responsible for repairing any damage at locations of
entry or exit to Township roads caused by traffic associated
with the timber harvesting operation to the extent the damage
is in excess of that caused by normal traffic. The Township may
require the landowner or operator to furnish a bond to
guarantee the repair of such damages. Such bond shall remain
in full force until the Zoning Officer issues a written
notification that all provisions of this chapter and the permit
have been complied with. In lieu of such bond, the operator or
landowner may post a cash deposit or certified check with the
Township.
(51) Townhouses and multifamily dwellings.
(a) Maximum length and width of an attached grouping of
townhouses: 150 feet. Maximum number of multifamily
dwellings that shall be within a building: 12, except no
maximum shall apply in a building in which all units are
permanently age-restricted to at least one resident age 55 and
older.
(b) Paved area setback. All off-street parking spaces, except
spaces on driveways immediately in front of a carport or
garage entrance, shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from
any dwelling.
(c) Garages. It is strongly recommended that all Townhouses be
designed so that garages and/or carports are not an overly
prominent part of the view from public streets. For this reason,
parking courts, common garage or carport structures or
garages at the rear of dwellings are encouraged instead of
individual garages opening onto the front of the building,
especially for narrow townhouse units.
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-42
278:563
(d) Mailboxes. Any mailboxes provided within the street right-ofway
should be clustered together in an orderly and attractive
arrangement or structure. Individual freestanding mailboxes of
noncoordinated types at the curbside are specifically
discouraged.
(e) Access. Vehicular access points onto all arterial and collector
streets shall be minimized to the lowest reasonable number. No
townhouse dwelling within a tract of five or more dwelling
units shall have its own driveway entering onto an arterial or
collector street.
(f) Common open space. Unless a higher amount of open space is
required under the conservation development provisions, a
minimum of 30% of the total lot area of the development
involving townhouses and multifamily dwellings and their
accessory uses shall be set aside as common open space for the
residents. The applicant shall prove that these areas will be
suitable for active or passive recreation. This subsection shall
not apply to the neighborhood development option.
[1] If a development includes over 30 dwelling units that will
not be restricted to at least one resident age 55 and older
and will not be time-share dwellings, then the common
open space shall at a minimum include a rectangular grass
field 50 feet by 150 feet that is suitable for free play by
young persons. If all dwellings in a development will be
restricted to at least one resident age 55 and older, then
the common open space shall at a minimum include
landscaped trails that are ADA-accessible.
[2] A recreation building or pool available to all residents of
the development may count towards the open space
requirement. Areas with a width of less than 50 feet shall
not count towards this requirement. This requirement
shall be in place of any requirement for recreation land or
fees under the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.128
(52) Treatment center.
(a) See definition in § 285-20.
(b) The applicant shall provide a written description of all
conditions (such as criminal parolees, alcohol addiction) that
will cause persons to occupy the use during the life of the
permit. Any future additions to this list shall require an
additional special exception approval.
128. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 285-42 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-42
278:564
§ 285-43. Additional requirements for accessory uses.
(c) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board that the use will involve adequate on-site
supervision and security measures to protect public safety.
(d) The Zoning Hearing Board may place conditions upon the use
to protect public safety, such as conditions on the types of
residents and security measures.
(e) If the use involves five or more residents, a suitable recreation
area shall be provided that is supervised by the center's staff.
(53) Veterinarian office (includes animal hospital).
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) Any structure in which animals are treated or housed shall be a
minimum of 30 feet from any lot line of an existing dwelling.
Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds
generated within the buildings cannot routinely be perceived
within any adjacent dwellings.
(c) Animals undergoing treatment may be kept as an accessory
use. However, a commercial kennel shall only be allowed if a
kennel is permitted in that district and if the applicable
requirements are met.
A. General. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are clearly
customary and incidental to a permitted by right, special exception or
conditional use are permitted by right, except as is provided for in this
chapter. A business shall only be conducted as an accessory to a
dwelling if specifically permitted by this chapter.
B. Accessory setbacks. The accessory setback requirements of the
applicable district shall apply to every accessory building, structure or
use unless a standard that is clearly meant to be more restrictive or less
restrictive is specifically stated in this article for a particular accessory
use. Accessory structure setback requirements shall not apply to
permitted surface parking lots, fences or permitted accessory signs.
C. Front yard setback. No accessory structure, use or building shall be
permitted in a required minimum front yard in any district, unless
specifically permitted by this chapter.
D. Special standards. Each accessory use shall comply with all of the
following standards listed for that use:
(1) Accessory office.
(a) This use specifically was written to apply within the RV
District. For other types of home offices and home-based
§ 285-42 WEAPONS § 285-43
278:565
businesses, see the provisions in this section for "Home
occupations."
(b) This use shall be limited to an existing detached building that
includes more than 500 square feet of floor area. This use shall
only include a professional office, which shall be accessory to a
dwelling on the lot. The use shall be conducted by a resident of
the principal dwelling on the lot and a maximum of four other
persons working on site at one time, who may or may not live in
the dwelling.
(c) One off-street parking space shall be required per nonresident
employee, plus parking for the dwelling.
(d) The use shall not involve loading or unloading by tractor-trailer
trucks.
(e) The use shall not be conducted in a manner that is perceptible
to residents of other lots between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
7:30 a.m.
(f) A maximum of one sign shall be permitted, with a maximum of
two square feet on each of two sides and a maximum height of
five feet, and which shall not be illuminated
(g) The Zoning Hearing Board may limit the intensity of the use if
determined to be necessary considering the location and the
proximity of surrounding uses.
(2) Antenna, standard (includes amateur radio antenna).
(a) Height. No standard antenna, including its supporting
structure, shall have a total height above the average
surrounding ground level of greater than 75 feet.
(b) Anchoring. An antenna shall be properly anchored to resist
high winds.
(3) Bees, keeping of.
(a) The applicant shall maintain the bees in a manner that does not
create a public nuisance.
(b) Bee colonies shall be maintained within hives.
(c) Hives shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any lot line,
except this setback shall be reduced to 50 feet if a six-footminimum-
height fence or solid hedge is located along the
adjoining lot line for a distance of at least 100 feet from the
hives.
(d) The approval to keep bees shall be revoked if the use is
maintained in a way that results in unprovoked stinging of
§ 285-43 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-43
278:566
persons who are located on other lots or on streets or
sidewalks.
(4) Bus shelter.
(a) A bus shelter may be constructed in any zoning district,
provided the shelter is served by a regularly scheduled public
bus route or a retirement community shuttle service. However,
if such bus shelter includes any advertising signs, the shelter
shall only be allowed in a commercial or industrial district or
along an arterial street in another zoning district.
(b) A zoning permit shall be required by the Township.
(c) If the bus shelter is constructed outside of the street right-ofway,
written permission shall be obtained from the property
owner. If the bus shelter will be constructed within a street
right-of-way, written permission shall be obtained from
PennDOT or the Township, as applicable.
(d) A bus shelter shall have a maximum floor area of 60 square feet
and be firmly anchored on a hard surface.
(e) A bus shelter shall be constructed primarily using clear
shatter-resistant materials.
(f) A bus shelter may include one sign with up to two sides, each
with a maximum sign area of 35 square feet, and which may be
illuminated. In addition, signs may provide public transit
information. If a bus shelter includes an advertising sign, such
shelter shall be set back a minimum of 500 feet from any other
shelter with an advertising sign.
(g) A written agreement shall establish the party that will be
responsible for maintaining the shelter. The Township may
require that an escrow be provided to ensure proper
maintenance and/or removal of the shelter.
(h) A bus shelter shall not obstruct a clear sight triangle.
(i) The Zoning Officer shall require the removal of a bus shelter
and the signs within 60 days if the Zoning Officer becomes
aware that the shelter is not being properly maintained or if it
is no longer served by a bus route.
(5) Composting as a principal or accessory use (other than raising of
mushrooms).
(a) All composting shall be conducted in such a manner that does
not create a fire, rodent or disease-carrying-insect hazard and
does not cause noxious odors off of the subject property.
§ 285-43 WEAPONS § 285-43
278:567
(b) Composting shall be permitted as an accessory use, provided
that the composting is limited to biodegradable vegetative
material, including trees, shrubs, leaves, bark and vegetable
waste. Such composting shall be kept free of other garbage
and animal fats.
(c) Minimum lot area for composting of manure that was not
generated on site: 25 acres. Any composting of manure shall
comply with the latest edition of the Pennsylvania Manure
Management Manual.
(d) Setbacks. Composting areas of greater than one acre shall be
set back 75 feet from lot lines of abutting residential lot lines,
except that a two-hundred-foot minimum setback shall apply
from all lot lines for composting of manure that was not
generated on site.
(6) Day care, child: as accessory to a dwelling.
(a) See § 285-26 and the definitions in § 285-20 concerning the
number of children who can be cared for in different zoning
districts in a family day-care home or a group day-care home.
(b) In any case, six to 12 children (other than children who are
related to the primary caregiver) shall only be cared for at one
time within a single-family detached dwelling with a minimum
lot area of 30,000 square feet and a twenty-foot minimum
setback from all existing dwellings on another lot(s). Four to
six children (in addition to children who are related to the
primary caregiver) shall only be cared for at one time within a
dwelling that is not attached to another dwelling. The care of
fewer numbers of children may occur within any lawful
dwelling unit. If a use involves the care of 13 or more children,
it shall be considered to be a principal day-care center, except
as accessory to a place of worship or school.
(c) The dwelling shall retain a residential appearance with no
change to the exterior of the dwelling to accommodate the use,
other than cosmetic improvements.
(d) The use shall be actively operated by a permanent resident of
the dwelling.
(e) If four or more children are cared for who are not related to the
primary caregiver, then a minimum of 400 square feet of
exterior play area shall be available, surrounded by a six-foothigh
secure fence.
(f) See also "day-care center" as a principal use in § 285-42, and
day care as accessory to a place of worship in § 285-26B.
§ 285-43 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-43
278:568
(g) The use shall comply with any applicable state and federal
regulations, including having an appropriate State Department
of Public Welfare (or its successor agency) registration
certificate or license if required by such agency.
(h) The use shall include a secure fence around any outdoor areas
abutting streets that are routinely used for outdoor play.
(7) Drive-through facilities.
(a) The proposed traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause
traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
(b) On-lot traffic circulation and parking areas shall be clearly
marked.
(c) A drive-through use shall be designed with space for an
adequate number of waiting vehicles while avoiding conflicts
with traffic onto, around and off of the site. Any drive-through
facilities shall be designed to minimize conflicts with
pedestrian traffic.
(8) Farm-related business. This use may be approved on a lawful
existing lot with a minimum lot area of 20 acres that includes a
principal agricultural use.
(a) A farm-related business shall be defined as a low-intensity
commercial or industrial activity that functions as a customary
accessory use to an on-site principal agricultural use. Farmrelated
businesses are intended to provide supplemental
income to farmers to encourage the continuation of farming
and to provide needed services to other farmers.
(b) A farm-related business shall be conducted by a resident or
owner of the property, his/her relatives, and a maximum total
of six other employees working on site at one time, in addition
to employees of the agricultural use. In addition, a barn that
was constructed for agricultural purposes prior to the adoption
of this section may be leased to a nonresident for a use meeting
these standards.
(c) To the maximum extent feasible, a farm-related business
should use an existing building. Buildings that existed prior to
the effective date of this section may be used for a farm-related
business. Any new building constructed for a farm-related
business and any new parking area for trucks shall be set back
a minimum of 100 feet from any lot line of an existing dwelling,
unless a larger setback is required by another section of this
chapter. The total of all building floor areas used for a farmrelated
business shall not exceed 6,000 square feet. This sixthousand-
square-foot limit shall only apply to buildings
constructed after the effective date of this chapter. A farm-
§ 285-43 WEAPONS § 285-43
278:569
related business may also use buildings of any size that existed
prior to the effective date of this chapter. The total area used
by buildings, parking and storage for the farm-related business
shall not exceed four acres or 10% of the lot area, whichever is
less restrictive.
(d) The farm-related business shall not routinely require the
overnight parking of more than two tractor-trailer trucks,
other than trucks serving the agricultural use.
(e) Any manufacturing operations shall be of a custom nature and
shall be conducted indoors.
(f) The business shall not generate noxious odors, noise or glare
beyond amounts that are typically generated by agricultural
operations. Nonagricultural operations shall not routinely
occur in a manner that generates traffic or noise heard by
neighbors between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(g) Any retail sales shall only be occasional in nature and shall
occur by appointment or during a maximum of 30 hours per
week (except customary retail sales as part of a barber/beauty
shop). This provision shall not restrict permitted sale of
agricultural products.
(h) Only one sign shall advertise a farm-related business, which
shall have a maximum sign area of 10 square feet on each of
two sides, and which shall not be internally illuminated, and
which shall have a maximum height of eight feet.
(i) The following activities shall be permitted by right as a farmrelated
business:
[1] Farm equipment, farm vehicle or buggy repair;
[2] Occasional repair of one motor vehicle at a time, beyond
those vehicles owned or leased by a resident of the
property or his/her relative, but not including a junkyard,
auto body shop or spray painting;
[3] Barber/beauty shop;
[4] Office;
[5] Music, hobby, trade or art instruction for up to 10 persons
at a time;
[6] Small engine repair;
[7] Custom woodworking or wood refinishing;
[8] Custom blacksmithing or sharpening services;
[9] Installation of accessories to motor vehicles;
§ 285-43 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-43
278:570
[10] Boarding of animals, not including a kennel or a stable
(which are separate uses);
[11] Custom butchering, not including a commercial
slaughterhouse or stockyard;
[12] Processing and storage of agricultural products produced
on the premises;
[13] Sawmill;
[14] Corn mazes and educational tours;
[15] Use of a building that existed prior to January 1, 2006, for
rental storage, such as for boats or recreational vehicles,
or
[16] Conversion of a barn that existed prior to January 1, 2006,
into one dwelling unit or into an office.
See also "retail sales of agricultural products" in this
§ 285-43.
(j) The following farm-related businesses shall require special
exception approval from the Zoning Hearing Board:
[1] Uses that the applicant proves to the Zoning Hearing
Board are closely similar in impacts to uses listed as
allowed as farm-related businesses.
[2] Commercial farm tourism and special events, such as
Halloween activities.
[3] Use of a building that was constructed after January 1,
2006, for rental storage.
[4] Construction tradesperson's or landscaping business'
headquarters, in addition to an office which is permitted
by right;
[5] Processing and storage of agricultural products not
produced on the premises;
[6] Welding and custom machining of parts; or
[7] Sale, processing or mixing of seeds, feed, chemical
fertilizers, or wood/leaves/bark compost or mulch.
(k) This subsection shall not regulate agricultural uses that are
permitted under other provisions of this chapter.
(l) If an activity would be permitted as either a farm-related
business or a home occupation, then the applicant may choose
which set of provisions shall apply.
§ 285-43 WEAPONS § 285-43
278:571
(m) One off-street parking space shall be provided per nonresident
employee, plus parking for any dwelling. In addition, the
applicant shall prove to the Zoning Officer that sufficient
parking will be available for customers, which is not required
to be paved.
(n) All existing and new buildings shall maintain a residential or
agricultural appearance, as viewed from a public street.
(o) The use shall not involve the storage or use of highly
hazardous, toxic, radioactive, flammable or explosive
substances, other than types typically used in agriculture or a
household.
(p) Landscaping shall be placed between any outdoor storage of
nonagricultural materials or products and any adjacent
dwelling from which storage would be visible.
(q) The lot shall have provisions for trucks to turn around on the
site without backing onto a public street. When special
exception approval is required, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider the suitability of the adjacent roads for the amount
and weights of truck traffic that will be generated.
(9) Fences and walls.
(a) Fences and walls are permitted by right in all districts. Any
fence or wall shall be durably constructed and wellmaintained.
Fences that have deteriorated shall be replaced or
removed.
(b) No fence, wall or hedge shall obstruct the sight distance as
required by § 285-65C and/or the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
(c) Fences.
[1] Front yard. Any fence located in the required minimum
front yard of a lot in a residential district shall:
[a] Be an open-type of fence (such as picket, wrought
iron, vinyl post, chain link or split rail) with a minimum
ratio of 1:1 of open to structural areas; and
[b] Not exceed four feet in height. A taller height may be
approved by the Zoning Officer if necessary to contain
animals.
[2] On a corner lot, a fence or wall shall meet the same
requirements along both streets as would apply within a
front yard. A fence shall not be required to comply with
minimum setbacks for accessory structures.
§ 285-43 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-43
278:572
[3] Height. A fence located in a residential district in a
location other than a required front yard shall have a
maximum height of 6.5 feet, and eight feet in any other
district, except a maximum of height of 12 feet shall be
permitted around a tennis court or where the applicant
proves to the Zoning Officer that such taller height is
necessary to protect public safety around a specific
hazard.
[4] Setbacks. No fence shall be built within an existing street
right-of-way. A fence may be constructed along a lot line,
but not on the lot line itself. However, a fence shall be
located on the inside of any buffer plantings required by
§ 285-65. Where no setback is required, a one-foot or
greater setback is recommended to provide for future
maintenance of the fence and to account for possible
inaccurate lot lines.
[5] Fence materials. Barbed wire shall not be used as part of
fences around dwellings in residential districts.
Electrically charged fences shall only be used to contain
farm animals and shall be of such low intensity that they
will not permanently injure humans. No fence or wall shall
be constructed out of fabric, junk, junk vehicles,
appliances, drums or barrels.
(d) Walls.
[1] Engineered retaining walls necessary to hold back slopes
are exempted from setback regulations and the
regulations of this section and are permitted by right as
needed in all districts. However, if a retaining wall is over
eight feet in height, it shall be set back a minimum of 15
feet from a lot line of an existing dwelling.
[2] No wall of greater than three feet shall be located in the
required front yard in a residential district, except as a
backing for a permitted sign as permitted in § 285-59.
[3] A wall in a residential district outside of a required front
yard shall have a maximum height of three feet if it is
within the minimum accessory structure setback.
[4] Walls that are attached to a building shall be regulated as
a part of that building.
(10) Garage sale (includes yard sale, moving sale and porch sale).
(a) See definition in Article II. A garage sale shall not include
wholesale sales, nor sale of new merchandise of a type
typically found in retail stores.
§ 285-43 WEAPONS § 285-43
278:573
(b) Each dwelling may have a maximum of six garage sales in any
calendar year. Each sale shall be at least one month apart.
Each sale shall last a maximum of three days.
(c) The use shall be clearly accessory to the principal use.
(d) No outdoor storage shall be permitted when the sale is not in
operation.
(e) All items shall be placed and offered for sale within the
confines of the property described in the permit.
(f) No toxic or alcoholic beverages shall be offered for sale at a
garage sale.
(g) See the sign provisions for garage sales in Article VII.
(11) Home occupations.
(a) All home occupations shall meet the following requirements:
[1] The use shall be conducted primarily by a permanent
resident of the dwelling, and involve a maximum of one
person working on site at any one time who does not
reside within the dwelling. A maximum of one nonresident
employee shall visit the property on a daily basis or
operate a vehicle based at the property.
[2] The use shall be conducted indoors. No outdoor storage or
display related to the home occupation shall be permitted.
No changes shall occur to the exterior of a building that
would reduce its residential appearance as viewed from a
street.
[3] The use shall occupy an area that is not greater than 25%
of the total floor area of the principal dwelling unit. The
use shall clearly be secondary to the residential use. The
home occupation shall primarily be conducted within the
principal dwelling.
[4] One off-street parking space shall be required per
nonresident employee. In addition, for a general home
occupation, the Zoning Hearing Board shall require
additional off-street parking if the Board determines it is
necessary for customer parking.
[5] The use shall not require delivery by tractor-trailer trucks.
[6] The regulations of Subsection D(14)(d) regarding parking
of trucks shall apply to a home occupation. No excavating
equipment shall be parked overnight on a residential lot or
an adjacent street as part of a home occupation.
[Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 202]
§ 285-43 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-43
278:574
[7] No equipment or machinery shall be permitted that
produces noise, noxious odor, vibration, glare, electrical or
electronic interference detectable on another property.
The use shall not involve the storage or use of hazardous,
flammable or explosive substances, other than types and
amounts typically found on a residential property. The use
shall not involve the storage or use of toxic or highly
hazardous substances.
[8] A home occupation shall not be conducted in a manner
that is perceptible to other residents between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m.
[9] Any tutoring or instruction shall be limited to a maximum
of three students at a time.
[10] A barber or beauty shop shall not include any nonresident
employees.
[11] The main office of a medical doctor, chiropractor or dentist
shall not be permitted as a home occupation.
[12] A home occupation may include one two-square-foot
nonilluminated sign, as permitted by Article VII.
[13] The Zoning Hearing Board shall deny a general home
occupation application, or limit its intensity through
conditions, if the Board determines the use would be too
intense for the proposed location. In making such
determination, the Board shall review the likely amounts
of traffic; the types of operations involved and related
nuisances; the amount of off-street and on-street parking
that is available; the density of the neighborhood; whether
the use would be adjacent to another dwelling; and
setbacks from other dwellings.
[14] The use shall not involve manufacturing, other than of
custom crafts and sewing. The use shall not involve
commercial repair of motor vehicles.
[15] The use may include sales using telephone, mail order or
electronic methods. On-site retail sales shall be prohibited,
except for sales of hair care products as accessory to a
barber/beauty shop.
[16] If more than one home occupation is accessory to a
dwelling, the total aggregate impact of the home
occupations shall be considered in determining
compliance with this chapter.
[17] A zoning permit shall be required for any home
occupation.
§ 285-43 WEAPONS § 285-43
278:575
(b) In addition to the requirements listed in Subsection D(10)(a)
above, the following additional requirements shall apply to a
light home occupation:
[1] The use shall not routinely involve routine visits to the
home occupation by customers or more than one
nonresident employee at a time.
[2] The use shall only involve the following activities:
[a] Work routinely conducted within an office;
[b] Custom sewing and fabric and basket crafts;
[c] Cooking and baking for off-site sales and use;
[d] Creation of visual arts (such as painting or wood
carving);
[e] Repairs to and assembly of computers and computer
peripherals; and
[f] A construction tradesperson, provided that a
maximum of one nonresident employee shall routinely
operate from the lot.
(12) Outdoor storage and display, commercial or industrial, as a
principal or accessory use. (For residential outdoor storage, see
“residential accessory use” in this section.)
(a) Location. Outdoor storage or display shall not occupy any part
of any of the following: the existing or future street right-ofway,
sidewalk or other area intended or designed for
pedestrian use or required parking area.
(b) No such storage or display shall occur on areas with a slope in
excess of 25% or within the one-hundred-year floodplain.
(c) Screening. See § 285-65.
(d) Tire storage.
[1] For tires not mounted on a motor vehicle, any outdoor
storage of more than five tires on a lot in a residential
district or more than 50 used tires in a nonresidential
district shall only be permitted as part of a Townshipapproved
junkyard.
[2] The outdoor storage of more than 50 used tires shall be
limited to the General Industrial District.
[3] Where allowed, any storage of used tires shall involve
stacks with a maximum height of 15 feet and cover a
maximum of 400 square feet. Each stack shall be
§ 285-43 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-43
278:576
separated from other stacks from all lot lines by a
minimum of 75 feet. If the same set of tires is stored on a
lot for more than six months, they shall be stored within a
building or trailer.
[4] The operator of a lot involving tire storage shall prove that
the tires are stored in a manner that minimizes public
health hazards from the breeding of vectors in
accumulated water and/or that the site is regularly
sprayed to minimize vectors.
(13) Pets, keeping of.
(a) This is a permitted by right accessory use in all districts.
(b) No use shall involve the keeping of animals or fowl in such a
manner or of such types of animals that it creates a serious
nuisance (including noise or odor), a health hazard or a public
safety hazard. The owner of the animals shall be responsible
for collecting and properly disposing of all fecal matter from
pets. No dangerous animals shall be kept outdoors in a
residential district, except within a secure, completely
enclosed cage or fenced area of sufficient height or on a leash
under full control of the owner.
(c) A maximum combined total of five dogs and cats shall be
permitted to be kept by residents of each dwelling unit.
[1] Such limits shall only apply to dogs or cats over six months
in age.
[2] Any greater number of dogs and/or cats shall need
approval as a kennel.
[3] No limit shall apply to the number of cats kept on a farm of
more than 20 acres.
(d) Pigeons, chickens, roosters, ducks, geese and/or similar fowl
shall not be kept on a lot of less than one acre. However, if the
total weight of such fowl exceeds 500 pounds, then the
requirements shall be met for the raising of livestock or poultry
use.
(e) Any keeping of pets shall only be permitted, provided it does
not create unsanitary conditions or noxious odors for
neighbors.
(f) Horses. Minimum lot area: two acres for first horse or similar
animal, plus one acre for each horse or similar animal in excess
of one. A maximum of 10 horses or similar animals shall be
kept, unless the use is approved as a nonhousehold stable. Any
horse barn, feed areas, manure storage areas or stable shall be
a minimum of 75 feet from any residential lot line.
§ 285-43 WEAPONS § 285-43
278:577
[1] However, as a special exception, the minimum lot area for
keeping one horse may be reduced to one acre, as an
accessory use to a detached dwelling, provided: 1) the
horse is the principal mode of transportation for the
resident; and 2) adequate, safe and healthful means of
disposal of animal waste is used at all times.
(g) Only those pets that are domesticated and are compatible with
a residential character shall be permitted as keeping of pets.
Examples of permitted pets include dogs, cats, rabbits, gerbils
and lizards.
[1] The following and similar animals shall not be kept as pets,
except that the Zoning Hearing Board may approve a
particular number and type of species as a special
exception if the applicant proves they will not cause
nuisances or hazards: bears, goats, wolves, wolf-dog
hybrids, cows, venomous snakes that could be toxic to
humans, hogs or sheep.
(h) It shall be unlawful on a residential lot to keep any "exotic
wildlife," as defined by the Pennsylvania Game and Wildlife
Code, whether or not an exotic wildlife possession permit has
been issued.
(14) Residential accessory structure or use (see definition in Article II).
(a) Accessory structures and uses (other than fences) shall not be
located within the required accessory use setback as stated in
§ 285-27A, unless specifically exempted by this chapter.
Accessory structures shall not be located within a front yard,
nor within any yard required to be equal in width to a front
yard along a street on a corner lot. See accessory setback
regulations in § 285-27.
(b) Accessory buildings in a residential district on a lot of less than
two acres shall meet the following requirements:
[1] Maximum total floor area of all accessory buildings: 1,000
square feet.
[2] Maximum of two accessory buildings per lot.
(c) Height: see § 285-27B.
(d) Parking of commercial trucks. The overnight outdoor parking
of commercial trucks or the trailer from a tractor-trailer
combination on a principal residential lot in a residential
district is prohibited, except that one of the following shall be
permitted if such vehicle(s) is used by residents of the dwelling
to travel to and from work:
§ 285-43 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-43
278:578
[1] The parking of a maximum of one vehicle of up to 14,000
pounds aggregate gross vehicle weight; or
[2] The parking of one vehicle with an aggregate gross vehicle
weight of over 14,000 pounds aggregate gross vehicle
weight, provided such vehicle is kept a minimum of 100
feet from any dwelling on another lot and provided a row
of evergreen trees meeting § 285-65 is planted to buffer
views of the vehicle from the street and dwellings on other
lots.
[3] Construction equipment that is not primarily intended for
on-road use shall not be stored overnight in a residential
district. A vehicle shall not block a shared driveway or
street.
(e) Repairs. Repairs of a truck with an aggregate gross vehicle
weight of over 14,000 pounds shall not occur on a residential
lot. Repairs of motor vehicles that are not owned or leased by a
resident of the lot or his/her relative shall not occur on a
residential lot.
(f) See setback exceptions in § 285-65B.
(g) Unregistered vehicles and junk vehicles. A maximum of one
unregistered vehicle shall be kept outside of an enclosed
building on a residential lot, provided it is not a junk vehicle. A
maximum of two unregistered vehicles shall be kept outside of
an enclosed building on any other lot, except as specifically
permitted otherwise for a certain use. No junk vehicle shall be
kept on a residential lot unless it is kept within an enclosed
building. See also the definition of "junkyard."
(h) Recreational vehicles or boats. A recreational vehicle or boat
with a length of 24 feet or greater shall not be parked in the
front yard of a dwelling during more than two days in any
seven-day period.
(i) No outdoor overnight storage shall be allowed in a minimum
front yard of a dwelling, except for firewood. No outdoor
overnight storage of materials or items shall be allowed for
more than 90 days on a residential lot outside of the minimum
front yard, other than firewood. No outdoor storage of trash
shall be allowed in a front yard unless the trash is awaiting
imminent pickup on that day.
(15) Retail sales of agricultural products as an accessory use.
(a) The use shall be an accessory use incidental to a crop farming,
greenhouse, plant nursery, orchard, winery or raising of
livestock use.
§ 285-43 WEAPONS § 285-43
278:579
(b) The only retail sales shall be of agricultural products and
horticultural products, in addition to any handmade crafts
produced by the operator of the market and/or his/her family.
An average of not less than 25% of the products sold on site
shall have been produced by the operator or his/her family.
This percentage may vary month to month, provided that the
average is met.
(c) Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with the
provisions of Article VI. No parking shall be permitted in such a
way that it creates a safety hazard.
(d) Any structure erected for this use that is not clearly permanent
in nature shall be disassembled during seasons when products
are not offered for sale.
(e) Signs. See Article VII.
(f) No stand shall be located closer than: 50 feet from a lot line of
an existing dwelling, 25 feet from any other lot line or 100 feet
from the closest intersecting point of street rights-of-way at a
street intersection, unless the sales occur within a dwelling or
barn that existed prior to the adoption of this chapter.
(g) A maximum total of 5,000 square feet of building floor area
shall be used for such use.
(h) The use may occur within an existing dwelling, a barn or a
separate stand. Any stand shall be maintained in good
condition.
(i) The retail sales shall be located on land owned by the operator
of the market or upon a tract of five acres or more which the
operator of the market actively farms.
(j) The applicant shall prove to the Zoning Officer that the
driveway has adequate sight distance, based upon the
PennDOT standards that would apply to a normal commercial
establishment along a state road, regardless of whether a
PennDOT permit would be needed.
(16) Sewage sludge/biosolids, land application of.
(a) The applicant shall provide written evidence to the Township
that sufficient safeguards will be in place to protect the public
health and safety and the water quality of groundwater and
surface waters. This should include, but not be limited to,
provisions for regular testing of the material that is spread and
for ongoing water quality monitoring.
(b) A copy of all test results of the material that is spread and any
test results of water quality shall be provided to the Zoning
§ 285-43 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-43
278:580
Officer within six days after they are received by the operator
of the use or the landowner.
(17) Stable, household. See "Pets, keeping of" in this § 285-43.
(18) Swimming pool, household (referred to hereafter as "pool").
(a) A swimming pool containing 24 inches or more of water depth
shall include a fence, wall or similar enclosure surrounding the
pool. Such enclosure shall extend not less than four feet above
the ground. All gates shall be self-closing and self-latching,
with latches placed at least four feet above the ground.
(b) A swimming pool shall not be located in a front yard. The water
surface and any raised decking of a swimming pool shall be set
back a minimum of eight feet from side and rear lot lines.
(19) Unit for care of relative.
(a) The use shall meet the definition in § 285-20. See also
provisions in § 285-26 under "Accessory uses."
(b) The accessory unit shall be occupied by a maximum of two
persons, who shall be relatives of the permanent residents of
the principal dwelling unit. At least one resident of the
accessory unit shall need such accommodations because of an
illness, old age or disability.
(c) The applicant shall prove to the Zoning Officer that the
accessory unit has been designed and constructed so that it
can be easily reconverted into part of the principal dwelling
unit, or be completely removed, or be converted into a lawful
accessory use after the relative no longer resides within the
unit. Such accessory unit may be converted into an additional
bedroom(s), permitted home occupation area or similar use. A
lawful detached garage may be converted into a unit for care of
relative and then be reconverted to a garage or permitted
home occupation area. If the unit for care of relative will be
attached to the principal dwelling unit, then an interior door
shall connect the two units.
(d) The applicant shall establish a legally binding mechanism in a
form acceptable to the Township that will prohibit the use of
the accessory unit as a separate dwelling unit after the relative
no longer resides within the unit. Such mechanism shall also
be binding upon future owners.
(e) The owner of the property shall be required to annually renew
the permit for the use. Such renewal shall be conditioned upon
the owner proving that a relative of the occupants of the
principal dwelling unit continues to reside within the accessory
unit.
§ 285-43 WEAPONS § 285-43
278:581
(f) Such accessory unit shall not decrease the one-family
residential appearance of a one-family dwelling, as viewed
from exterior property lines. The accessory unit shall be
attached to the principal dwelling unit, except for a detached
modular cottage that is specifically approved by the Zoning
Hearing Board. If a detached modular cottage is placed on the
property, it shall be completely removed within 90 days after
the relative no longer lives within it. A detached dwelling shall
only be placed on the lot if it will meet principal building
setbacks and has a maximum building floor area of 900 square
feet.
(g) Additional parking for the accessory unit is not required if the
applicant proves that the resident(s) of the accessory unit will
not routinely operate a vehicle.
(h) Any on-lot septic system shall be recertified if the sewage flows
will increase.
(20) Accessory dwelling unit (ADU). [Added 5-9-2011 by Ord. No.
222]
(a) One ADU may be permitted per principal single-family
detached dwelling for use by a relative.
(b) The owner of the property must occupy either the principal
dwelling or the ADU as the owner's primary residence.
(c) Each year the owner of the property shall provide the Township
with a written statement in a form prepared by the Township,
together with the applicable fee, certifying compliance with
this section. In the event that the owner fails to comply with
this section, the owner shall be required to reconvert the ADU
into part of the principal dwelling unit or completely remove
the ADU.
(d) One additional off-street parking space shall be provided for
the ADU.
(e) An ADU must be contained in, or attached to, the principal
dwelling.
(f) The addition of an ADU shall be designed so that the
appearance of the building remains that of a single-family
detached dwelling. Any necessary additional entrances or exits
shall be located to the side or rear of the building.
(g) The maximum size of an ADU shall not exceed 40% of the
principal dwelling total floor area or more than 800 square
feet, whichever is less, nor have more than two bedrooms.
(h) Any on-lot sewage disposal system shall be certified by the
Sewage Enforcement Officer to meet all applicable
§ 285-43 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-43
278:582
requirements as a result of the inclusion or addition of the
ADU.
(i) The ADU permit shall be deemed to be automatically revoked if
the Zoning Officer determines that the owner of the property
no longer meets the requirements of this section, upon
vacation of the ADU or principal dwelling unit by the owner or
by the relatives, or if the property is sold.
(j) Upon sale of the property, the new owner shall apply for a
permit under this section and comply with the Zoning
Ordinance prior to permitting occupancy of the ADU. Failure to
comply with this section shall be a violation of the Zoning
Ordinance.
(k) The addition of an ADU to a single-family detached dwelling
shall conform to all other zoning and building code
requirements, unless modified herein.
(l) The owner of the property shall present evidence of recording
of an agreement between the owner and the Township, in a
form acceptable to the Township Solicitor, which sets forth that
the occupancy of the ADU is limited as set forth in this section.
(m) The following accessory dwelling units may be approved as a
conditional use in the A-Agricultural District, subject to the
following specific criteria, by the Board of Supervisors:
[1] An ADU the maximum size of which is not more than 60%
of the principal dwelling total floor area or 1,200 square
feet, whichever is less.
[2] The ADU shall be designed to maintain the architectural
design, style, appearance and character of the main
building as a single-family detached dwelling. If an ADU
extends beyond the current footprint or existing height of
the main building, such an addition must be consistent
with the existing facade, roof pitch, siding and windows.
[3] All other applicable standards for an ADU shall apply.
§ 285-43 WEAPONS § 285-43
278:583

ARTICLE V
Environmental Protection
§ 285-44. Erosion control.
The landowner, person and/or entity performing any earth disturbance shall
utilize sufficient measures to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation of
creeks.
§ 285-45. Nuisances and hazards to public safety.
§ 285-46. Wetlands.
See § 285-28.
§ 285-47. FP Floodplain District (flood-prone areas). [Amended
3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 239]
A. The disturbed land area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
B. Except for agricultural activities, any earth disturbance over 5,000
square feet of land area shall require the submission of an adequate
erosion and sedimentation control plan to the County Conservation
District.
C. See state erosion control regulations (Note: as of 2006, in 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102).
A. No landowner, tenant nor lessee shall use or allow to be used any land
or structures in a way that results or threatens to result in any of the
following conditions:
(1) Transmission of communicable disease, including conditions that
may encourage the breeding of insects or rodents.
(2) A physical hazard to the public, or a physical hazard that could be
an attractive nuisance that would be accessible by children.
(3) Pollution to groundwaters or surface waters, other than as
authorized by a state or federal permit.
(4) Risks to public health and safety, such as but not limited to
explosion, fire or biological hazards.
(5) Interference with the reasonable use and enjoyment of property by
a neighboring landowner of ordinary sensitivities.
B. Additional information. If the Zoning Officer has reason to believe that
the proposed use may have difficulty complying with the standards of
this article, then the Zoning Officer may require an applicant to provide
written descriptions of proposed machinery, hazardous substances,
operations and safeguards.
§ 285-44 WEAPONS § 285-47
278:585
A. Purpose and authorization.
(1) This section serves the following major purposes:
(a) Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the
Township.
(b) Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices
in order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
(c) Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply
and natural drainage.
(d) Reduce financial burdens imposed on the Township and its
residents by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
(e) Comply with federal and state floodplain management
requirements.
(2) The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the
passage of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
floodplain management regulations to promote public health,
safety, and the general welfare of its citizenry. The Board of
Supervisors has enacted this section in accordance with the Flood
Plain Management Act, the Second Class Township Code, and the
MPC.
B. FP Floodplain District applicability and administration.
(1) The regulations of the FP Floodplain District shall apply throughout
the entire Township as overlay zoning regulations that supplement
the zoning district regulations. Where the regulations of this
section differ from the regulations of any other section of this
chapter, the provision that is more restrictive on development shall
apply.
(a) The inclusion of construction and floodproofing standards in
this section shall not be interpreted to allow any structure or
construction that is not expressly authorized by this section. If
the Zoning Hearing Board grants a variance to allow a
structure or construction not authorized by this section, such
structure or construction shall comply with all construction
and floodproofing standards in this section unless the Zoning
Hearing Board also so grants a variance from a specific
construction or floodproofing standard.
(2) The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or
natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by
§ 285-47 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-47
278:586
debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside any
identified floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within such
areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the Township or any officer
or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
(3) This section supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may
be in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other
ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the
extent that those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any
conflict between any of the provisions of this chapter and
provisions of other ordinances, the more restrictive shall apply.
(4) The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce
this section and for all purposes shall be considered and may
sometimes be referred to as the Floodplain Administrator. The
Floodplain Administrator may fulfill the duties and responsibilities
set forth in these regulations, delegate duties and responsibilities
set forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan
examiners, inspectors, and other employees, or enter into a written
agreement or written contract with another agency or private
sector entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations.
Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity
shall not relieve the Township of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR
§ 59.22. In addition to the powers and duties generally set forth in
this chapter, when serving as Floodplain Administrator the Zoning
Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
(a) The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it
has been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken
will be in conformance with the requirements of this and all
other applicable codes and ordinances.
(b) Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application for the permit to
determine if all other necessary government permits required
by state and federal laws have been obtained, such as those
required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act
1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);
and the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
No permit shall be issued until this determination has been
made. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance
of any permit the Floodplain Administrator shall also review
the history of repairs to the subject building so that any
§ 285-47 WEAPONS § 285-47
278:587
repetitive loss concerns can be addressed before the permit is
issued.
(c) During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator
or other authorized official shall inspect the premises to
determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the
information provided on the permit application and with all
applicable Township ordinances. He/she shall make as many
inspections during and upon completion of the work as are
necessary.
(d) In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure,
premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to
enforce the provisions of this section.
(e) In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the
work does not comply with the permit application or any
applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false
statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the
Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the permit and report
such fact to the Board of Supervisors for whatever action it
considers necessary.
(f) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all
records associated with the requirements of this section
including, but not limited to, finished construction elevation
data, permitting, inspection and enforcement.
(g) The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for
submitting a biennial report to FEMA concerning Township
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(h) The responsibility, authority and means to implement the
commitments of the Floodplain Administrator can be
delegated, but the ultimate responsibility lies with the Zoning
Officer.
(i) The Floodplain Administrator shall consider UCC
requirements.
C. Floodplain compliance.
(1) No structure shall be used or located, relocated, constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered or land used except
in full compliance with these floodplain regulations and other
provisions of applicable Township ordinances. A Township zoning
permit is required for any development within the one-hundredyear
floodplain.
§ 285-47 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-47
278:588
(2) Any alteration to a waterway, drainage channel or the one-hundredyear
floodplain, including development, redirecting drainage ways,
changes in grade or filling in, shall only occur after a determination
by the Zoning Officer that all Township ordinances have been
complied with and after any needed state or federal permits are
received.
(3) Any municipality that will be affected by a change in an alteration
or relocation of a waterway shall be given prior notice of such
proposal, with copies of such notice provided to the DCED and
FEMA.
D. Permits for uses, structures and grading within the identified floodplain
area. Applications for such a permit shall be made, in writing to the
Zoning Officer.
(1) All permit applications shall include the following:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The name and address of the owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(c) The name and address of the contractor.
(d) The site location.
(e) A brief description of the proposed work and estimated costs.
(f) A site plan showing the exact size and location of the proposed
construction, as well as any existing buildings or structures,
and also showing the one-hundred-year flood line.
(g) A brief description of proposed work and estimate cost,
including a breakout of flood-related cost and the market value
of the building before the flood damage occurred where
appropriate.
(2) If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, permit applicants
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Zoning Officer to determine that:
(a) The proposal is consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all
other applicable codes and ordinances.
(b) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
§ 285-47 WEAPONS § 285-47
278:589
(d) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
(e) Building materials are flood-resistant.
(f) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been
used.
(g) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed
and/or located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
(3) Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any
other pertinent information as may be required by the Zoning
Officer to make the above determination:
(a) A completed permit application form.
(b) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn in at a scale
of one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the
following:
[1] North arrow, scale, and date.
[2] Topographic contour lines, if applicable.
[3] The location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, and other improvements, including the location
of any existing or proposed subdivision and development.
[4] The location of all existing streets, driveways and other
access ways.
[5] The location of any existing bodies of water or
watercourses, identified floodplain areas, and if available,
information pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of
water including direction and velocities.
(c) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
[1] The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed
building based upon North American Vertical Datum of
1988.
[2] The BFE.
[3] Supplemental information as may be necessary under the
UCC.
(d) The following data and documentation:
[1] If available, information concerning flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other
factors associated with a base flood.
§ 285-47 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-47
278:590
[2] Detailed information concerning any proposed
floodproofing measures and corresponding elevations.
[3] Documentation, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of
any proposed development within any identified floodplain
area, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not cause any increase in
the BFE.
[4] A document, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, which states that the proposed
construction or development has been adequately
designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces associated with the base flood elevation.
Such statement shall include a description of the type and
extent of flood proofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance within
§ 285-47Q(6), Storage, and § 285-47R, Development which
may endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in § 285-47Q(6) and § 285-47R
which are intended to be used, produced, stored or
otherwise maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in
§ 285-47R during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the DEP Planning Module for
Land Development.
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
DEP requirements to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
E. Review of permit applications by Conservation District. A copy of all
applications and plans for any proposed construction or development in
any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval shall be
submitted by the Zoning Officer to the Conservation District for review
and comment prior to the issuance of a permit. The recommendations of
the Conservation District shall be considered by the Zoning Officer for
possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
F. Review of permit applications by others. A copy of all plans and
applications for any proposed construction or development in any
identified floodplain area to be considered for approval may be
§ 285-47 WEAPONS § 285-47
278:591
submitted by the Zoning Officer to any other appropriate agencies and/
or individuals (e.g Planning Commission, Township Engineer, etc.) for
review and comment.
G. Changes to permits. After the issuance of a permit by the Zoning
Officer, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit
or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with
the application without the written consent or approval of the Zoning
Officer. Requests for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Zoning Officer for consideration.
H. Placards. In addition to the permit, the Zoning Officer shall issue a
placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the time
construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
permit, the dated of its issuance, and be signed by the Zoning Officer.
I. Start of construction.
(1) Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin
within 180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed
within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit or the
permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing,
by the Zoning Officer. Construction and/or development shall be
considered to have started with the preparation of land, land
clearing, grading, filling, excavation of basement, footings, piers,
or foundations, erection of temporary forms, the installation of
piling under the proposed subsurface footings, or the installation of
sewer, gas, and water pipes, or electrical or other service lines from
the street.
(2) Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is
submitted by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and
reasonable cause for the Zoning Officer to approve such a request.
J. Identification of FP Floodplain District.
(1) The FP Floodplain District is all those areas of West Lampeter
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, classified as special
flood hazard areas in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying FIRM dated April 5, 2016, and issued by FEMA, or
the most recent version thereof, including all digital data developed
as part of the FIS and FIRM.
(2) The above referenced FIS and FIRM, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments are hereby adopted by West Lampeter Township,
and declared to be a part of this section and the FP Floodplain
District.
K. Description and special Requirements of identified floodplain areas of
the FP Floodplain District.
(1) Floodway area.
§ 285-47 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-47
278:592
(a) Description. The area identified as floodway in the FIS and
FIRM which represents the channel of a watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation by more than one foot at any point.
This term shall also include floodway areas which have been
identified in other available studies or sources of information
for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(b) Special requirements.
[1] Any encroachment that would cause any increase in flood
heights shall be prohibited.
[2] No new construction or development shall be allowed,
unless a permit is obtained from the DEP Regional Office.
(2) Special flood hazard area.
(a) Description. The areas identified as Zones AE and A1-30 in the
FIS and FIRM which are subject to inundation by the onepercent-
annual chance flood event determined by detailed
methods and have BFEs shown.
(b) Special requirements.
[1] No new construction or development shall be located
within the area measured 50 feet landward from the topof-
bank of any watercourse, unless a permit is obtained
from the DEP Regional Office.
[2] In special flood hazard areas without a designated
floodway, no new development shall be permitted unless it
can be demonstrated that the cumulative effect of all past
and projected development will not increase the BFE by
more than one foot.
(c) Permitted by right uses.
[1] The following uses and no others are permitted by right in
the FP Floodplain District, and they are permitted only if
done under and in accordance with the provisions of the
State Clean Streams Law, as amended; rules and
regulations of DEP; § 285-47K(2)(c), § 285-47O, and
§ 285-47Q; and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter:
[a] Agriculture, horticulture and forestry, all excluding
any structures, and excluding any grading or filling
which would cause any increase in flood heights or
frequency.
§ 285-47 WEAPONS § 285-47
278:593
[b] Erosion and sedimentation control measures, facilities
and structures, provided no increase in flood heights
or frequency, unhealthful ponding or other unsanitary
conditions shall occur.
[c] Public and private recreational uses such as parks,
swimming areas (excluding swimming pools), play
areas, day camps, campgrounds (excluding camp
sites), picnic groves, lawns, gardens, golf courses,
driving ranges, archery ranges, game farms, areas or
clubs for hunting, fishing, and/or boating (including
marker or anchor buoys), paved bicycle paths, and
hiking and horseback riding trails, all excluding any
structures, and excluding any grading or filling which
would cause any increase in flood heights or
frequency.
[d] Harvesting of any wild crop, such as marsh hay, ferns,
moss, berries, tree fruits and seeds, or wild rice,
excluding any plants appearing on the latest edition of
the U.S. List of Endangered and Threatened Plant
Species maintained by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service.
[e] Activities related to the preservation of natural
amenities, including wildlife sanctuaries, nature
preserves, woodland preserves, botanical gardens, or
arboreta, excluding any structures and excluding any
grading or filling which would cause any increase in
flood heights or frequency.
[f] Stream improvements whose sole purpose is to
improve aquatic life habitat, and which are approved
by the Fish and Boat Commission and reviewed by the
Conservation District, and subject to the provisions of
§ 285-47Q.
[g] One- or two- or multiple-strand fences, so long as all
strands run in a horizontal direction.
[h] Picnic tables, park benches, fireplaces and grills, and
play-ground equipment, all if anchored to prevent
flotation.
[i] Blinds for the shooting or observation of wildlife,
provided that such blinds may only be placed, erected
and maintained during the open season established by
the Game Commission for the taking of migratory
waterfowl and the three weeks immediately preceding
and three weeks immediately following that open
season. Blinds must be removed during all other times
of the year.
§ 285-47 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-47
278:594
[j] Circuses, carnivals and similar transient enterprises,
provided that natural vegetative ground cover is not
destroyed, removed or covered in such a way as to
create erosion or sedimentation.
[k] Farm ponds which are constructed in accordance with
a conservation plan reviewed by the Conservation
District and which do not create any increase in flood
heights or frequency, and subject to the provisions of
§ 285-47Q.
[l] Floodproofing and flood hazard reduction structures
to protect only lawfully existing and registered
nonconforming structures and lawfully existing and
registered nonconforming uses within structures.
[m] Public utility facilities (except buildings) under the
exclusive jurisdiction of the Public Utility Commission
and specifically exempted from control by municipal
zoning ordinances, subject to the provisions of
§ 285-47Q.
[n] Marker buoys.
[o] Culverts, bridges, stormwater facilities, pump stations
and street and driveway crossings that have been
reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer.
[p] Utility lines, poles and manholes and water monitoring
devices.
(d) Special exception uses.
[1] If the following uses are listed as allowed permitted by
right or special exception uses in the applicable underlying
zoning district, then special exception approval shall also
be required to determine compliance with § 285-47.
[a] Parking lots, loading areas and driveways, if they are
consistent with the provisions of Subsection G, except
that parking lots designed or used for storage and
parking lots for hotels, motels and other transient
lodgings are prohibited.
[b] Water-oriented uses such as docks, piers, wharves and
boat-launching ramps.
[c] Fish hatcheries, including uncovered ponds and
raceways, which are approved by the Pennsylvania
Fish Commission, but excluding other structures.
[d] Other uses similar to the above, provided the use will
not reduce the cross-sectional area of the floodplain.
§ 285-47 WEAPONS § 285-47
278:595
(e) Prohibited uses.
[1] The following uses are prohibited in the FP Floodplain
District:
[a] All uses prohibited either expressly or implicitly in the
underlying zoning district for the land in question.
[b] All structures, with the exception of those specifically
allowed in § 285-47K(2)(c) and § 285-47K(2)(d).
[c] Sanitary landfills, dumps, junk and salvage yards, and
outdoor storage of vehicles and/or materials.
[d] Placing, depositing or dumping any spoil, fill or solid
waste, except such grading or filling necessary to
accomplish and carry out those uses permitted in
§ 285-47K(2)(c) and § 285-47K(2)(d); provided,
however, that no grading or filling is permitted which
would cause any increase in flood heights or
frequency.
[e] Removal of topsoil, excluding sod production and
nursery activities as allowed in § 285-47K(2)(c) and
§ 285-47K(2)(d), and excluding such grading or filling
necessary to accomplish and carry out those uses
which are permitted in § 285-47K(2)(c) and
§ 285-47K(2)(d); provided, however, that no grading or
filling is permitted which would cause any increase in
flood heights or frequency.
[f] Damming or relocation of any watercourse, except as
provided for in § 285-47K(2)(c) and § 285-47K(2)(d).
[g] Any parts of any on-site sewage disposal systems.
[h] Swimming pools.
[i] Fences, except horizontal strand fences.
[j] Stockpiling, storage or disposal of buoyant materials,
logging slash, herbicides, pesticides, domestic or
industrial waste, radioactive materials, petroleum or
other flammable materials, explosives, poisonous
materials, hazardous materials, or other materials
which, if flooded, would pollute the watercourse or be
injurious to human, animal or plant life.
[k] Cemeteries for humans or animals.
[l] Zoo, menagerie, wild animal farm or domestic or farm
animal enclosures which will not allow all animals to
escape floodwaters of maximum flood elevation
§ 285-47 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-47
278:596
without human intervention while remaining safely
confined.
[m] The floodproofing of new residential structures.
[n] Any development, structure or use which may,
whether alone or in combination with others, and
except where specifically authorized elsewhere in this
section:
[i] Endanger human life.
[ii] Obstruct, impede, retard, change or increase the
velocity, direction or flow of floodwaters.
[iii] Increase the surface elevation of floods or the
frequency of floods.
[iv] Catch or collect debris carried by floodwaters.
[v] Be placed where the natural flow of the stream or
floodwaters would carry it downstream to the
damage or detriment of property within or
adjacent to the FP Floodplain District.
[vi] Degrade the water-carrying capacity of any
watercourse, channel or floodplain.
[vii] Increase the rate of local runoff, erosion or
sedimentation.
[viii] Degrade the quality of surface water or the
quality or quantity of groundwater.
[ix] Be susceptible to flotation and subsequent
movement which would cause damage to other
property.
[x] Create unhealthful ponding or other unsanitary
conditions.
[xi] Not be in harmony with the intent and purpose of
this section, as set forth in § 285-47A.
[o] Feedlots.
[p] The construction, expansion or enlargement of any
structure or building associated with the following
uses:
[i] Hospitals.
[ii] Nursing homes.
[iii] Jails.
§ 285-47 WEAPONS § 285-47
278:597
[iv] Prisons.
[v] Mobile/manufactured home parks.
[q] Any new structure or building, or any expansion or
addition to an existing structure or building that will
be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances, or that
will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance
of a supply of any of the following substances in
quantities exceeding 550 gallons:
[i] Acetone.
[ii] Ammonia.
[iii] Benzene.
[iv] Calcium carbide.
[v] Carbon disulfide.
[vi] Celluloid.
[vii] Chlorine.
[viii] Hydrochloric acid.
[ix] Hydrocyanic acid.
[x] Magnesium.
[xi] Nitric acid and oxides or nitrogen.
[xii] Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
[xiii] Phosphorus.
[xiv] Potassium.
[xv] Sodium.
[xvi] Sulfur and sulfur products.
[xvii] Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and
rodenticides).
[xviii]Radioactive substances, insofar as such
substances are not otherwise regulated.
[r] Fully and partially enclosed space below the lowest
floor (including basement).
(3) Approximate floodplain area.
§ 285-47 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-47
278:598
(a) Description. The areas identified as Zone A in the FIS which
are subject to inundation by the one-percent-annual-chance
flood event determined using approximate methodologies.
Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed,
no BFEs or flood depths are shown.
(b) Special requirements.
[1] No new construction or development shall be located
within the area measured 50 feet landward from the topof-
bank of any watercourse, unless a permit is obtained
from the DEP Regional Office.
[2] When available, information from other federal, state, and
other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the
BFE, as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other
information is available, the BFE shall be determined by
using a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain
area which is nearest the construction site in question.
[3] In lieu of the above, the Township may require the
applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods
used correctly reflect currently accepted technical
concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Township.
(c) The provisions of § 285-47K(2)(c), (d), and (e), are applicable to
the approximate floodplain area.
L. Changes in identified floodplain area. The identified floodplain area
may be revised or modified by the Board of Supervisors where studies
or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the
need for such revision. However, prior to any such change, approval
must be obtained from the FEMA. As soon as practicable, but not later
than six months after the date such information becomes available, the
Township shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or
scientific data.
M. Boundary disputes. Should a dispute concerning any identified
floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be made by the
Zoning Officer and any party aggrieved by this decision or
determination may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. The burden of
proof shall be on the appellant.
N. Technical provisions.
(1) Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
§ 285-47 WEAPONS § 285-47
278:599
(a) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities
which may be affected by such action have been notified by the
Township, and until all required permits or approvals have
been first obtained from the DEP Regional Office. It is the
responsibility of the applicant to provide all required studies
and pay all fees.
(b) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the
activity will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
(c) FEMA and DCED shall be notified prior to any alteration or
relocation of any watercourse.
(2) Submit technical or scientific data to FEMA for a Letter of Map
Revision (LOMR) within six months of the completion of any new
construction, development, or other activity resulting in changes in
the BFE.
(3) Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed
within any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict
compliance with the provisions contained in this section and any
other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
O. Elevation and floodproofing requirements. Within any identified
floodplain area any new construction or substantial improvements
other than those expressly authorized by § 285-47K shall be prohibited.
If a variance is obtained for new construction or substantial
improvements in the identified floodplain area in accordance with
§ 285-47X, or a use is permitted by § 285-47K then the following
provisions shall apply:
(1) Residential structures.
(a) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or
substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation.
(b) In A Zones, where there are no BFEs specified on the FIRM,
any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 285.47K(3)(b)[2] and [3].
(c) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the UCC and ASCE 24 shall be utilized, where
they are more restrictive.
(2) Nonresidential structures.
§ 285-47 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-47
278:600
(a) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or
substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or
above, the regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and
constructed so that the space enclosed below the regulatory
flood elevation:
[1] Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
and
[2] Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy.
(b) In A Zones, where there are no BFEs specified on the FIRM,
any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 285-47K(3)(b)[2] and [3].
(c) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing
Regulations," published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(June 1972, as amended March 1992), or with some other
equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect which states
that the proposed design and methods of construction are in
conformance with the above referenced standards.
(d) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the UCC and ASCE 24 shall be utilized, where
they are more restrictive.
(3) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) which will be used solely for the parking of a
vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other
than a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow
for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose
of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term
"fully enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
(b) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
§ 285-47 WEAPONS § 285-47
278:601
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
P. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The accessory structure shall not be designed or used for human
habitation, but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the
storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the principal
use or activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 150 square feet.
(3) The accessory structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The accessory structure will be located on the site so as to cause
the least obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc. are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The accessory structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation or movement and shall be designed to automatically
provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 285-47 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-47
278:602
Q. Design and construction standards. Within any identified floodplain
area any new construction or substantial improvements other than
those expressly authorized by § 285-47K shall be prohibited. If a
variance is obtained for new construction or substantial improvements
in the identified floodplain area in accordance with § 285-47X or if a use
is authorized by § 285-47K, then the following minimum standards shall
apply for all construction and development proposed within any
identified floodplain area.
(1) Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points.
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted.
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling.
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet, unless
substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes are submitted to,
and approved by the Zoning Officer.
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
(2) Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of storm water runoff in a safe and efficient
manner. The system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and
provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall
also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto
adjacent properties.
(3) Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(a) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer
facilities and systems shall be located, designed and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the
infiltration of floodwaters.
(b) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(c) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with
all state and Township regulations for such systems. If any
such system is permitted, is shall be located so as to avoid
impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a flood.
(d) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
#348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damage and
§ 285-47 WEAPONS § 285-47
278:603
The International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be
utilized.
(4) Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
(5) Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
(6) Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life,
and not listed in § 285-47R, Development which may endanger
human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood
elevation and/or flood proofed to the maximum extent possible.
(7) Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
(8) Anchoring.
(a) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
(b) All air ducts, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
(9) Floors, walls and ceilings.
(a) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the
flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing
structural damage to the building.
(b) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(c) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed of materials that are waterresistant
and will withstand inundation.
(d) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the
regulatory flood elevations shall be made of metal or other
water-resistant material.
(10) Paints and adhesives.
(a) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
§ 285-47 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-47
278:604
(b) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(c) All wooden components (doors, trims, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other
finishing material.
(11) Electrical components.
(a) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the BFE.
(b) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
(12) Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and
ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility
equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory
flood elevation.
(13) Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
(14) Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications of the UCC shall apply to the above and other
sections and subsections of this section, to the extent that they are
more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of this
section.
R. Development which may endanger human life.
(1) In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,
and the regulations adopted by the DCED as required by the Act,
any new or substantially improved structure which: will be used for
the production or storage of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances; or will be used for any activity requiring
the maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other
comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances on the premises; or will involve the production, storage,
or use of any amount of radioactive substances, shall be subject to
the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(a) Acetone.
(b) Ammonia.
(c) Benzene.
§ 285-47 WEAPONS § 285-47
278:605
(d) Calcium carbide.
(e) Carbon disulfide.
(f) Celluloid.
(g) Chlorine.
(h) Hydrochloric acid.
(i) Hydrocyanic acid.
(j) Magnesium.
(k) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(l) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel, oil, etc.).
(m) Phosphorus.
(n) Potassium.
(o) Sodium.
(p) Sulfur and sulfur products.
(q) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides).
(r) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
(2) Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
§ 285-47R(1) shall be prohibited.
(3) Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved structure of the kind described in
§ 285-47R(1) shall be:
(a) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above BFE.
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood. Any such structure, or part
thereof, that will be built below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
standards for completely dry floodproofing contained in the
publication. "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992), or with some
other equivalent watertight standard.
(4) Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in § 285-47R(1) shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the topof-
bank of any watercourse.
§ 285-47 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-47
278:606
S. Special Requirements for subdivisions. All subdivision proposals and
development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres,
whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas where BFE data are not
available, shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
analyses that determine base flood elevations and floodway
information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map
revision or letter of map revision. Submittal requirements and
processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
T. Special requirements for manufactured homes and recreational
vehicles. Within any identified floodplain area any manufactured homes
or recreational vehicles shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained for
erection of manufactured homes or placement of recreational vehicles
in the identified floodplain area in accordance with § 285-47X, then the
following provisions shall apply:
(1) Within any floodway, manufactured homes and recreational
vehicles shall be prohibited.
(2) Within approximate floodplain or special flood hazard area,
manufactured homes shall be prohibited within the area measured
50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any new watercourse.
(3) Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(a) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(b) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
at least 1 1/2 feet above BFE.
(c) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
(4) Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance
with the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the International
Residential Building Code adopted as part of the UCC or the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development's Permanent
Foundations for Manufactured Housing, 1984 Edition, or latest
revision thereto shall apply.
(5) Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
UCC where appropriate and/or applicable to units where the
manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided or
were not established for the units(s) proposed installation.
(6) Within approximate floodplain or special flood hazard area,
recreational vehicles in must either.
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully
licensed and ready for highway use, or
§ 285-47 WEAPONS § 285-47
278:607
(b) Meet all of the requirements for manufactured homes in
§ 285-47T(2), (3), (4) and (5).
U. Prohibitions. In accordance with the administrative regulations
promulgated by the DCED to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act, the following activities shall be prohibited within any
identified floodplain area.
(1) The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(a) Hospitals.
(b) Nursing homes.
(c) Jails or prison.
(2) The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
V. Existing structures. The provisions of this section do not require any
changes or improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures.
However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the
provisions of § 285-47W shall apply. Historic structures as defined in
this section undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a
substantial improvement as also defined in this section must comply
with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a
specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from
the National Register of Historic Places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior. An exemption from ordinance requirements
will be the minimum necessary to preserve historic character and
design of the structure.
W. Improvements. The following provisions shall apply whenever any
improvement is made to an existing structure located within any
identified floodplain area:
(1) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any floodway are that would cause any increase in
the elevation of the BFE.
(2) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any special flood hazard area that would, together
with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the
BFE more than one foot at any point.
(3) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of
any kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or
more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial
§ 285-47 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-47
278:608
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with
the provisions of this section.
(4) The above activity shall also address the requirements of the UCC.
(5) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than
50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to
the greatest extent possible.
(6) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
section.
X. Variances.
(1) If compliance with any of the requirements of this section would
result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder,
developer or landowner, the Zoning Hearing Board may, upon
request, grant relief from the strict application of the
requirements.
(2) Requests for variances shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with the procedures contained in § 285-11 of
this chapter and the following:
(a) No variance shall be granted for any construction,
development, use or activity within any floodway that would
cause any increase in the BFE.
(b) No variance shall be granted for any construction,
development, use, or activity within any special flood hazard
area that would, together with all other existing and
anticipated development, increase the BFE than one foot at
any point.
(c) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood
elevation requirement involved, no variance shall be granted
for any of the other requirements pertaining specifically to
development which may endanger human life.
(d) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(e) Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it
considers necessary in order to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this
section.
(f) Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall notify the applicant in writing that:
§ 285-47 WEAPONS § 285-47
278:609
[1] The granting of the variance may result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance.
[2] Such variance may increase the risks to life and property.
(g) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall consider at a minimum, the following:
[1] That there is good and sufficient cause.
[2] That failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
[3] That the granting of the variance will:
[a] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited
increase in flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, or extraordinary public expense.
[b] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or
local ordinances and regulations.
(h) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions
shall be maintained by the Township. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to the FEMA.
(i) Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall
be designed and constructed so as to have the capability of
resisting the one-percent-annual-chance flood.
Y. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases use in
this section shall be interpreted so as to give this section its most
reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE or USE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the one-hundredyear
flood).
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a
base flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually
expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the FIRM
for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or greater chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground
level on all sides.
§ 285-47 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-47
278:610
BUILDING — A combination of materials forming a permanent
structure and which has walls and a roof. This term shall include
manufactured homes and trailers used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction,
reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings
or other structures, the placement of manufactured homes, streets
and other paving, utilities, filling, grading and excavation, mining,
dredging, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and
the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction or
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by the Township.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are
to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the FEMA or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to
the Township.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by
the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the
FIRM, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject
to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream,
river or watercourse and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot.
§ 285-47 WEAPONS § 285-47
278:611
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC RESOURCE — Any building, structure, site, object or district
that is included on the National Register of Historic Places, individually
or as a contributing resource in a National Register Historic District.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area,
including any basement. An unfinished flood-resistant partially
enclosed area used solely for the parking of vehicles, building access
and incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not
considered the lowest floor of a building, provided that such space
is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this section.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A type of single-family detached dwelling
that meets all of the following requirements:
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISON — A parcel or
contiguous parcels of land which has been so designated and improved
that it contains two or more mobile/manufactured home lots for the
placement thereon of mobile/manufactured homes.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of these floodplain regulations
that were adopted by the Township, and includes any subsequent
improvements thereto. Any construction started after April 17, 1978,
and before the effective date of these floodplain regulations is subject
to the regulations in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided
the start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by the Township.
It is transportable in a single piece, or two substantial pieces
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for towing;
(1)
(2) It is designed for permanent occupancy;
It arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations;
(3)
It may be constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
(4)
(5) It is not a recreation vehicle.
§ 285-47 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-47
278:612
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile
abutment, projection, excavation, channel, culvert, fence, stockpile,
refuse, fill, structure or other matter in, along, across or projecting
into any channel, watercourse or flood-prone area, which may impede,
retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either by itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or is placed where
the flow of the water may carry the matter downstream to threaten life
and property.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis; not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest
horizontal projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light-duty truck; and not designed for use as a permanent
dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping,
travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The BFE or estimated flood
height as determined using simplified methods plus a freeboard safety
factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure
on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on an average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
other proposed new development and means the date the permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation;
or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/
or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of
the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first, alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
§ 285-47 WEAPONS § 285-47
278:613
§ 285-48. Noise.
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — A subdivision as defined in the MPC.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss, regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not include either any
project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the Township code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building
code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable
to new construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the
municipality, a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry.
Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the UCC adopted
the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building
Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction standard applicable with
the state floodplain construction. For coordination purposes, references
to the above are made specifically to various sections of the IRC and
IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the Township's floodplain management regulations.
A structure or other development without the elevation certificate,
other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
§ 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e) (2), (e) (4), (e) (5) is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
A. No principal or accessory use, or operations or activities on its lot, shall
generate a sound level exceeding the limits established in the table
below, when measured at the specified locations:
§ 285-47 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-48
278:614
Sound Level Limits by Receiving Land Use/District
Land Use or Zoning
District Receiving the
Noise Hours/Days
Maximum
Sound Level
1. At a lot line of a
residential use in a
residential district
1) 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
other than Sundays,
Christmas Day, Thanksgiving
Day, New Year's Day, Labor
Day and Memorial Day
1) 57 dBA
2) 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. plus
all of the following days:
Sundays, Christmas,
Thanksgiving, New Year's
Day, Easter Sunday, Labor
Day and Memorial Day
2) 52 dBA
2. Lot line of a
residential use in a
commercial, industrial
or agricultural district
1) Same as above 1) 62 dBA
2) Same as above 2) 57 dBA
3. Any lot line other
than "1" or "2" above
All times and days 70 dBA
Note: dBA means "A" weighted decibel.
B. The maximum permissible sound level limits set forth in the above table
shall not apply to any of the following noise sources:
(1) Sound needed to alert people about an emergency.
(2) Repair or installation of utilities or construction of structures,
sidewalks or streets between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.,
except for clearly emergency repairs which are not restricted by
time.
(3) Lawn mowers, snowblowers, leaf blowers, and household power
tools between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(4) Agricultural activities, including permitted raising of livestock, but
not exempting a commercial kennel.
(5) Public celebrations specifically authorized by the Township
Supervisors or a county, school district, state or federal
government agency or body.
(6) Unamplified human voices.
(7) Routine ringing of bells and chimes by a place of worship or
municipal clock.
§ 285-48 WEAPONS § 285-48
278:615
§ 285-49. Odors and dust.
No use shall generate odors or dust that are offensive to persons of average
sensitivities beyond the boundaries of the subject lot, except for odor and
dust nuisances that are allowed for normal farming operations under the
state's Right to Farm Act.
§ 285-50. Control of light and glare.
This § 285-50 shall only regulate exterior lighting that spills across lot lines
or onto public streets.
(8) Vehicles operating on a public street, railroads and aircraft.
(9) Snow making within a commercial or resort district.
(10) Festivals and similar special events within a commercial or
industrial district that involve a total maximum of 20 days per
calendar year per lot.
A. Streetlighting exempted. This § 285-50 shall not apply to streetlighting
that is owned, financed or maintained by the Township or the state or
an individual porch light of a dwelling (not including a spotlight).
B. Height of lights. No luminaire, spotlight or other light source that is
within 200 feet of a lot line of an existing dwelling or approved
residential lot shall be placed at a height exceeding 35 feet above the
average surrounding ground level. This limitation shall not apply to
lights needed for air safety nor lights intended solely to illuminate an
architectural feature of a building, nor lighting of outdoor public
recreation facilities or a ski resort.
C. Diffused. All light sources, including signs, shall be properly diffused as
needed with a translucent or similar cover to prevent exposed bulbs
from being directly visible from streets, public sidewalks, dwellings or
adjacent lots.
D. Shielding. All light sources, including signs, shall be shielded around
the light source and carefully directed and placed to prevent the
lighting from creating a nuisance to reasonable persons in adjacent
dwellings, and to prevent the lighting from shining into the eyes of
passing motorists.
E. Flickering. Flashing, flickering or strobe lighting are prohibited, except
for nonadvertising seasonal lights between October 25 and January 10.
F. Spillover. Exterior lighting on an institutional, commercial or industrial
property shall not cause a spillover of light onto a residential lot that
exceeds 0.5 horizontal footcandle at a distance 20 feet inside the
residential lot line.
G. Gasoline sales canopies. All light fixtures under the canopy shall be
recessed into the canopy or screened by an extension around the
§ 285-48 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-50
278:616
bottom of the canopy so that lighting elements are not visible from
another lot or street.
H. Horizontal surface lighting. For the lighting of predominantly horizontal
surfaces, such as but not limited to parking areas, streets, driveways,
pedestrian walkways, outdoor sales and storage areas, vehicle-fueling
facilities, vehicle sales areas, loading docks, recreational areas and
building entrances, fixtures shall be aimed downward and shall meet
the standards for a full-cutoff light fixture. A full-cutoff light fixture shall
be a fixture in which no light is emitted at or above a horizontal plane
drawn through the bottom of the fixture and no more than 10% of the
lamp's intensity is emitted at or above an angle 10° below that
horizontal plane at all lateral angles around the fixture. Fixtures with an
aggregate-rated lamp lumen output per fixture that does not exceed the
rated output of a standard one-hundred-watt incandescent lamp are
exempt from the requirements of this subsection.
I. Nonhorizontal lighting. For lighting of predominantly nonhorizontal
surfaces, such as but not limited to facades, signs and displays, fixtures
shall be fully shielded and shall be installed and aimed so as to not
project their output into the windows of neighboring residences,
adjacent uses, past the object being illuminated, skyward or onto a
public roadway. Fixtures with an aggregate-rated lamp lumen output
per fixture that does not exceed the rated output of a standard onehundred-
watt incandescent lamp are exempt from the requirements of
this subsection.
(1) However, lighting shall be allowed of the United States flag from
dusk to dawn, provided the light source shall have a beam spread
no greater than necessary to illuminate the flag.
§ 285-50 WEAPONS § 285-50
278:617

ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 285-51. Required number of parking spaces.
§ 285-52. General regulations for off-street parking.
A. Overall requirements.
(1) Number of spaces. Each use that is newly developed, enlarged,
significantly changed in type of use or increased in number of
establishments shall provide and maintain off-street parking spaces
in accordance with the Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements129
and the regulations of this article.
(2) Uses not listed. Uses not specifically listed in the Table of Off-Street
Parking Requirements shall comply with the requirements for the
most similar use listed in the table, unless the applicant proves to
the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that an alternative standard
should be used for that use.
(3) Multiple uses. Where a proposed lot contains or includes more than
one type of use, the number of parking spaces required shall be the
sum of the parking requirements for each separate use.
(4) Parking landscaping. See §§ 285-65 and 285-66 of this chapter.
A. General. Parking spaces and accessways shall be laid out to result in
safe and orderly use, and to fully take into account all of the following:
vehicular access onto and off the site, vehicular movement within the
site, loading areas, pedestrian patterns and any drive-through facilities.
No parking area shall cause a safety hazard or impediment to traffic off
the lot.
B. Existing parking.
(1) Any parking spaces serving such preexisting structures or uses at
the time of adoption of this chapter shall not in the future be
reduced in number below the number required by this chapter.
(2) If a new principal nonresidential building is constructed on a lot,
then any existing parking on such lot that serves such building shall
be reconfigured to comply with this chapter, including but not
limited to requirements for channelization of traffic from adjacent
streets, channelization of traffic within the lot, minimum aisle
widths, paving and landscaping.
C. Change in use or expansion. A structure or use in existence at the
effective date of this chapter that expands or changes in use an existing
principal building shall be required to provide all of the required
129. Editor's Note: The Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements is included at the end of this
article.
§ 285-51 WEAPONS § 285-52
278:619
parking for the entire size and type of the resulting use, except as
follows:
(1) If an existing lawful use includes less parking than would be
required if the use would be newly developed, then that deficit of
parking shall be grandfathered for reuses of an existing building.
For example, an existing store might include three parking spaces
and would have been required to provide six spaces if it was newly
developed. Therefore, there is an existing nonconforming deficit of
four spaces. Then, if that store is converted to an office that would
need 10 spaces, the office would need to provide a total of six
spaces (10 spaces minus the preexisting deficit of four equals six).
(2) If a nonresidential use expands by an aggregate total maximum of
5% in the applicable measurement (such as building floor area)
beyond what existed at the time of adoption of this chapter, then no
additional parking is required. For example, if an existing building
included 3,000 square feet, and a single minor addition of 150
square feet was proposed, then additional parking would not be
required. This addition without providing new parking shall only be
allowed one time per lot.
D. Continuing obligation of parking and loading spaces. All required
numbers of parking spaces and off-street loading spaces shall be
available as long as the use or building which the spaces serve still
exist, and such spaces shall not be reduced in number below the
minimum required by this chapter. No required parking area or offstreet
loading spaces shall be used for any other use (such as storage or
display of materials) that interferes with the area's availability for
parking.
E. Location of parking.
(1) Required off-street parking spaces shall be on the same lot or
abutting lot with the principal use served, unless the applicant
proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board as a special
exception that a method of providing the spaces is guaranteed to be
available during all of the years the use is in operation within 300
feet walking distance from the entrance of the principal use being
served. Such distance may be increased to 500 feet for employee
parking of a nonresidential use. A written and signed lease shall be
provided, if applicable.
(a) The Zoning Hearing Board may require that the use be
approved for a period of time consistent with the lease of the
parking, and that a renewal of the permit shall only be
approved if the parking lease is renewed.
F. Reduction of parking requirements as a special exception.
§ 285-52 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-52
278:620
(1) Purposes: to minimize the amount of land covered by paving, while
making sure adequate parking is provided; to recognize that
unique circumstances may justify a reduction in parking.
(2) As a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may authorize a
reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces required to be
provided for a use if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Hearing Board that a lesser number of spaces would be
sufficient.
(a) The applicant shall provide evidence justifying the proposed
reduced number of spaces, such as studies of similar
developments during their peak hours. The applicant shall also
provide relevant data, such as numbers of employers, peak
expected number of customers/visitors and similar data.
(b) Under this section, an applicant may prove that a reduced
number of parking spaces is justified because more than one
principal use will share the same parking. In such case, the
applicant shall prove that the parking has been designed to
encourage shared use and that long-term agreements ensure
that the parking will continue to be shared. The amount of the
reduction in parking should be determined based upon
whether the different uses have different hours of peak
demand and/or overlapping customers.
[1] In addition, an applicant may prove that parking needs will
be reduced or that off-site parking is feasible because the
applicant agrees to make a long-term commitment to a
shuttle service for residents or employees.
(c) Reserved area for additional parking. Under this section, the
Zoning Hearing Board may require that a portion of the
required parking be met through a reservation of an area for
future parking. The Board may require the reservation for a
certain number of years or an indefinite period corresponding
to the years the buildings are in use.
[1] Such reservation shall be in a form acceptable to the
Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor that legally binds current
and future owners of the land to keep the reserved parking
area in open space and then to provide the additional
parking if the Township determines it is necessary. A deed
restriction is recommended.
[2] If approved under this Subsection F(2)(c), the applicant
shall present a site plan to the Zoning Officer that shows
the layout that will be used for the additional parking if the
parking is required to be provided in the future. The site
plan shall show that the additional parking is integrated
with the overall traffic access and pedestrian access for
§ 285-52 WEAPONS § 285-52
278:621
§ 285-53. Design standards for off-street parking.
the site and that the additional parking will be able to meet
Township requirements.
[3] The additional parking that is reserved under this
subsection shall be required to be kept as landscaped open
area until such time as the Zoning Hearing Board decision
may authorize the land's release from the restriction or
until the Township may require that the land be developed
as parking.
[4] The Zoning Officer shall periodically review the sufficiency
of the parking that is provided. If the Zoning Officer in the
future determines that the reserved parking is needed to
meet actual demand, he/she shall provide written notice to
the property owner. The property owner shall then have
one year to develop the reserved area into off-street
parking in compliance with this chapter.
A. General requirements.
(1) Backing onto a street. No parking area shall be designed to require
or encourage parked vehicles to back into a public street in order
to leave a parking space, except for a single-family or two-family
dwelling with its access onto a local street or parking court.
Parking spaces may back onto an alley.
(2) Every required parking space shall be designed so that each motor
vehicle may proceed to and from the parking space provided for it
without requiring the moving of any other vehicle, unless
specifically permitted otherwise.
(3) Parking areas shall not be within a required buffer yard or street
right-of-way.
(4) Separation from street. Except for parking spaces immediately in
front of individual dwellings, all areas for off-street parking, offstreet
loading and unloading and the storage or movement of motor
vehicles shall be physically separated from the street by a
continuous grass or landscaped planting strip, except for necessary
and approved vehicle entrances and exits to the lot.
(5) Stacking and obstructions. Each lot shall provide adequate area
upon the lot to prevent backup of vehicles on a public street while
awaiting entry to the lot or while waiting for service at a drivethrough
facility.
B. Size and marking of parking spaces.
§ 285-52 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-53
278:622
(1) Each parking space shall be a rectangle with a minimum width of
nine feet and a minimum length of 18 feet, except the minimumsized
rectangle shall be eight feet by 22 feet for parallel parking.
(2) For handicapped spaces, see Subsection F below.
(3) All spaces shall be marked to indicate their location, except those
of a one- or two-family dwelling.
C. Aisles.
(1) Each aisle providing for one-way traffic to access parking stalls
shall have the following minimum mso-element-frame width:
Angle of Parking
(degrees)
Minimum Aisle Width
(feet)
Parallel or 30 12
45 14
60 18
90 20
(2) Each aisle providing access to stalls for two-way traffic shall be a
minimum of 22 feet in width, except a width of 20 feet may be
allowed for parking areas with spaces that are parallel or involve
an angle of parking of 45° or less.
D. Accessways and driveways.
(1) Width of driveway/accessway at entrance onto a public street, at
the edge of the cartway:*
1-Way Use 2-Way Use
Minimum 12 feet * 25 feet *
Maximum 20 feet * 30 feet *
* Unless a different standard is required by PennDOT for an
entrance to a state road or the applicant proves to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that a wider width is needed
for tractor-trailer trucks.
(2) Drainage. Adequate provisions shall be made to maintain
uninterrupted parallel drainage along a public street at the point of
driveway entry. The Township may require an applicant to install an
appropriate type and size of pipe at a driveway crossing.
(3) Residential driveways: see § 285-70. [Added 12-10-2007 by Ord.
No. 202]
E. Paving, grading and drainage.
§ 285-53 WEAPONS § 285-53
278:623
(1) Parking and loading facilities, including driveways, shall be graded
and adequately drained to prevent erosion or excessive water flow
across streets or adjoining properties.
(2) Except for landscaped areas, all portions of required parking,
loading facilities and driveways shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete, paving block or other low-dust materials preapproved by
the Township.
(a) However, by special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may
allow parking areas with low or seasonal usage to be
maintained in stone, grass or other suitable surfaces. For
example, the Board may allow parking spaces to be grass,
while major aisles are covered by stone.
(b) If the design and material are found acceptable by the
Township Engineer, portions of parking areas may be covered
with a low-dust porous parking surface that is designed to
promote groundwater recharge. This might include porous
asphalt or pervious concrete placed over open graded gravel
and crushed stone. Porous parking surfaces shall not be
allowed in areas routinely used by heavy trucks.
(c) Curbing should not be required in parking areas except where
absolutely necessary to control stormwater runoff.
F. Lighting of parking areas. See "light and glare control" in Article V.130
G. Parking for persons with disabilities/handicapped parking.
(1) Number of spaces. Any lot including four or more off-street parking
spaces shall include a minimum of one handicapped space. The
following number of handicapped spaces shall be provided, unless
a different number of spaces is officially required under the Federal
Americans With Disabilities Act:
Total No. of
Parking Spaces on
the Lot
Required Minimum No./Percentage of
Handicapped Parking Spaces
4 to 15 1
16 to 40 2
41 to 65 3
66 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
130. Editor's Note: See § 285-50.
§ 285-53 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-53
278:624
Total No. of
Parking Spaces on
the Lot
Required Minimum No./Percentage of
Handicapped Parking Spaces
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of required number of spaces
1,001 or more 20 plus 1% of required number of spaces
over 1,000
(2) Location. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located where they
would result in the shortest reasonable accessible distance to a
handicapped-accessible building entrance. Curb cuts shall be
provided as needed to provide access from the handicapped
spaces.
(3) Minimum size. Each required handicapped parking space shall be
eight feet by 18 feet. In addition, each space shall be adjacent to a
five feet wide access aisle. Such access aisle may be shared by two
handicapped spaces by being placed between them. However, one
out of every eight required handicapped parking spaces shall have
an adjacent access aisle of eight-foot width instead of five feet.
(4) Slope. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located in areas of less
than 2% slope in any direction.
(5) Marking. All required handicapped spaces shall be well-marked by
clearly visible signs and by pavement markings. Such signs and
markings shall be maintained over time. Blue paint is
recommended. The amount of the fine for violations shall be noted
on signs that are visible to persons parking in the space.
(6) Paving. Handicapped parking spaces and adjacent areas needed to
access them with a wheelchair shall be covered with a smooth
surface that is usable with a wheelchair.
H. Paved area setbacks (including off-street parking setbacks).
(1) Intent. To ensure that parked or moving vehicles within a lot do not
obstruct sight distance or interfere with pedestrian traffic, to aid in
stormwater management along streets and to prevent vehicles
from entering or exiting a lot other than at approved driveways.
(2) Any new or expanded paved area serving a principal nonresidential
use shall be separated from a public street by a planting strip. The
planting strip shall have a minimum width of 15 feet and be
maintained in grass or other attractive vegetative ground cover. At
least 10 feet of the planting strip shall be outside of the existing
street right-of-way. This fifteen-foot width shall be increased to 20
feet for a lot including 100 to 250 parking spaces and to 25 feet for
a lot including more than 250 parking spaces.
§ 285-53 WEAPONS § 285-53
278:625
§ 285-54. Off-street loading.
(a) The planting strip shall not include heights or locations of
plants that would obstruct safe sight distances but may include
deciduous trees that motorists can view under the leaf canopy.
(b) The planting strip may be placed inward from the shoulder of
an uncurbed street or inward from the curb of a curbed street.
The planting strip may overlap the street right-of-way, provided
it does not conflict with PennDOT requirements, and provided
that the Township and PennDOT, as applicable, maintain the
right to replace planting areas within the right-of-way with
future street improvements.
(c) Township-approved sidewalks, recreation paths and
approximately perpendicular driveway crossings may be
placed within the planting strip. Mostly vegetative stormwater
channels may be placed within the planting strip.
(d) The following shall be prohibited within the planting strip:
[1] Paving, except as allowed by Subsection H(2)(c) above,
and except for street widenings that may occur after the
development is completed;
[2] Fences; and
[3] Parking, storage or display of vehicles or items for sale or
rent.
(e) Where feasible, where a sidewalk is not installed, this setback
should include an unobstructed generally level width running
parallel to a street that is suitable for a person to walk.
(3) See landscaping requirements in §§ 285-65 and 285-66.
I. Parking set back from buildings. Parking spaces serving principal
nonresidential buildings and apartment buildings shall be located a
minimum of 10 feet from any principal building wall, unless a larger
distance is required by another provision. This distance shall not apply
at vehicle entrances into or under a building.
J. Speed bumps. Speed bumps, speed tables and similar raised areas to
reduce speeds shall be allowed on private streets and parking areas,
provided the raised area is maintained in a highly visible color or
pavement markings and a sign warns motorists of the raised pavement.
A. Each use shall provide off-street loading facilities, which meet the
requirements of this section, sufficient to accommodate the maximum
demand generated by the use and the maximum size vehicle in a
manner that will not routinely obstruct traffic on a public street and
traffic entering and exiting the lot. If no other reasonable alternative is
feasible, traffic may be obstructed for occasional loading and unloading
§ 285-53 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-54
278:626
§ 285-55. Fire lanes and access.
along an alley, provided traffic has the ability to use another method of
access.
B. At the time of review under this chapter, the applicant shall provide
evidence to the Zoning Officer on whether the use will have sufficient
numbers and sizes of loading facilities. The Planning Commission and/
or Board of Supervisors may provide advice to the Zoning Officer on
this matter as part of any plan review by such boards. For the purposes
of this section, the words "loading" and "unloading" are used
interchangeably.
C. Each space and the needed maneuvering room shall not intrude into
approved buffer areas and landscaped areas.
A. Fire lanes shall be provided where required by state or federal
regulations or other local ordinances.
B. Access shall also be provided so that fire equipment can reach all sides
of principal nonresidential buildings and multifamily/apartment
buildings. This access shall be able to support a loaded fire pumper
truck but shall not necessarily be paved.
C. The specific locations of fire lanes and fire equipment access are
subject to approval by the Township, after review by local fire officials.
TABLE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
USE
NUMBER OF OFF-STREET
PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
PLUS 1 OFF-STREET
PARKING SPACE FOR
EACH
A. RESIDENTIAL USES: 2 per dwelling unit.
1. Dwelling Unit, other than
types listed separately in this
table.
If a vehicle must be moved from
one space in order to access the
second space, then an additional
parking space shall be available for
each dwelling unit, such as an onstreet
space in front of the dwelling
or an overflow parking lot. Offstreet
parking spaces shall be
located outside of the street rightof-
way.
2. Single-family detached
dwelling with an accessory
apartment within a
Neighborhood Development
A combined total of 3 spaces for the
2 dwelling units. Each space shall
be designed to allow each vehicle
to be moved without first moving
another vehicle.
3. Home Occupation See § 285-43
§ 285-54 WEAPONS § 285-55
278:627
TABLE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
USE
NUMBER OF OFF-STREET
PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
PLUS 1 OFF-STREET
PARKING SPACE FOR
EACH
4. Housing Permanently
Restricted to Persons 62 Years
and Older and/or the
Physically Handicapped
1 per dwelling/rental unit, except
0.4 per dwelling/rental unit if
evidence is presented that the nonphysically
handicapped persons will
clearly primarily be over 70 years
old
Nonresident employee
5. Boardinghouse 1 per rental unit or bed for adult,
whichever is greater
Nonresident employee
6. Group Home 1 per 2 residents, unless the
applicant proves the home will be
limited to persons who will not be
allowed to drive a vehicle from the
property
Employee
B. INSTITUTIONAL USES:
1. Place of Worship or Church 1 per 5 seats in room of largest
capacity. For pews that are no
individual seats, each 48 inches
shall count as one seat.
Employee
2. Hospital 1 per 3 beds 1.2 employees
3. Nursing Home 1 per 5 beds 1.1 employees
4. Assisted Living Facility and/
or Retirement Community
1 per 4 beds, plus 1.5 for each
individual dwelling unit
1.1 employees
5. Day-Care Center 1 per 10 children, with spaces
designed for safe and convenient
dropoff and pickup
1.1 employees
6. School, Primary or
Secondary
1 per 4 students aged 16 or older 1.1 employees
7. Utility Facility 1 per vehicle routinely needed to
service facility
8. College or University 1 per 1.5 students not living on
campus who attend class at peak
times (plus required spaces for oncampus
housing)
1.1 employees
9. Library, Community Center
or Cultural Center or Museum
1 per 5 seats (or 1 per 250 square
feet of floor area accessible to
patrons and/or users if seats are
not typically provided)
1.1 employees
§ 285-55 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-55
278:628
TABLE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
USE
NUMBER OF OFF-STREET
PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
PLUS 1 OFF-STREET
PARKING SPACE FOR
EACH
10. Treatment Center 1 per 2 residents aged 16 years or
older plus 1 per nonresident
intended to be treated on-site at
peak times
Nonresident employee
11. Swimming Pool,
Nonhousehold
1 per 50 square feet of water
surface, other than wading pools
1.1 employees
C. COMMERCIAL USES: All commercial uses, as applicable,
shall provide additional parking or
storage needed for maximum
number of vehicles stored,
displayed or based at the lot at any
point in time. These additional
spaces are not required to meet the
stall size and parking aisle width
requirements of this chapter
1. Auto Service Station or
Repair Garage
5 per repair/ service bay and 1/4
per fuel nozzle, with such spaces
separated from accessways to
pumps
Employee; plus any
parking needed for a
convenience store under
"retail sales"
2. Auto, Boat, Recreational
Vehicle or Manufactured Home
Sales
1 per 15 vehicles, boats, RVs or
homes displayed
Employee
3. Bed-and-Breakfast Use 1 per rental unit plus the 2 per
dwelling unit
Nonresident employee
4. Bowling Alley 2 per lane plus 2 per pool table 1.1 employees
5. Car Wash Adequate waiting and drying areas 1.1 employees
6. Financial Institution
(includes bank)
1 per 200 square feet of floor area
accessible to customers, plus
"office" parking for any
administrative offices
1.1 employees
7. Funeral Home 1 per 5 seats in rooms intended to
be in use at one time for visitors,
counting both permanent and
temporary seating
Employee
8. Miniature Golf 1 per hole 1.1 employees
9. Haircutting/Hairstyling 1 per customer seat used for
haircutting, hair styling, hair
washing, manicuring or similar
work
1.1 employees
§ 285-55 WEAPONS § 285-55
278:629
TABLE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
USE
NUMBER OF OFF-STREET
PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
PLUS 1 OFF-STREET
PARKING SPACE FOR
EACH
10. Hotel or Motel 1 per rental unit plus 1 per 4 seats
in any meeting room (plus any
required by any restaurant)
1.1 employees
11. Laundromat 1 per 3 washing machines On-site employee
12. Offices or clinic, medical/
dental
5 per physician or physician's
assistant and 4 per dentist
1.1 employees
13. Offices, other than above 1 per 300 square feet of total floor
area
14. Personal Service Use,
other than haircutting/
hairstyling (minimum of 2 per
establishment)
1 per 200 square feet of floor area
accessible to customers
1.1 employees
15. Indoor Recreation (other
than bowling alley),
Membership Club or Exercise
Club
1 per 4 persons of maximum
capacity of all facilities
1.1 employees
16. Outdoor Recreation (other
than uses specifically listed in
this table)
1 per 4 persons of capacity (50%
may be on grass overflow areas
with major driveways in gravel)
1.1 employees
17. Restaurant 1 per 4 seats, or 3 spaces for a use
without customer seats. This
parking shall be calculated
separately from a shopping center.
1.1 employees
18. Retail Sales (other than
types separately listed and
other than a shopping center)
1 per 200 square feet of floor area
of rooms accessible to customers
19. Retail Sales of Only
Furniture, Lumber, Carpeting,
Bedding or Floor Covering
1 per 400 square feet of floor area
of rooms accessible to customers
20. Shopping Center involving
5 or more retail
establishments on a lot
1 per 200 square feet of total floor
area, after deleting common areas
that are shared among various uses
and that do not involve any retail
sales
21. Tavern or Nightclub or
After-hours Club
1 per 30 square feet of total floor
area
1.1 employees
§ 285-55 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-55
278:630
TABLE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
USE
NUMBER OF OFF-STREET
PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
PLUS 1 OFF-STREET
PARKING SPACE FOR
EACH
22. Theater or Auditorium 1 per 4 seats, 1/2 of which may be
met by convenient parking shared
with other business uses on the
same lot that are typically not
routinely open beyond 9:00 p.m.
1.1 employees
23. Trade/Hobby School 1 per 2 students on site during
peak use
1.1 employees
24. Veterinarian Office 4 per veterinarian 1.1 employees
D. INDUSTRIAL USES: In addition to parking or storage
needed for maximum number of
vehicles stored, displayed or based
at the lot at any point in time,
which spaces are not required to
meet the stall size and aisle width
requirements of this ordinance
1. All industrial uses
(including warehousing,
distribution and
manufacturing)
1 per 1.1 employees, based upon
the maximum number of employees
on site at peak period of times
1 visitor space for every 10
managers on the site
2. Self-Storage Development 1 per 20 storage units 1.1 employees
§ 285-55 WEAPONS § 285-55
278:631

ARTICLE VII
Signs
§ 285-56. Sign purposes.
§ 285-57. Sign definitions.
A. In addition to serving the overall purposes of this chapter, this article is
intended:
(1) To provide for signs as a means of effective visual communication.
(2) To promote adopted comprehensive planning and zoning
objectives.
(3) To assure compatibility of signs with land uses and buildings in the
vicinity of the signs and in the community as a whole.
(4) To improve the safety of pedestrians, vehicular traffic and property.
(5) To enhance the economic value of the community.
(6) To enhance the aesthetic environment.
(7) To minimize adverse effects of signs on nearby property.
(8) To otherwise promote the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the community.
(9) To regulate the use of signs through a sign permitting process.
(10) To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign
regulations.
A. The following definitions of "sign" and kinds of signs shall apply to those
terms whenever they appear in this article.
SIGN — A device for visual communication that is used to bring the
subject to the attention of the public.
Signs do include lettering, logos, trademarks or other symbols that
are an integral part of the architectural design of a building, that
are applied to a building or that are located elsewhere on the
premises; signs affixed to windows or glass doors or otherwise
internally mounted such that they are obviously intended to be
seen and understood by vehicular or pedestrian traffic outside the
building; flags and insignia of civic, charitable, religious, fraternal,
patriotic or similar organizations; insignia of governments or
government agencies; banners, streamers, pennants, spinners,
reflectors, ribbons, tinsel and similar materials; and inflatable
objects.
(1)
Signs do not include the following: architectural features that may
be identified with a particular business; backlit awnings that
(2)
§ 285-56 WEAPONS § 285-57
278:633
BILLBOARD — An off-premises sign that has a sign area greater than
six square feet.
BUILDING SIGN — A sign attached to or painted on a building or
attached to an awning that is attached to a building. This term includes
wall signs and roof signs. A window sign shall also be regulated as
a building sign, except as provided in the definition of "window sign"
below.
BUSINESS SIGN — A sign that directs attention to any business,
professional, commercial or industrial activity occurring on the
premises on which the sign is located, but not including a home
occupation sign. (Also see "center sign.")
CENTER SIGN — A business sign that provides identification at the
entrance to a center such as a shopping center, office complex or
industrial park.
CONTRACTOR SIGN — A temporary sign that carries the name and
information about a contractor who is involved in construction work
occurring on the premises on which the sign is located.
DEVELOPMENT SIGN (RESIDENTIAL) — An identification sign at the
entrance to a residential development.
ELECTION SIGN — A type of "issue sign" that directs attention to a
candidate or candidates for public office, a political party or a ballot
issue.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign not attached to or painted on a
building, or a sign attached to or painted on a building that has no use
in addition to supporting the sign.
GARAGE/YARD SALE SIGN — A temporary sign that directs attention to
the sale of personal goods on the premises on which the sign is located.
GOVERNMENT SIGN — An off-premises sign placed by a governmental
unit, such as a traffic, directional, informational or street name sign, or
an historical marker.
HOME OCCUPATION SIGN — A sign providing information about a
business activity conducted within a dwelling unit on the premises on
which the sign is located.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign used to identify the name and display
information about the individual, organization, agency, institution,
facility or development located on the premises on which the sign is
located but not including a business sign. (Also see "development sign"
and "public use sign.")
include no lettering, logos or other symbols; signs within a building
that are not readable from outside of the building; flags of
governments or government agencies; decorative seasonal and
holiday banners on residential properties; and displays of
merchandise either behind store windows or outdoors. See also
§ 285-59A(36).
§ 285-57 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-57
278:634
INCIDENTAL SIGN — An informational sign, no more than two square
feet in size, that carries a message such as "enter," "open," "telephone,"
"rest rooms," "no parking," "no trespassing," "warning," a listing of
hours when open, an on-site direction, or anything similar. Incidental
signs may not include any commercial message or logo, except that one
"enter" sign per entrance may include a logo or business name, as long
as the entrance is exclusively for that business and the logo or business
name is subordinate to the word "enter."
ISSUE SIGN — A temporary sign that directs attention to a candidate(s)
for elective office or to an opinion of a public or private nature, such
as but not limited to a community, social, religious, judicial, political
or ballot issue . A sign including commercial advertising shall not be
considered an issue sign. If such type of sign exceeds the maximum size
for an issue sign, then it shall be regulated as a billboard.
LOT — When used in this Article VII, the word "lot" shall mean a
designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit: such as the area used by a dwelling unit in a townhouse
structure or a tenant space in a multiple tenant building.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION SIGN — An off-premises sign displaying
information about a church, service club or other organization that does
not operate for the purpose of making a profit.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign that advertises a service, product,
activity, business or activity that is not offered or located on the lot upon
which the sign is located. A political, election or issue-oriented sign that
exceeds the size limits for an issue sign shall also be regulated as an
off-premises sign. See also "billboard," which is a type of off-premises
sign.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign that applies to the property on which it
is displayed.
OPEN HOUSE SIGN — A temporary sign that provides information
about a real estate open house, including the words "open house," the
day and time of the open house, and the name of the realtor.
OVERHEAD SIGN — A sign located such that pedestrian or vehicular
traffic might pass beneath any part of it.
PERMANENT SIGN — A sign intended to be displayed for an unlimited
period of time.
PUBLIC USE SIGN — An identification sign used to identify the name
and display information about a public use, such as a government
building, school, park, firehouse or church.
PUBLIC UTILITY SIGN — Signs that are necessary for a sewage
service, water supply, land-line telephone or electricity provider to post
in the performance of their responsibilities, such as warning signs and
utility pole identification numbers.
§ 285-57 WEAPONS § 285-57
278:635
§ 285-58. Sign area and height.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary sign that provides information
about a real estate activity on the premises on which the sign is located,
such as a sign advertising a sale, rental or property available for or in
the process of development, but not including an open house sign.
ROOF SIGN — A sign attached to or painted on a roof.
SIDEWALK SIGN — A temporary sign placed on the sidewalk adjacent
to the commercial activity it advertises, but not including a contractor
sign, a garage/yard sale sign, a home occupation sign, an open house
sign, a real estate sign or a special event sign.
SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — A temporary sign that carries information
about a special event, such as an auction, flea market, festival, carnival,
meal or fund-raising event that benefits a charity, place of worship,
school, fire company or similar nonprofit organization. This term shall
not include any business sign, such as a "sale" sign at a store.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign that is displayed for no more than three
months in any year, including consecutively from year to year, unless
stated otherwise in this chapter.
WALL SIGN — A sign attached to or painted on the wall of a building.
WINDOW DISPLAY — An exhibit behind a window that is intended to
draw attention to a product, service, business or cause.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign of more than one square foot that is attached
to a window or visible through a window. A temporary window sign
made of paper on a commercial building is not regulated by this
chapter. Any other window sign shall be regulated as a building sign.
A. Sign area. The area of a sign shall be the area of the smallest rectangle,
triangle or circle that will encompass all elements of the sign, such as
letters, figures, symbols, designs or other display.
(1) When the sign is a separate unit, the area shall include any borders,
framing, trim, decorative attachments, background and space
between elements; it shall not include any supporting structure
unless that structure is illuminated, is in the form of a symbol, or
contains advertising elements.
(2) When the sign is applied to a wall or otherwise has no definable
edges, the area shall include all color, artwork or other means used
to differentiate the sign from the surface upon which it is placed.
(3) When a single sign structure has more than one face with the same
message, and no two sign faces are more than three feet apart at
any point, the area shall be computed by determining the greatest
total area of all sign faces visible from any single location.
B. Sign height. The height of a sign shall be measured from the average
ground level beneath the sign to the highest point of the sign. The
§ 285-57 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-58
278:636
§ 285-59. General sign regulations.
ground level shall be the lower of the ground level existing at the
time of construction or the ground level existing prior to construction
and prior to any earth disturbance at the site. This prior ground level
may be established by any reliable source, including without limitation
existing topographic maps, aerial photographs, photographs of the site
or affidavits of people who are personally familiar with the site. No
person(s) shall artificially increase the maximum height of a sign by
altering the grade at the base of the sign by any means.
(1) No sign shall be higher than the height limitation of the district in
which it is located.
(2) The height of freestanding signs shall be controlled by the
regulations in Sign Tables 1 and 2.131
(3) Wall signs may be at any height on the wall to which they are
attached, except that they may not extend higher than the top of
the wall.
(4) Roof signs may extend no more than five feet above the lowest
point where they are attached to the building and may not extend
above the highest point of the roof.
A. The following regulations shall apply to all signs, in addition to the
specific regulations contained in the following provisions of this article.
Where the general regulations are contradicted by a specific
regulation, the specific regulation shall control:
(1) All signs shall reflect the general character of the neighborhood.
(2) All signs shall be constructed of durable materials, maintained in
good condition, and secured in a safe manner.
(3) When a sign becomes unsafe, the Zoning Officer shall give written
notice to the owner of the premises on which the sign is located
that the sign must be made safe or removed immediately.
(4) The areas surrounding all signs shall be maintained in a neat, clean
and attractive condition.
(5) All signs shall be removed within three months if the purpose for
which they were erected no longer exists.
(6) Each property that displays one or more permanent freestanding
signs and that is in an area where street addresses have been
assigned must prominently display the address on one permanent
freestanding sign visible from the street. The address must include
the street number; the street name is optional. The address must
be of a size and design that is easily identifiable and legible from
131. Editor's Note: The Sign Tables are included at the end of this article.
§ 285-58 WEAPONS § 285-59
278:637
moving traffic in the street at a distance of 100 feet (such as threeinches-
high lettering/numerals with a three-fourth-inch stroke).
The area taken up by the address does not count as part of the sign
area. Center signs are exempt from this requirement.
(7) No temporary signs shall be permitted except as authorized
elsewhere in this article.
(8) No sign shall be located within a street right-of-way, except a
government sign, a public utility sign or an allowed sidewalk sign.
(9) No sign within the clear sight triangle should obstruct vision
between the heights of three feet and 10 feet above the elevation of
the center line of the street.
(10)No signs shall be painted, pasted, nailed, stapled or otherwise
attached to utility poles, trees or fire hydrants, except for
government signs, and except that public utility signs may be
attached to utility poles, and except that "no trespassing" and "no
hunting" signs may be attached to trees in a manner that does not
harm the tree.
(11) Any freestanding sign within a one-hundred-year floodplain shall
be designed with a single post and an elevated sign face so as not to
inhibit floodwaters or catch debris in floodwaters.
(12)No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct any door, stairway,
window, fire escape, sidewalk or other means of egress or ingress.
(13)No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct ventilation or light from a
building.
(14)No overhead sign shall have a clearance of less than eight feet
between any pedestrian walk and the lowest part of the sign and
less than 17.5 feet between any roadway/accessway and the lowest
part of the sign.
(15)No sign that is parallel to and attached to the face of a building
shall project more than 18 inches over a public sidewalk.
(16)No sign that is perpendicular to and attached to the face of a
building shall project more than 48 inches from the building.
(17)No sign shall have lights or other illuminating devices that
constitute a public safety or traffic hazard.
(18)No sign shall be permitted that imitates or that might be confused
with an official traffic sign or signal, such as by containing the
words "stop" or "danger" or by including red, green or yellow
lights.
(19)No sign or window display shall include a revolving beam or beacon
of light resembling an emergency vehicle or facility.
§ 285-59 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-59
278:638
(20)No sign shall advertise activities or products that are illegal under
federal, state, or Township laws or regulations.
(21)No sign shall include statements, words or pictures that are
considered to be vulgar, obscene or pornographic.
(22)No streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel,
balloons of greater than 50 cubic feet, or similar materials shall be
displayed outside a building. (See "special event sign" in Sign Table
2132 for regulations that apply to banners used as special events
signs.)
(23) Flags. In addition to any other allowed signage, each commercial
or industrial property may display one flag not to exceed 35 square
feet with a company or corporate identification logo for a business
on the premises or that announces that a business is "open." See
also the definition of "sign," which exempts certain types of flags.
(24)No animated, sequential, intermittent, flashing, rotating, or
oscillating signs shall be permitted except for time and
temperature signs.
(25) No sign shall emit smoke, visible vapors, particles, sound or odor.
(26)No sign shall be placed on a motor vehicle or trailer if the vehicle/
trailer is being used primarily for displaying such sign.
(27) No inflatable signs shall be permitted.
(28)No open flames shall be permitted as part of a sign or in any other
way to attract attention.
(29) Advertising painted upon or displayed upon a barn or other
structure shall be considered a sign and shall comply with the
regulations of this article.
(30) Any sign that has been authenticated as historically significant and
accurate for its specific location, whether original or a replica, may
be exempted from the regulations of this article as a special
exception.
(31) Signs may be interior lighted with nonglaring lights; signs may be
externally lighted by lights that are shielded so there is no direct
light transmitted to other properties or public rights-of-way.
(32) The light from any illuminated sign shall not adversely affect: a)
safe vision of operators of vehicles moving on public or private
streets or parking areas; b) any residential district; or c) any part of
a building or property used for residential purposes. Lighting of
signs shall also meet the light and glare control requirements of
Article V.
132. Editor's Note: Sign Table 2 is included at the end of this article.
§ 285-59 WEAPONS § 285-59
278:639
§ 285-60. Regulations for specific types of signs.
Sign Tables 1 and 2133 provide regulations for specific kinds of signs in each
zoning district. Sign Table 1 provides regulations for permanent signs; Sign
Table 2 provides regulations for temporary signs. Types of signs that are not
provided for in Sign Table 1 or 2 or anywhere else in this article shall not be
allowed.
§ 285-61. Sign permit procedures and fees.
Permits for the placement of signs are required as indicated in Sign Tables 1
and 2. Sign permit application requirements, such as forms, plans and fees,
shall be established by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 285-62. Nonconforming signs.
(33)No lighting shall be permitted to outline buildings or structures or
parts thereof through the use of neon lighting, strings of lights, or
other means with the exception of customary holiday decorations,
which may be installed between October 30 and January 10.
(34) Business signs that are not within commercial and industrial
districts shall not be illuminated when the business is closed.
(35) All electrically illuminated signs shall comply with the electrical
code that is currently in effect in West Lampeter Township.
(36) Signs that are not readable from any street and from any lot line
are not regulated by this chapter in number or in sign area,
provided such signs meet the following requirements: they have a
maximum height of eight feet for a freestanding sign; they are not
taller than the attached building for a building sign; and they have
a maximum sign area of 20 square feet, except a maximum of 40
square feet shall be allowed for an outdoor menu board for a drivethrough
of a restaurant. This exemption shall not apply to signs in a
shopping center, other than a menu board for a drive-through
restaurant.
A. Nonconforming signs may continue to be displayed, as long as there is
compliance with the following limitations and conditions:
(1) There may be no expansion or increase in the nonconformity in any
way. This provision includes but is not limited to billboards.
(2) Maintenance and repair of the sign are permitted; if necessary, up
to 50% of the entire area of a sign and its supporting structure may
be replaced in the event of damage; any such replacement must be
completed within six months of the damage occurring.
133. Editor's Note: Sign Tables 1 and 2 are included at the end of this article.
§ 285-59 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-62
278:640
(3) The sign must be brought into conformity if, for a period of at least
three months, the message has no longer applied to an activity on
the premises (this does not apply to billboards that are actively
offered for rent). However, if a vacant business space is actively
being offered for sale or lease, and the sign is intended to be reused
by the future business, then the sign may continue in place,
provided the sign is changed to a blank sign face within 60 days.
SIGN TABLE 1A - REGULATIONS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS
(All signs listed in this Table 1 shall be required to have a Township sign permit,
except “Incidential Signs.”)
Freestanding Signs
(For Setbacks - See Note 5) Building Signs
Type Of Sign
Zoning
District
Maximum
Permitted
Number of
Signs
Maximum
Permitted
Sign Area Per
Sign
(See Note 2)
Maximum
Permitted
Height
Maximum
Permitted
Number of
Signs
Maximum
Permitted
Total Sign
Area
a) Business
sign (except
Center Signs
that are
provided for
below)
Identification
sign (except
Development
Signs and
Public Use
Signs) (For
Home
Occupation
Sign - See
Note 4)
a) OSR, RR,
R-1, R-2, R-3
and VR
a) 1 per lot a) 2 square
feet except 12
square feet for
a principal
nonresidential
use. See also
"Public Use
Signs" for
schools and
places of
worship.
Freestanding
signs in these
districts shall
not be
internally
illuminated
a) 6 feet a) 2 per lot a) 2 square
feet, except
20 square feet
for a principal
nonresidential
use per
building side
up to 2 sides
of a building
b) Same as a) b) A b) 1 per lot b) 8 square
feet
b) 6 feet b) 2 per lot b) 8 square
feet
§ 285-62 WEAPONS § 285-62
278:641
SIGN TABLE 1A - REGULATIONS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS
(All signs listed in this Table 1 shall be required to have a Township sign permit,
except “Incidential Signs.”)
Freestanding Signs
(For Setbacks - See Note 5) Building Signs
Type Of Sign
Zoning
District
Maximum
Permitted
Number of
Signs
Maximum
Permitted
Sign Area Per
Sign
(See Note 2)
Maximum
Permitted
Height
Maximum
Permitted
Number of
Signs
Maximum
Permitted
Total Sign
Area
c) Same as a) c) MS, MSL,
OTR, and CN
c) 1 per
street
frontage
per lot. On
a lot with
multiple
uses,
individual
freestanding
signs shall
not be
allowed for
each use.
See Note 2
c) 40 square
feet
c) 12
square feet
c) 3 per
establishment,
per
building side
c) 1.5 square
feet per linear
foot of facade
to which sign
is attached,
up to a
maximum of
200 square
feet of
signage per
lot. Also see
Note 3. See
Note 1 for
projecting
signs
d) Same as a) d) CH and I/
M
d) Same as
c)
d) See Note 2 d) 20 feet d) 3 per
building side,
per
establishment
d) Same as c)
NOTES:
1 In the MS, MSL or NC District, up to 10 square feet of the allowed building sign area
may be used for a sign that projects outward perpendicular to the front of the building.
Such sign shall project a maximum of four feet from the side of the building and shall
not be internally illuminated. See Note 5 below, which provides an exception from the
setback from the right-of-way. A projecting sign face shall have an appearance similar
to relief-cut wood or a fabric banner hung from a post. See minimum clearance in
§ 285-59A(14). See also Sidewalk Signs in Table 2.
2 The area permitted on each street frontage is 40 square feet for street frontage up
to 80 feet, plus 1 square foot per two feet of street frontage over 80 feet, up to a
maximum of 80 square feet. If a lot includes 10 or more separate establishments, then
a maximum sign area of 100 square feet shall be allowed on each street frontage, if the
additional sign area is used to identify the various establishments.
§ 285-62 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-62
278:642
NOTES:
3 The length of the facade of an irregularly shaped building (such as a circular building,
an "S" shaped building, or a building with one or more inserts on the side in question)
is the straight-line distance between the two ends of the building. In any case, each
principal commercial establishment shall be allowed a minimum building sign area of
30 square feet. The Township may require a business in a multitenant building with a
rear service door to include an identification sign on that door, to assist fire fighters
and delivery persons.
4 A home occupation sign shall be limited to the following information: name, an
address, telephone number, an occupation or activity, and a logo or trademark; there
may be no internal or spotlit illumination, except that a sign for a medical office or
emergency service may be externally illuminated when the business is open. The sign
shall have a maximum sign area of two square feet on a maximum of two sides. The
sign shall have a maximum height of six feet. The sign may be attached to a building,
a mailbox, a light post or a freestanding post. [Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No.
202]
5 For all of the signs listed in Table 1, a ten-foot minimum setback shall apply from the
legal street right-of-way, except that no setback from the right-of-way is required if the
existing principal building has a front setback of less than 12 feet.
§ 285-62 WEAPONS § 285-62
278:643
SIGN TABLE 1B - REGULATIONS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS (continued)
(All signs listed in this Table 1 shall be required to have a Township sign permit,
except “Incidential Signs.”)
Type of Sign
Maximum
Permitted
Number of
Such Signs
Maximum
Permitted
Sign Area
for Each
Sign
Maximum
Permitted
Height for
Freestanding
Signs
Minimum
Required
Setback
From Street
Right-of-Way
for
Freestanding
Signs Other Requirements
Billboard -
shall only be
allowed in the
I/M and CH
Districts
See "Other
Requirements"
300 square
feet per
surface,
whether or
not messages
are the same
25 feet 30 feet A billboard structure
shall have a maximum of
two surfaces. The
second surface shall
only be allowed if the
surfaces are back-toback
or at an angle of
less than 45°. The
minimum setback shall
be 15 feet or the
minimum building
setback line, whichever
is greater, from property
lines other than street.
Each billboard structure
must be at 1,000 feet
from any other billboard
and at least 300 feet
from any residential or
RR district or a public
park or occupied
principal dwelling
Bus Shelter
Signs
A sign attached to a bus
shelter shall only be
allowed in conformance
with the Bus Shelter
regulations in
§ 285-43D(4)
§ 285-62 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-62
278:644
SIGN TABLE 1B - REGULATIONS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS (continued)
(All signs listed in this Table 1 shall be required to have a Township sign permit,
except “Incidential Signs.”)
Type of Sign
Maximum
Permitted
Number of
Such Signs
Maximum
Permitted
Sign Area
for Each
Sign
Maximum
Permitted
Height for
Freestanding
Signs
Minimum
Required
Setback
From Street
Right-of-Way
for
Freestanding
Signs Other Requirements
Center Sign
(Business)
For each
center, 1 per
principal
entrance, up
to maximum
of 2, except
there may be
more than 2 if
all entrances
are at least
1,200 feet
apart
20 square feet
in OSR, A, RR,
R-1, R-2, R-3
and RV
Districts; 80
square feet in
all other
districts
6 feet in
OSR, A, RR,
R-1, R-2, R-3
and RV
Districts; 20
feet in all
other
districts
10 feet Center signs are allowed
only for centers such as
shopping centers, office
complexes, and
industrial parks which
meet at least two of the
following three
minimums: (1) 5 units;
(2) 20,000 square feet of
building area; and (3) 5
acres of land
Development
Sign
(Residential)
For each
residential
development,
1 per
principal
entrance, up
to maximum
of 2 entrances
20 square feet 6 feet in
OSR, A, RR,
R-1, R-2, R-3
and RV
Districts, 20
feet in all
other
districts
10 feet Development signs are
allowed only for
residential
developments. They may
include only the name of
the development and
may not include any
commercial advertising.
Such signs shall not be
internally illuminated.
Such sign may be
attached to a decorative
masonry wall with a
maximum height of 6
feet and a maximum
length of 8 feet,
provided that the sign
does not obstruct the
sight distance triangle
Government
Sign
These signs may be placed within street rights-of-way. These signs are not regulated
by Article VII, Signs.
§ 285-62 WEAPONS § 285-62
278:645
SIGN TABLE 1B - REGULATIONS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS (continued)
(All signs listed in this Table 1 shall be required to have a Township sign permit,
except “Incidential Signs.”)
Type of Sign
Maximum
Permitted
Number of
Such Signs
Maximum
Permitted
Sign Area
for Each
Sign
Maximum
Permitted
Height for
Freestanding
Signs
Minimum
Required
Setback
From Street
Right-of-Way
for
Freestanding
Signs Other Requirements
Incidental Sign Maximum of 5
per
establishment
per street
frontage
2 square feet 6 feet 10 feet,
except no
setback is
required if
sign is no
more than 30
inches high
Nonprofit
Organization
Sign
As approved
by the Board
of Supervisors
4 square feet 6 feet Not
applicable
The location shall be
approved by the Board
of Supervisors. The
location may be
approved in street
rights-of-way or
designated entrances to
the community or on
common display panels.
If the sign will not be
within the right-of-way,
then permission shall be
obtained from the
landowner
Public Use
Sign (such as
for a place of
worship or
primary or
secondary
school)
1 building
sign per lot
and 1
freestanding
sign per
principal
entrance
40 square feet 6 feet in
OSR, A, RR,
R-1, R-2, R-3,
and RV
Districts; 10
feet in all
other
districts
10 feet
§ 285-62 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-62
278:646
SIGN TABLE 2 - REGULATIONS FOR TEMPORARY SIGNS
(Sign permits are not required for the signs listed in this Table 2.)
Kind of
Sign
Permitted
Time for
Display
Maximum
Permitted
Number
of Such
Signs
Maximum
Permitted
Sign Area
(per sign)
Maximum
Permitted
Height
for
Freestanding
Signs
Minimum
Required
Setback
From Street
Right-of-Way
for
Freestanding
Signs
Other
Requirements
Contractor
Sign
During
construction
that is
actively
occurring on
site
1 per
contractor
or
financing
provider
per lot
6 square feet.
If one sign is
used for
multiple
contractors,
then the
maximum
sign area
shall be an
average of 6
square feet
per
contractor, up
to a maximum
of 24 square
feet
6 feet See "Other
Requirements"
Must be set back
at least 10 feet
from cartway or at
building face,
whichever is less;
may not be in side
yard setback. May
not be
illuminated. Not
permitted off
premises.
A contractor sign
may be combined
with another
permitted sign
onto the same
structure, such as
a real estate sign.
In such case, the
sign area
permitted on the
structure for each
type of sign may
be added together.
Garage/Yard
Sale Sign
(includes
sign for
auction of
private
property)
From 48
hours before
sale to end of
day of sale or
auction
1 on-site
and 1 offsite
sign
per
dwelling
unit having
the sale/
auction
6 square feet 6 feet 10 feet Also see Note 1
§ 285-62 WEAPONS § 285-62
278:647
SIGN TABLE 2 - REGULATIONS FOR TEMPORARY SIGNS
(Sign permits are not required for the signs listed in this Table 2.)
Kind of
Sign
Permitted
Time for
Display
Maximum
Permitted
Number
of Such
Signs
Maximum
Permitted
Sign Area
(per sign)
Maximum
Permitted
Height
for
Freestanding
Signs
Minimum
Required
Setback
From Street
Right-of-Way
for
Freestanding
Signs
Other
Requirements
Issue Sign
(includes
political
election
signs for
candidates)
Any sign that
relates to an
election, vote
or
referendum
shall be
removed
within 7 days
after such
event
2 sign
faces per
candidate
or issue
per lot or
dwelling
unit, per
street
frontage.
32 square feet
in MS, MSL,
CN, CH, I/M
and OTR
Districts; 6
square feet in
other districts
10 feet in
MS, MSL,
CN, CH, I/
M and
OTR
Districts;
6 feet in
other
districts
10 feet See Note 2.
If a lot includes
more than 250
feet of street
frontage, then one
additional sign
face per candidate
or issue shall be
allowed for each
additional 250
feet of street
frontage
Open House
Sign
From 5 days
before open
house to 2
hours after
open house.
Display may
not exceed 6
days per
month per
lot
Maximum
1 on
premises;
maximum
1 off
premises;
for a
subdivision
of new
homes,
open
house
signs shall
be limited
to a
maximum
total of 2
signs per
subdivision
6 square feet 6 feet in
OSR, A,
RR, R-1,
R-2, R-3,
and RV
Districts;
10 feet in
all other
districts
Not
applicable
Must include the
words "Open
House" and day
and time of open
house. Open
house must be
attended by the
seller or the
seller's
representative
during entire
advertised time of
open house. Must
not interfere with
pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
Also see Note 1
§ 285-62 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-62
278:648
SIGN TABLE 2 - REGULATIONS FOR TEMPORARY SIGNS
(Sign permits are not required for the signs listed in this Table 2.)
Kind of
Sign
Permitted
Time for
Display
Maximum
Permitted
Number
of Such
Signs
Maximum
Permitted
Sign Area
(per sign)
Maximum
Permitted
Height
for
Freestanding
Signs
Minimum
Required
Setback
From Street
Right-of-Way
for
Freestanding
Signs
Other
Requirements
Real Estate
Sign (in OSR,
A, RR, R-1,
R-2, R-3 and
RV Districts)
While offered
for sale,
auction or
rent, until
five days
after
settlement of
sale or
occupancy of
rental space
or end of
auction
1 per
street
frontage,
up to 2 per
lot
6 square feet 6 feet 10 feet Not permitted offpremises.
Also see
Note 1. Such sign
shall not be
illuminated
Real Estate
Sign (in all
districts
other than in
the
preceding
row)
While offered
for sale or
rent, until 5
days after
settlement of
sale or
occupancy of
rental space
or end of
auction
1 per
street
frontage,
up to 2 per
lot
32 square feet 10 feet 10 feet Not permitted offpremises.
Also see
Note 1. Such sign
shall not be
illuminated
§ 285-62 WEAPONS § 285-62
278:649
SIGN TABLE 2 - REGULATIONS FOR TEMPORARY SIGNS
(Sign permits are not required for the signs listed in this Table 2.)
Kind of
Sign
Permitted
Time for
Display
Maximum
Permitted
Number
of Such
Signs
Maximum
Permitted
Sign Area
(per sign)
Maximum
Permitted
Height
for
Freestanding
Signs
Minimum
Required
Setback
From Street
Right-of-Way
for
Freestanding
Signs
Other
Requirements
Sidewalk
Sign
May only be
displayed
during hours
when the
business is
open to the
public
1 per
street
frontage,
up to 2 per
lot
See "Other
Requirements"
See
"Other
Requirements"
Not
applicable
Shall not be more
than 24 inches
wide and 48
inches high if
placed next to
curb; if placed
next to buildings
having
obstructions, such
as steps, shall not
be more than 42
inches wide and
72 inches high.
The distance
between sidewalk
signs shall be at
least 15 feet. A
minimum of 4 feet
of unobstructed
walkway shall be
maintained. A
sidewalk sign
shall only be
allowed in the MS
and MSL Districts
or in front of a
commercial use in
a Neighborhood
Design Option
Development.
Such sign shall
not be internally
lit. A sidewalk
sign may only be
placed in front of
the building of
principal
commercial use.
§ 285-62 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-62
278:650
SIGN TABLE 2 - REGULATIONS FOR TEMPORARY SIGNS
(Sign permits are not required for the signs listed in this Table 2.)
Kind of
Sign
Permitted
Time for
Display
Maximum
Permitted
Number
of Such
Signs
Maximum
Permitted
Sign Area
(per sign)
Maximum
Permitted
Height
for
Freestanding
Signs
Minimum
Required
Setback
From Street
Right-of-Way
for
Freestanding
Signs
Other
Requirements
Only one sign
shall be allowed
per business
Special
Event Sign
(may include
a banner)
From 21
days before
event to 5
days after
event, up to
a maximum
total of 45
days. See
also "Other
Requirements"
1 per lot
per event;
maximum
10 offpremises
signs per
event
16 square feet
if on
premises; 6
square feet if
off premises
6 feet 10 feet Off-premises
special event
signs shall only be
allowed for events
to benefit a
charity, nonprofit,
or public service.
Off-premises
special events are
only allowed along
an arterial or
collector street
and shall need
permission of the
property owner.
Also see Note 1.
However, an onpremises
sign
advertising an
allowed
commercial
auction (not
involving a single
household) may
be displayed a
maximum of 21
days before and
one day after the
auction
§ 285-62 WEAPONS § 285-62
278:651
SIGN TABLE 2 - REGULATIONS FOR TEMPORARY SIGNS
(Sign permits are not required for the signs listed in this Table 2.)
Kind of
Sign
Permitted
Time for
Display
Maximum
Permitted
Number
of Such
Signs
Maximum
Permitted
Sign Area
(per sign)
Maximum
Permitted
Height
for
Freestanding
Signs
Minimum
Required
Setback
From Street
Right-of-Way
for
Freestanding
Signs
Other
Requirements
Temporary
Banner
A maximum
total of 30
days per
calendar
year
1 per
business
establishment
25 square feet 6 feet 10 feet Allowed for a
principal
commercial
business. This
type of sign is
intended for
special sales
NOTES:
1 Signs which are not removed within the time limits may be removed and impounded
by the Township, and the Township may recover a fee equal to the cost of removal and
storage.
2 Signs which are not removed within the time limits may be removed and discarded by
the Township, and the Township may recover a fee equal to the cost of removal, storage
and disposal.
§ 285-62 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-62
278:652
ARTICLE VIII
General Regulations
§ 285-63. Frontage onto improved streets; number of uses or
buildings; minimum size of dwellings.
A. Frontage required onto improved street. Each proposed new lot, each
land development and each proposed principal building shall be on a lot
which directly abuts a public street, a street proposed to be dedicated
to the Township by the subdivision plan which created or creates such
lot, or a private street which meets all of the requirements of the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.134 In the case
of townhouses, manufactured/mobile home park or apartments, each
unit may have access onto a parking court which then has access onto a
public or private street meeting Township standards.
B. Number of principal uses and principal buildings per lot.
(1) A lot in a commercial or industrial district may include more than
one permitted principal use per lot and/or more than one permitted
principal building per lot, provided that all of the requirements are
met for each use and each building. If differing dimensional
requirements apply for different uses on the lot, then the most
restrictive requirement shall apply.
(a) For example, if Use One requires a one-acre lot area and Use
Two on the same lot requires a two-acre lot area, then the lot
shall have a minimum lot area of two acres.
(b) The applicant shall submit a site plan that demonstrates that
each structure would meet the requirements of this chapter.
(c) The uses and buildings shall be in common ownership.
However, a condominium form of ownership of individual
buildings, with a legally binding property owners' association,
may be established if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of
the Zoning Officer, based upon review by the Township
Solicitor, that there will be appropriate legal mechanisms in
place.
(2) A lot within a residential district shall not include more than one
principal use and shall not include more than one principal building
unless specifically permitted by this chapter.
(a) A manufactured/mobile home park, condominium residential
development or apartment development may include more
than one principal building per lot, provided all other
requirements of this chapter are met. A condominium form of
ownership of individual dwelling units, with a legally binding
homeowners' association, may be established if the applicant
134. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 285-63 WEAPONS § 285-63
278:653
§ 285-64. Height exceptions.
The maximum structure height specified for each district shall not apply
to: antenna that meet the requirements of this chapter, water towers, clock
or bell towers, steeples of places of worship, electrical transmission lines,
elevator shafts, windmills, skylights, chimneys or other appurtenances
usually required to be and customarily placed above the roof level and
not intended for human occupancy. See also the definition of "height" in
§ 285-20 and provisions in § 285-27B.
§ 285-65. Special lot and yard requirements, sight distance and
buffer yards.
proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer, based upon
review by the Township Solicitor, that there will be appropriate
legal mechanisms in place and compliance with applicable
state law.
(b) A lot may include two single-family detached dwellings if the
requirements are met so a subdivision could occur in the future
so that each single-family detached dwelling could be on its
own conforming lot. For example, each dwelling unit shall be
able to meet minimum lot area, yards and lot width if the
dwelling would be subdivided onto its own lot. See also
provisions for the A District in § 285-35.
C. Minimum size of dwellings. Each dwelling unit shall include a minimum
of 600 square feet of enclosed habitable, indoor, heated floor area,
which shall be primarily above the ground level.
D. Maximum occupancy. No recreational vehicle shall be occupied on a lot
for more than 30 days in a calendar year, except as may be approved
within a campground with suitable central water and sewage service.
No mobile/manufactured home shall be occupied on a lot as a dwelling
unless it meets all of the requirements for a dwelling.
A. In general.
(1) No lot, structure or use shall be created or developed in such a way
that it would result in another lot, building or use not being able to
meet the requirements of this chapter. This includes, but is not
limited to, setback areas, non-impervious areas and off-street
parking areas.
(2) Emergency access. All uses and structures shall have adequate
provisions for access by emergency vehicles and fire ladders. Such
access shall be maintained in a passable condition by the owner of
the lot or, where applicable, by the property owners' association.
B. Exceptions to minimum lot areas, lot widths and yards.
§ 285-63 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-65
278:654
(1) Corner lots. For a corner lot, each yard that abuts a public street
shall be considered a front yard and meet the requirements for
minimum depth of a front yard. See definition of "lot, corner" in
§ 285-20.
(2) Projections into required yards.
(a) Cornices, eaves, roof overhangs, sills or other similar
architectural features, exterior stairways, unenclosed fire
escapes or other required means of egress, rain leads,
chimneys, Bilko-type doors for basement access, window
awnings, chaise for heating pipes, or other similar structures
that do not include space usable by persons, may extend or
project into a required yard not more than three feet, except as
may be required within a drainage or utility easement.
(b) Steps, stoops, fire escapes, handicapped ramps, and landings
necessary to provide entrance to a building may be located
within a required setback area.
(c) For decks and porches: see § 285-27.
(3) Lot widths around curves. Around the bulb of a cul-de-sac street or
on the outside of the curve of a street with a radius of less than 150
feet, the minimum lot width at the minimum building setback line
may be reduced to 60% of the width that would otherwise be
required.
(4) Front setback or buildings on built-up streets. Where at least two
adjacent buildings within 100 feet of a property are set back a
lesser distance than required, the average of the lesser distances
becomes the required minimum front setback for the property.
[Added 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 202]
C. Sight clearance.
(1) See the sight clearance triangles and sight distance required in the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.135
(2) The following minimum sight clearance triangle shall apply for
driveways onto a street:
(a) Driveways shall be located and constructed so that a clear
sight triangle of 75 feet, as measured along the street center
line, and five feet along the driveway center line is maintained;
no permanent obstructions shall be placed within this area at a
height of between three and 10 feet above the ground level.
135. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 285-65 WEAPONS § 285-65
278:655
D. Buffer yards. Buffer yards and screening complying with the following
standards shall be required under the following situations, unless a
more restrictive provision is established by another section of this
chapter:
(1) A minimum thirty-foot-wide buffer yard with plant screening shall
be required along the rear and side lot lines of any lot used
primarily for principal nonresidential purposes that is contiguous
to a residentially zoned lot. A lot used primarily for principal
nonresidential purposes that is contiguous to a lot occupied by an
existing principal dwelling shall provide a plant screen in
accordance with § 285-65D(6). [Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord.
No. 202]
(a) If a principal business use will include areas used for
manufacturing or will have a loading dock that will be routinely
serviced by tractor-trailer trucks or refrigerated trucks, then
the minimum buffer yard width along such manufacturing area
and/or loading dock shall be increased to 70 feet, and the
minimum initial height of plantings shall be increased to eight
feet.
(b) If a lot will include more than 100,000 square feet of business
building floor area, then the minimum buffer yard width shall
be increased to 70 feet and the minimum initial height of
plantings shall be increased to eight feet.
(c) If a dwelling will be on the same lot as a principal business use,
then a buffer yard shall not be required by this section.
§ 285-65 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-65
278:656
(d) A ten-foot minimum buffer yard with landscaped screening
shall be required where a subdivision or land development of
new dwellings will have rear yards abutting a public street or
expressway.
(e) A buffer yard is required to be provided by the following, if they
are abutting and visible from a public street:
[1] Along lot lines of any newly developed or expanded
outdoor industrial storage or loading area; or
[2] Along lot lines of any newly developed or expanded area
routinely used for the overnight parking of two or more
tractor-trailer trucks or trailers of tractor-trailers.
(2) A required yard may overlap a required buffer yard, provided the
requirement for each is met. The buffer yard shall be measured
from the district boundary line, street right-of-way line or lot line,
whichever is applicable. Required plantings shall not be placed
within the right-of-way, except that the Township may allow
deciduous canopy trees.
(3) The buffer yard shall be a landscaped area free of structures,
dumpsters, commercial or industrial storage, or display, signs,
manufacturing or processing activity, materials, loading and
unloading areas or vehicle parking or display.
(4) Fence. Any fence in a buffer yard shall be placed on the inside
(nonresidential side) of any required plant screening. If a fence in a
buffer yard has one side that is more finished or smoother than the
other side, the more finished or smoother side shall face the outside
of the buffer yard.
(5) A well or septic system may be placed within a buffer yard,
provided the landscaping and tree preservation provisions are still
met.
(6) Each planting screen shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Plant materials needed to form the visual screen shall have a
minimum height when planted of five feet. In addition, an
average of one deciduous shade tree, with a minimum trunk
diameter of two inches measured six inches above the finished
ground level, shall be placed for each 40 feet of length of the
buffer yard. The shade trees may be clustered or spaced
unevenly.
(b) Plants needed to form the visual screen shall be of such
species, spacing and size as can reasonably be expected to
produce within three years a mostly solid year-round visual
screen at least six feet in height.
§ 285-65 WEAPONS § 285-65
278:657
(c) The plant screen shall be placed so that at maturity the plants
will not obstruct a street or sidewalk.
(d) The plant visual screen shall extend the full length of the lot
line, except for: 1) Township-approved points of approximately
perpendicular vehicle or pedestrian ingress and egress to the
lot; 2) locations necessary to comply with safe sight distance
requirements where the plantings cannot feasibly be moved
further back; and 3) locations needed to meet other specific
state, Township and utility requirements, such as stormwater
swales.
(e) American Arborvitae and similar weak-stem plants shall not be
used to meet the buffer yard requirements. A monotonous
straight row of the same species is discouraged. A more
naturalistic form of planting is encouraged with a mix of
species. If more than 20 evergreen plants are proposed, no
more than 50% shall be of one species.
(f) Evergreen trees should be planted at diagonal offsets so that
there is room for future growth of the trees.
(g) The plant screening shall primarily use evergreen trees.
(h) If existing healthy trees with a trunk diameter of six inches or
greater (measured 4.5 feet above the ground level) exist within
the buffer yard, they shall be preserved. The Zoning Officer
may certify that preserving existing mature trees and shrubs
within the buffer yard will meet the same purposes as the new
plant screening. In such case, part or all of the new plant
screening may be waived in writing by the Zoning Officer.
(i) The use of earth berms in combination with landscaping is
encouraged within buffer yards to provide additional
protection to dwellings and residential areas.
(j) If a residential lot abuts a street along its front lot line and
another street along its rear lot line, then a buffer yard with
plant screening shall be required along the rear lot line. This
provision shall not apply for an alley.
(7) Buffer yard plans.
(a) Prior to the issuance of a permit under this chapter, where a
buffer yard would be required and on any required subdivision
or land development plan, the applicant shall submit plans
showing:
[1] The location and arrangement of each buffer yard;
[2] The placement, general selection of species and initial size
of all plant materials; and
§ 285-65 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-65
278:658
§ 285-66. Landscaping.
[3] The placement, size, materials and type of all fences to be
placed in such buffer yard.
A. Any part of a commercial, industrial, institutional or apartment lot
which is not used for structures, loading areas, parking spaces and
aisles, sidewalks and designated storage areas shall be provided with
an all-season, well-maintained vegetative ground cover and shall be
landscaped with trees and shrubs. Landscaped areas shall be kept free
of debris, rubbish and noxious weeds.
B. See also the buffer yard provisions in § 285-65.
C. Street trees. As part of the creation of a new lot or the construction of a
new principal nonresidential building or development of parking area
for six or more parking spaces, deciduous shade street trees shall be
planted between such lot lines, building and/or parking area and any
adjacent public street(s). This requirement shall not apply along street
segments where existing healthy trees will be preserved and protected
during construction that will serve the same purpose.
(1) Number. A minimum average of one such tree shall be planted for
each 50 feet of length of street right-of-way around the lot.
(2) Location. Such trees shall be placed immediately outside of the
street right-of-way or an alternative location acceptable to the
Board of Supervisors.
(3) Ordinance. Such street trees shall be planted in a manner approved
by the Township Engineer to avoid conflicts with sidewalks and
utilities.
(4) Buffer. Where shade trees may be required under the buffer yard
provisions, the same tree may be used to count towards both
requirements.
(5) The street trees shall meet the requirements of Subsection D.
D. Parking lot landscaping.
(1) A minimum of one deciduous tree shall be required for every 15
new off-street parking spaces.
(2) If a lot will include 30 or more new parking spaces, landscaped
islands shall be provided within automobile parking areas.
Otherwise, the trees may be planted around the parking area.
(3) Deciduous trees required by this section shall meet the following
standards:
(a) Type of trees permitted. Required trees shall be chosen from
the following list of approved street trees, unless the applicant
§ 285-65 WEAPONS § 285-66
278:659
proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that another
type of tree would shade paved areas, be resistant to disease,
road salt and air pollution, and be attractive.
Types of Deciduous Trees Permitted to Meet Ordinance
Requirements
Acer rubrum - Red Maple
Acer saccharum - Sugar Maple
Celtis occidentalis - Common Hackberry
Fagus sylvatica - European Beech
Fraxinus americana - White Ash
Fraxinus pennsylvania - Green Ash
Ginko biloba fastigiata - Maiden Hair Tree (male only; female
has noxious odor)
Gleditsia triacanthos - Thornless Locust
Liquidambar styraciflua - Sweet Gum
Liriodendron tulipifera - Tulip Poplar
Quercus - All species of oaks
Sophora japonica - Scholar Tree/Pagoda Tree
Tilia americana - American Linden
Tilia cordata - Little Leaf Linden
Tilia euchlora - Crimean Linden
Tilia petiolaris - Silver Linden
Ulmus hybrids - Homestead or Sapporo Autumn Gold
Ulmus parviflora - Chinese or Lacebark Elm, not including
Siberian Elm
Zelkova serrata - Zelkova
Note: This chapter only regulates the species of trees that are
used to meet requirements of the Township. The species of
trees that are not required by Township ordinances are not
regulated.
(b) Quality of trees. Required trees shall be of symmetrical growth
and free of insect pests and disease.
(c) Minimum size. The trunk diameter (measured at a height of six
inches above the finished grade level) shall be a minimum of
two inches or greater.
(d) Planting and maintenance. Required trees shall be:
§ 285-66 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-66
278:660
§ 285-67. Nonconformities.
[1] Planted in conformance with good landscaping practices,
with adequate unpaved surface around each for water and
air; and
[2] Properly protected by curbs, curbstops, distance or other
devices from damage from vehicles.
E. Parking lot landscaping. A minimum vegetative area shall be provided
that includes at least a three-foot minimum radius around all sides of
the trunk of each required deciduous tree within or adjacent to a
parking lot.
F. Review and approval. Where landscaping is required by this chapter,
the applicant shall submit a landscaping plan, in addition to a site plan,
showing proposed initial sizes, locations and species of plantings.
G. Landscaping maintenance. All shade tree, buffer yard and other
landscaping required by this chapter shall be perpetually maintained by
the property owner. Any landscaping needed to meet an ordinance
requirement that dies, is removed or is severely damaged shall be
replaced by the current property owner, on a one-to-one basis, as soon
as is practical considering growing seasons, within a maximum of 150
days.
A. Proof and registration of nonconformities. It shall be the responsibility
of, with the burden of proof upon, a party asserting a nonconformity to
provide the evidence that it is lawful. A property owner may request a
written statement of nonconformity from the Zoning Officer after
providing sufficient evidence.
B. Continuation of nonconformities.
(1) A lawful nonconforming use, structure or lot as defined by this
chapter may be continued and may be sold and continued by new
owners.
(2) Any expansion of, construction upon or change in use of a
nonconformity shall only occur in conformance with this section.
(3) If an existing use was not lawfully established, it shall not have any
right to continue as a nonconforming use.
C. Expansion of or construction upon nonconformities. The following shall
apply, unless the structure is approved under Subsection D.
(1) Nonconforming structure (including a dimensionally
nonconforming structure).
(a) The Zoning Officer shall permit a nonconforming structure to
be reconstructed or expanded, provided:
§ 285-66 WEAPONS § 285-67
278:661
[1] That such action will not increase the severity or amount
of the nonconformity (such as the area of the building
extending into the required yard) or create any new
nonconformity; and
[2] That any expanded area will comply with the applicable
setbacks in that district and other requirements of this
chapter.
(b) In the case of a nonconforming structure which is used by a
nonconforming use, any expansion shall also meet the
requirements of this section regarding nonconforming uses.
(2) Nonconforming lots.
(a) Permitted construction on a nonconforming lot. A single
permitted-by-right principal use and its customary accessory
uses may be constructed, reconstructed or expanded on a
nonconforming lot, provided all of the following additional
requirements are met:
[1] The lot must be a lawful nonconforming lot of record;
[2] Minimum setback requirements shall be met;
[3] State and federal wetland regulations shall be met;
[4] If a septic or well is used, the requirements for such shall
be met.
[5] The lot must be held in single and separate ownership
from any other nonconforming lot.
(b) Lot width. The fact that an existing lawful lot of record does not
meet the minimum lot width requirements of this chapter shall
not by itself cause such lot to be considered to be a
nonconforming lot.
(3) Expansion of a nonconforming nonresidential use. A
nonconforming use or a building used by a nonconforming use shall
not be expanded except in accordance with the following
provisions:
(a) An expansion of more than 5% in total building floor area shall
require special exception approval from the Zoning Hearing
Board under Article I.
(b) Such reconstruction or expansion shall be only upon the same
lot that the nonconforming use was located upon at the time
the use became nonconforming.
(c) The total building floor area used by a nonconforming use or
the total land area covered by the nonconforming use,
whichever is more restrictive, shall not be increased by greater
§ 285-67 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-67
278:662
than 50% beyond what existed in the nonconforming use at the
time the use first became nonconforming.
[1] The above maximum increase shall be measured in
aggregate over the entire life of the nonconformity. All
expansions of the nonconforming use and/or building(s)
that occurred since the use originally became
nonconforming shall count towards the above maximum
increase.
(d) Any expansion of a nonconforming use shall meet the required
setbacks and other requirements of this chapter, unless the
Zoning Hearing Board grants a variance.
(4) Expansion of a nonconforming residential use. An existing
nonconforming residential use may be expanded as a permitted by
right use, provided that: a) the number of dwelling units or rooming
house units are not increased; b) the expansion meets all applicable
setbacks; c) no new types of nonconformities are created; and d) a
nonconformity is not made more severe. A lawfully nonconforming
dwelling in a business district may follow the dimensional
requirements for the R-2 District and may add customary accessory
uses.
(5) Nonconforming sign. The provisions of this chapter shall not
provide a right to expand or extend a nonconforming sign. Instead,
any expansions or extensions of a nonconforming sign shall comply
with this chapter.
D. Damaged or destroyed nonconformities. A nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use that has been destroyed or damaged may be rebuilt
in a nonconforming fashion only if: 1) the application for a building
permit is submitted within 18 months after the date of damage or
destruction; 2) work begins in earnest within 12 months afterwards and
continues; and 3) no nonconformity may be newly created or increased
by any reconstruction. The property shall be properly secured during
such time in such a way to keep out trespassers and to avoid harm to
neighboring properties.
E. Abandonment of a nonconformity.
(1) If a nonconforming use of a building or land is discontinued, razed,
removed or abandoned for 12 or more months, subsequent use of
such building or land shall conform with the regulations of the
district in which it is located, except:
(a) As provided for in the "Damaged or destroyed
nonconformities" provisions of Subsection D.
(2) The applicant shall be responsible to provide clear and convincing
evidence that the nonconformity was not abandoned.
§ 285-67 WEAPONS § 285-67
278:663
§ 285-68. Dumpster screening and location.
(3) An existing lawful separate dwelling unit may be unrented for any
period of time without being considered abandoned under this
chapter.
F. Changes from one nonconforming use to another:
(1) Once changed to a conforming use, a structure or land shall not
revert to a nonconforming use. The approval to establish a
substituted use shall completely extinguish the right to the
previous nonconforming use.
(2) A nonconforming use may be changed to a different nonconforming
use only if approved as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board. However, special exception approval is not needed for a
simple change within an existing building from one lawful
nonconforming retail store use to another retail store use or from
one lawful nonconforming personal service use to another personal
service use, provided that the new use complies with any Zoning
Hearing Board conditions that applied to the previous use and is
not more objectionable in external effects than the previous use.
(3) Where special exception approval is required for a change of a
nonconforming use, the Board shall determine whether the
applicant has provided sufficient proof to show that the proposed
new use will be equal or less objectionable in external effects than
the preexisting nonconforming use with regard to:
(a) Traffic safety and generation (especially truck traffic);
(b) Noise, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, odor, glare, vibration, fire,
hazardous substances, and explosive hazards;
(c) Amount and character of outdoor storage;
(d) Hours of operation if the use would be close to dwellings; and
(e) Compatibility with the character of the surrounding area.
(4) A nonconforming use shall not be changed to a nonconforming
adult use.
G. District changes. Any uses, structures or lots that become
nonconforming because of a zoning district change shall be regulated
under this section on nonconformities.
A. Any newly placed solid waste dumpster shall be screened on at least
three of four sides, as necessary to screen views from public streets and
dwellings.
§ 285-67 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-68
278:664
§ 285-69. Minimum setbacks from existing streets.
§ 285-70. Driveways.
B. Such screening shall consist of decorative masonry walls, mostly solid
weather-resistant wood fencing, fencing of a similar appearance (such
as solid vinyl post), or primarily evergreen plantings.
C. Setback from dwellings. An outdoor solid waste container (other than
for paper or cardboard) with a capacity of over 30 cubic feet shall be
kept a minimum of 20 feet from the lot line of a dwelling on an abutting
lot.
D. If a solid waste dumpster is moved from one part of a lot to another part
of a lot, then it shall come into compliance with this § 285-68.
E. This section shall not apply to dumpsters temporarily placed during
actual construction or demolition on the premises.
F. If a building includes four or more dwelling units, then the owner shall
provide at least one solid waste dumpster with a lid and have it
regularly emptied.
A. Where a front, side or rear yard would abut an existing street, then
such yard shall be measured from the following minimum distances
from the center line of the street right-of-way, unless a wider distance
would be within the street right-of-way:
(1) Forty feet from the center line of an arterial street,
(2) Twenty-five feet from the center line of any other street, and
(3) Ten feet from the center line of an alley.
B. Applicants are strongly encouraged to dedicate additional right-of-way
as appropriate to PennDOT or the Township for future street widenings
and utility and stormwater improvements. If such area is not accepted
for current dedication, then the approved plan should state that it is
reserved for future dedication at such time as PennDOT or the
Township may determine that the area is needed.
C. No building, fence or other structure (except for mailboxes, utility
poles, street trees and similar structures typically found within a rightof-
way) shall be placed within the setback required by Subsection A.
A. Number per lot. No more than two driveway connections allowing lefthand
turns onto a street per lot shall be permitted.
B. Setbacks. Driveways shall not connect with a public street within 40
feet of the right-of-way lines of any intersecting streets, nor within five
feet of a fire hydrant. Driveways shall be set back at least two feet from
any side lot line, unless a common or joint driveway location is
proposed;
§ 285-68 WEAPONS § 285-70
278:665
C. Slope. No part of a driveway shall have a slope greater than 15%. A
driveway shall not exceed a slope of 8% within 25 feet of the street
right-of-way lines.
D. Street classification. Driveway access shall be provided to the street of
lesser classification when there is more than one street classification
involved.
E. Driveways, unless otherwise regulated elsewhere in this chapter, shall
be a minimum of 12 feet in width and a maximum of 20 feet in width,
and the opening of such driveways shall not be located less than 10 feet
from the edge of each opening on the same lot as measured outside the
right-of-way. [Amended 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 209]
F. PennDOT permit. Any driveway intersecting with a state-owned road
shall require the obtainment of a driveway permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
G. Turnaround. Driveways which intersect an arterial or collector street
shall provide adequate turnaround area within the lot so that vehicles
do not back out onto the street.
H. Driveways shall be a minimum of 22 feet in length as measured outside
the street right-of-way. [Added 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 209]
§ 285-70 WEST LAMPETER CODE § 285-70
278:666
Appendix
Chapter A300
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
185 12-14-2004 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 120
186 12-30-2004 Intergovernmental
agreement (PIRMA)
See Ch. 28
187 12-30-2004 Intergovernmental
agreement (SMT)
See Ch. 28
188 4-11-2005 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
189 5-9-2005 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. 193
190 8-8-2005 Engine brake retarders
amendment
Ch. 137
191 10-10-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
192 12-30-2005 Taxation: emergency and
municipal services tax
Ch. 246, Art. III
193 7-10-2006 Zoning Ch. 285
194 7-10-2006 Stormwater management Ch. 230
195 3-12-2007 Property maintenance
amendment
Chs. 120; 197
196 5-14-2007 Intermunicipal agreement
(YMCA and LSRC)
See. Ch. 28
197 8-13-2007 Police pension plan
amendment
Ch. 50, Art. II
198 9-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
199 10-8-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
§ 285-70 WEAPONS § DL-1
278:667
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
200 11-12-2007 Taxation: local services tax Ch. 246, Art. III
201 12-20-2007 Intergovernmental
agreement (UCC joint county
appeals board)
See Ch. 28
202 12-10-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 285
203 12-10-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 285
204 1-14-2008 2008 bonds NCM
205 1-14-2008 Collection of attorneys' fees Ch. 95
206 3-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
207 5-12-2008 Parks and public property
amendment
Ch. 185
208 5-12-2008 Intergovernmental
agreement (Growing
Together: Comprehensive
Plan for Central Lancaster
County)
See Ch. 28
209 12-8-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 285
210 12-8-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 285
211 3-9-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
212 10-12-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
213 10-12-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
214 12-21-2009 Animal control Ch. 94
215 2-8-2010 Sewers and sewerage:
holding tanks amendment
Ch. 211, Art. III
216 4-12-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
217 Not adopted
218 Not adopted
219 7-12-2010 Municipal retirement system Ch. 50, Art. I,
reference only
220 11-8-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
221 1-3-2012 Cable franchise agreement Ch. A300,
reference only
222 5-9-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 285
§ DL-1 WEST LAMPETER CODE § DL-1
278:668
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
223 Not adopted
224 6-13-2011 Sewer connections
amendment
Ch. 211
225 1-3-2012 Alarm systems Ch. 140
226 8-22-2011 Solicitation and canvassing Ch. 222
227 9-12-2011 Earned income tax Ch. 246, Art. II
228 Bond NCM
229 9-10-2012 Police pension benefits Ch. 50, Art. II
230 9-10-2012 Municipal retirement system See Ch. 50, Art. I
231 7-8-2013 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 262
232 9-9-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 285
233 3-10-2014 Adoption of Official Map NCM
234 3-10-2014 Sewage discharge mercury
limit reduction
NCM
235 5-12-2014 Stormwater management Ch. 230
236 1-26-2015 Intergovernmental
agreement (joint
administration of portions of
Stormwater Management
Ordinance and MS4 permit
requirements)
See Ch. 28
237 2-9-2015 Intergovernmental
agreement (PSATS
Unemployment
Compensation Group Trust)
See Ch. 28
238 12-4-2015 Recycling amendment Ch. 224, Art. II
239 3-14-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 285
240 3-14-2016 Pensions: police pension
benefits
Ch. 50, Art. II
241 7-11-2016 Intermunicipal agreement
(joint administration of
portions of Zoning Ordinance
and Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance)
See. Ch. 28
242 11-14-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
243 12-12-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 285
244 12-19-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
§ DL-1 WEAPONS § DL-1
278:669
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
245 7-10-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 262
246 9-11-2017 Suburban Lancaster Sewer
Authority Articles of
Incorporation Amendment
See Ch. 9, Art. II
247 11-13-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 285
248 11-13-2017 Soliciting and Canvassing
Amendment
Ch. 222
249 11-13-2017 Intergovernmental
Agreement
NCM
250 Intergovernmental
Agreement
NCM
251 9-10-2018 Sewers and Sewerage:
Sewer Connections
Amendment
Ch. 211, Art. I
252 Short-Term Debt NCM
253 7-8-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 262
§ DL-1 WEST LAMPETER CODE § DL-1
278:670