The Charter
Chapter C
HOME RULE CHARTER
C:1

ARTICLE I
GENERAL
§ 1.01. Title.
This Charter shall be known as the "Home Rule Charter of the Township of
Whitehall," as amended.
§ 1.02. Purposes. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
This Charter and all amendments hereto shall constitute the form of
government for the Township of Whitehall. The purposes of this Charter
are: to provide Township services and facilities with the highest degree
of efficiency and economy; to establish a Mayor-Commissioner form of
government; to secure home rule for the citizens of Whitehall; and to
provide for the health, safety and well-being of the people of the Township.
§ 1.03. Status and Boundaries.
"The Township of Whitehall" shall continue to be a municipality under the
same name and with the same geographical boundaries as those existing at
the time this Charter was first adopted.
§ 1.04. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this Charter, shall, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise, have the following meanings:
AGENCY — department, administrative unit, board, bureau, commission or
committee.
BOARD — the Township Board of Commissioners consisting of those
Commissioners who have assumed office.
COURT OF COMMON PLEAS — shall mean the Court of Common Pleas of
Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL GENERAL ELECTIONS — those elections required by the laws
of Pennsylvania to be held in odd-numbered years.
PERSON — an individual, a partnership, an association, a corporation or
other entity.
TOWNSHIP — the Township of Whitehall, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
§ 1.01 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1.04
C:3

ARTICLE II
GENERAL POWERS OF THE TOWNSHIP
§ 2.01. Powers and Functions.
The Township has and may exercise any powers and perform any functions
not denied it by the Constitution of Pennsylvania, by this Charter or by the
General Assembly.
§ 2.02. Construction.
The powers and functions of the Township under this Charter shall be
liberally construed in favor of the Township. The specific enumeration
of powers and functions shall not be construed as limiting in any way
the general powers and functions of the Township. All possible powers
and functions of the Township are to be considered as if specifically and
individually set forth in this Article, whether such power and functions are
presently available to the Township or may hereafter become available.
§ 2.03. Incorporation of Certain Statutes of General Applicability.
[Added 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 1661, approved 5-15-1991]
The provisions of the following statutes, as amended from time to time, are
hereby declared to be incorporated by reference, as though fully set forth
herein:
A. The Eminent Domain Code, Act of June 22, 1964, P.L. 84, as amended.
B. The Local Tax Enabling Act, Act 511 of 1965, P.L. 1257, as amended,
except with regard to the tax rate limitations set forth therein.
C. The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, P.L.
805, as amended by Act 170 of 1988, P.L. 1329, inter alia.
D. The Police Pension Law, Act 600 of 1956, P.L. 643, as amended.
E. The Municipal Retirement Law, Act 15 of 1974, P.L. 34, as amended.
F. The Local Government Unit Debt Act, Act 185 of 1972, P.L. 781, as
amended.
G. The Sunshine Act, Act 84 of 1986, P.L. 388, as amended.
To the extent not inconsistent herewith, the procedural provisions of
the First Class Township Code Act of June 24, 1931, P.L. 1206, No. 331,
as amended, shall be utilized when undertaking the various actions
authorized thereby.
The power and authority to determine the applicability of other
statutes not set forth herein is granted to the Township Board of
Commissioners. The applicability of any statute, unless its applicability
is mandated by the General Assembly, must be declared by ordinance.
§ 2.01 HOME RULE CHARTER § 2.03
C:5

ARTICLE III
THE TOWNSHIP BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
§ 3.01. Status and Title.
The legislative branch of the government of the Township shall consist of
an elective governing body which shall be known as the Township Board
of Commissioners, The Board, when lawfully convened, shall constitute the
legislative, appropriating, policy-determining and governing body of the
Township.
§ 3.02. Powers and Duties.
§ 3.03. Composition.
The Board of Commissioners shall be composed of seven members elected
at-large at the municipal general elections by the qualified voters of the
Township.
A. The Board shall, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, provide
for the exercise and for the performance of all duties and obligations
imposed on the Township by law.
B. The Township Board of Commissioners shall have, but not by way of
limitation, the following powers and duties.
(1) To make appropriations, incur indebtedness and adopt the budget.
(2) To adopt, amend and repeal an administrative code.
(3) To create, alter, combine and abolish any Township agency or
agencies, with the exception of a department authorized by the
Charter, and any committee appointed by the Mayor under Article
V, § 5.08(M) of this Charter. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(4) To levy taxes.
(5) To fix the amount of bonds for officers and employees, which bonds
shall be paid from Township funds.
(6) To adopt by resolution all rules and regulations necessary for the
governing of its own activities and procedures and for assuring the
proper conducting of the business of the Township.
(7) To make or cause to be made such studies, investigations or audits
which it deems necessary or to be in the best interests of the
Township.
(8) To make provision for any matter of Township government not
otherwise provided for including, but not limited to, any necessary
matter involved in the transition of this Charter form of
government.
§ 3.01 HOME RULE CHARTER § 3.04
C:7
§ 3.04. Terms and Election. [Amended 1-13-2002 by Ord. No. 2387,
approved 5-20-2003]
The terms of office of all Commissioners shall be four years, commencing at
8:00 p.m. on the first Monday of January next following the year in which
they are elected and ending at the commencement of the terms for which
their successors are elected; except that a Commissioner appointed to fill
a vacancy shall serve only until the next municipal election at which a
successor is elected. Four Commissioners shall be elected at the Municipal
General Elections in November, 1975, and every four years thereafter.
Three Commissioners shall be elected at the Municipal General Elections
in November, 1977, and every four years thereafter. Commissioners in the
office at the time of the adoption of this Charter shall continue in office until
their terms expire.
§ 3.05. Salary. [Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 1661, approved
5-15-1991]
Each Commissioner shall receive a salary at the rate of $2,000 per annum
or such other sum as the Board shall from time to time determine; provided,
however, that no ordinance increasing such salary shall become effective
for at last 4 years after the effective date of this Charter. No change in
the compensation of Commissioners shall become effective in their current
term of office. Commissioners shall receive no other compensation, directly
or indirectly, for the performance of their duties; they shall receive no
pensions, health or life insurances or other forms of fringe benefits. They
shall, however, be entitled to payment of their actual expenses, and to
protection from liability incurred in the proper performance of their duties.
§ 3.06. Qualifications. [Amended 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3015,
approved 11-2-2015]
Commissioners shall be qualified voters of the Township, shall have been
residents of the Township continuously for at least one year preceding
election and shall reside in the Township throughout their terms of office.
The replacement commissioner shall be a qualified member of the same
party as the person vacating the seat, or, if the person vacating the seat
had no party affiliation, a person of any party affiliation as appointed by the
Board of Commissioners.
§ 3.07. Prohibitions. [Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 1661,
approved 5-15-1991; 1-14-2008 by Ord. No. 2708, approved
4-22-2008]
Except where authorized by law or by this Charter, no current or former
Commissioner shall hold any other Township office or employment in which
he or she receives salary, compensation or emolument, until one year has
passed since the expiration of the full term for which he or she was elected
or appointed to the Board unless he/she is duly elected to such new position
by the citizens in a municipal election.
§ 3.04 WHITEHALL CODE § 3.08
C:8
§ 3.08. Vacancies. [Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 1661,
approved 5-15-1991]
The office of Commissioner shall be come vacant upon death, resignation,
removal from office, forfeiture of office or for failure to assume such office
after election thereto within 45 days after commencement of the term
thereof. A Commissioner shall forfeit office if he or she:
§ 3.09. Filling of Vacancies. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The Board of Commissioners shall, by appointment by a majority vote of
the total remaining members of the Board, fill any vacancy in the office of
Commissioner. Should the Board fail, for any reason whatsoever, to fill a
vacancy within 45 days after the vacancy occurs, then the Court of Common
Pleas shall, upon petition of the Mayor, a member of the Board or of any
five citizens of the Township, fill by appointment the vacancy in such office.
Any person appointed to fill a vacancy shall possess all the qualifications
required of members of the Board as set forth in this Charter.
§ 3.10. Organization of Board of Commissioners.
The Board shall organize at 8 p.m. on the first Monday of January of each
even-numbered year. The Board at the organizational meeting shall elect
from its membership a President, Vice President and a Secretary, who shall
hold such offices at the pleasure of the Board. The President, or in his or her
absence the Vice President, shall preside at all meetings of the Board. The
officers of the Board shall have and may exercise the rights to which they
are otherwise entitled as Board members. The Secretary shall also possess
the powers and duties as set forth in Article VIII, § 8.02, of this Charter.
If the first Monday is a legal holiday, the meeting and organization shall take
place the first day following the legal holiday. The Board may transact any
further business it deems necessary or appropriate at the organizational
meeting.
If a majority of the Board shall not attend the organizational meeting
of the Board, those present may adjourn the meeting to such time as
they determine. Those who attend the second of such adjourned meetings,
although less than a quorum, as fixed in § 3.17 of this Article, shall,
A. Lacks at any time during his or her term of office any qualifications of
his or her office prescribed in this Charter or by law.
B. Is convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude or a crime
relating to the office of Commissioner.
C. Fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings without being
excused by the Board of Commissioners.
D. Fails to attend regular meetings for a period of 90 consecutive days
without an excuse deemed acceptable by the Board.
§ 3.08 HOME RULE CHARTER § 3.10
C:9
nevertheless constitute a quorum for the sole purpose of electing the
officers of the Board, but not for any other purpose.
§ 3.11. Committees and Staff.
The Board may appoint from among its members any committees and
officers of the Board not expressly established by this Charter, who shall
perform the duties and functions charged by the Board to the extent not
inconsistent with other provisions of this Charter.
§ 3.12. Meetings. [Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 1661, approved
5-15-1991]
§ 3.13. Minutes.
The Board shall provide for minutes of all regular and special meetings,
which minutes shall be open and available for public inspection at the
Township Municipal Building during the Township's regular business hours.
§ 3.14. Public Meetings and Public Notice of Meetings.
A. Regular meetings of the Board shall be convened at least once a month
at such times as the Board may determine, except as otherwise
provided in this Charter. Written notice shall be given to each
Commissioner at least 5 days prior to the meeting.
B. Special meetings may be called by the President of the Board or, upon
the written request of two members of the Board, by the Secretary. At
least 48 hours prior notice shall be given to each member. Said notice
shall designate the purpose, time and place of the special meeting,
which time may be other than that required for regular meetings. At a
special meeting, no business shall be considered other than that
designated in the notice of the meeting.
C. Presence of a Commissioner at any meeting shall constitute a waiver of
notice of such meeting, except where a Commissioner attends a
meeting for the express purpose of objecting to the transaction of any
business because the meeting was not lawfully called or convened.
D. If a meeting cannot be organized because a quorum has not attended,
those present may adjourn the meeting to such time as they may
determine.
E. All meetings of the Board shall be held at the Township Municipal
Building, or at such other location as shall be designated in a lawful
public meeting notice, following approval of such other location by the
Board of Commissioners.
A. Every public meeting of the Board shall be open to the public. Advance
notice of the intent of the Board to take forthcoming actions at regularly
scheduled meetings shall be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation.
§ 3.10 WHITEHALL CODE § 3.14
C:10
§ 3.15. Citizens' Right to be Heard.
The Board, before taking any vote, shall provide reasonable opportunity for
persons to address the Board on matters of concern.
§ 3.16. Procedures.
§ 3.17. Quorum. [Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 1661, approved
5-15-1991]
The majority of the current membership of the Board shall constitute a
quorum. The Board shall conduct no business unless a quorum is present,
except as otherwise provided in § 3.10 of this Article.
§ 3.18. Majority Action. [Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 1661,
approved 5-15-1991]
The action of the majority of a duly constituted quorum of the Board shall
be binding upon and constitute the action of the Board, except as otherwise
provided in this Charter.
B. The Board shall hold all public meetings, at specified times and places,
of which public notice shall be given. Public notice of the schedule of
regular meetings shall be given once for each calendar year and shall
show the regular dates and times for meetings and the place at which
meetings are held. Public notice of each special meeting and of each
rescheduled regular or special meeting shall be given, setting forth the
date, time and place of each meeting. Public notice shall be given by
posting a copy of the notice prominently at the Township Municipal
Building and by publishing the notice once in a newspaper of general
circulation in Whitehall Township. Public notice shall be given at least 3
days prior to the time of each regular meeting and at least 48 hours
prior to the time of the meeting in the case of special or rescheduled
meetings. The Board shall supply, on request, copies of the public notice
thereof to any newspaper of general circulation in Whitehall Township
and to any radio station, television and television cable system which
regularly broadcasts into Whitehall Township. The advertising and
public notice requirements of this Charter, to the extent inconsistent
with the provisions of the First Class Township Code, shall be deemed
to supersede the provisions of that statute.
A. The Board shall, by ordinance, adopt rules of procedure for its
organization, meetings and committees as part of its Administrative
Code.
B. The Board shall, by ordinance, adopt rules for the form of ordinances
and resolutions, and procedures for the presentation and adoption of
motions, ordinances and resolutions, all as part of its Administrative
Code.
§ 3.14 HOME RULE CHARTER § 3.19
C:11
§ 3.19. Form of Action by the Board.
All legislation, certain specific actions enumerated in § 3.20 of this Article,
and any other actions required by law or by the Charter to be adopted by
ordinance shall be enacted through the adoption of an ordinance. All other
action of the Board may be taken by ordinance, resolution or motion. All
ordinances and resolutions must be in written form. All actions in adopting
ordinances, resolutions or motions shall be by roll call vote and the vote of
each member of the Board shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting.
§ 3.20. Certain Specific Action Requiring an Ordinance. [Amended
12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 1661, approved 5-15-1991]
The following actions of the Board shall require an ordinance to establish
their validity:
§ 3.21. Submission to Mayor for Approval or Disapproval. [Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
The Mayor shall, within 3 days of passage, receive a written copy of each
ordinance or resolution approved by the Board for his approval or veto.
Within 10 days after receipt, the Mayor shall return the ordinance or
A. The adoption, amendment or repeal of any provision of an
administrative code or the creation, establishment, alteration,
combination or abolition of any Township agency or agencies.
B. Establishment of any fine or other penalty or the establishment of a rule
or regulation for violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed.
C. The levy of any tax.
D. The grant, renewal or extension of a franchise.
E. The establishment, alteration or abolition of rates charged for any
utility or other service supplied by the Township.
F. The authorization to borrow money.
G. The conveyance or lease, or authorization of the conveyance or lease, of
any land of the Township.
H. The amendment or repeal of any ordinance previously adopted.
I. The establishment of wages, hours or fringe benefits of Township
employees.
J. The determination of powers, duties and authority of the Mayor, Deputy
Mayor, Solicitor or Treasurer beyond those created by this Charter.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
K. The authorization to make any capital expenditures in excess of
$25,000.
§ 3.19 WHITEHALL CODE § 3.21
C:12
resolution to the Board with his or her approval or with a written statement
explaining his or her reasons for the veto thereof.
If the Mayor shall veto an ordinance or resolution, the Board, within 10 days
after receiving the veto, may override such veto by a two-thirds vote of the
total members of the Board. If the Mayor fails to return the ordinance or
resolution to the Board within 10 days after receipt, either approving or
vetoing the same, the ordinance or resolution shall be deemed to be finally
adopted as though approved and signed by the Mayor.
§ 3.22. Publication and Effective Date of Ordinances.
§ 3.23. Recording of Ordinances and Resolutions.
All motions, ordinances and resolutions of the Township shall be entered
verbatim in permanent separate record books for each. The books shall
be open and available for public inspection at the Township Municipal
Building during the Township's regular business hours. These books shall
be in the custody and control of the Secretary to the Board and all entries
made therein shall be at the direction of the President within 30 days after
passage.
§ 3.24. Ordinances Requiring Prior Public Notice. [Amended
12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 1661, approved 5-15-1991]
No final action shall be taken on the following types of ordinances and
amendments thereto without two public hearings thereon, with at least 10
day intervals between the public hearings and at least 10 days prior public
notice of each public hearing thereof published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township:
A. After final adoption in accordance with § 3.21, all ordinances shall be
published one time in a newspaper circulating generally within the
Township. The full text of the ordinance need not be published; instead
the title or a general summary of the substance of the ordinance, the
places where copies of it have been filed and the times when they are
available for public inspection will be sufficient to satisfy the
publication requirements of this Article. Publication shall occur within
30 days after the final adoption of an ordinance in accordance with
§ 3.21.
B. Ordinances shall take effect when specified therein except that no
ordinance, other than the Township budget ordinance, shall take effect
less than 30 days after final adoption in accordance with § 3.21, unless
the Board shall adopt a resolution declaring an emergency and at least
a majority plus one of the total number of the Board vote in favor of
such resolution. If an ordinance does not contain a specified effective
date, it shall be effective 30 days after its final adoption in accordance
with § 3.21.
§ 3.21 HOME RULE CHARTER § 3.24
C:13
§ 3.25. Enforcement of Ordinances. [Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord.
No. 1661, approved 5-15-1991]
A. Adoption of a zoning ordinance, a zoning map or of amendments
thereto.
B. Adoption of subdivision, land development and land uses, regulations or
of amendments thereto.
C. Authorization of the conveyance or leasing of any lands to or from the
Township.
D. Adoption, amendment or repeal of any administrative code provisions.
A. All proceedings for the violation of any ordinances and for the recovery
of fines or penalties imposed thereby shall be brought as prescribed by
statute or by Township ordinance.
B. Unless otherwise specified and authorized by law, the penalty for the
violation of any ordinance shall not exceed the amount established in
the First Class Township Code for the violation in question or 30 days
imprisonment in default of payment of fine. Any ordinance may provide
that for continuing violations, each day that a violation exists may be
regarded as a separate offense and punishable as such. The Board may,
by ordinance, increase any penalty beyond that set forth in the First
Class Township Code to the extent permitted by law.
§ 3.24 WHITEHALL CODE § 3.25
C:14
ARTICLE IV
BOARD INQUIRIES AND INVESTIGATIONS
§ 4.01. Inquiries and Investigations.
The Board shall have power, by resolution, to authorize inquiries and
investigations to be conducted by the entire body or by any of its
committees in aid of its legislative powers and functions.
§ 4.02. Witnesses and Documents.
The Board may compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
books, papers and other tangible evidence at any meeting of the Board or
any committee thereof. For that purpose, subpoenas may be issued, signed
by the President of the Board or the Chairman of the committee in any
pending case of inquiry or investigation and the same may be served in
any part of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Said subpoenas shall be
enforceable by action in the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 4.03. Oaths of Witnesses.
Any member of the Board shall have the power to administer oaths to
witnesses.
§ 4.04. Witnesses' Privileges.
A person residing outside the Township and subpoenaed as aforesaid shall
not be required to respond to the same until mileage and witness fees,
equal to those then established for witnesses whose attendance has been
required by the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County, shall have been
first furnished to the witness. All witnesses required to provide information
shall be accorded the same privileges and immunities as witnesses whose
attendance has been required by the Count of Common Pleas of Lehigh
County, Pennsylvania.
§ 4.01 HOME RULE CHARTER § 4.04
C:15

ARTICLE V
MAYOR
[Amended 2-16-1987 by Ord. No. 1576, approved 5-19-1987;
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1661, approved 5-15-1991; 11-11-1991 by
Ord. No. 1747, approved 4-28-1992; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
§ 5.01. Nature and Title.
The executive branch of the government of the Township shall be vested in
and administered by an elective executive, hereafter known as the Mayor,
who shall be the chief executive and administrative official of the Township
the official head of the Township. He or she shall have such authority and
perform such duties as are assigned to him or her under this Charter and
shall have such further authority as may, from time to time, be delegated to
the Mayor by ordinance.
§ 5.02. Election, Term, and Vacancy.
A. The Mayor shall be elected at large by the qualified electors of the
Township for a term of four years.
B. The election of a Mayor shall be held at a municipal election at fouryear
intervals, except for when a vacancy occurs as provided in
Subsection F of this section, below.
C. The term of an elected Mayor shall commence at 8:00 p.m. on the first
Monday of January following the year in which he or she is elected.
D. The term of an elected Mayor shall end at the commencement of the
term for which his or her successor is elected, or when the office of
Mayor becomes vacant, as provided in Section 5.06 of this Charter, as
amended from time to time.
E. If a vacancy in the office of Mayor occurs, the term of the appointed
Mayor shall commence upon his or her appointment, as provided by
Section 5.07 of this Charter, as amended from time to time, and shall
end at the commencement of the term of an elected successor Mayor, or
when a vacancy in the office of Mayor again occurs.
F. If a vacancy occurs, a successor Mayor shall be elected at the next
municipal election, for which the closing date for filing for the primary
election is eight weeks or more after the office of the Mayor becomes
vacant.
Transition: This amendment shall become effective with the
commencement of the term of the next Mayor elected at a municipal
election following approval of this amendment by referendum.
§ 5.01 HOME RULE CHARTER § 5.03
C:17
§ 5.03. Qualifications. [Amended 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3016,
approved 11-3-2015]
The Mayor shall be a qualified voter of the Township, shall be at least
25 years of age when elected to office, shall have been a resident of the
Township continuously for one year preceding his or her election and shall
reside in the Township throughout his or her term of service. An appointed
Mayor shall be a qualified member of the same party as the person vacating
the seat, or, if the person vacating the seat had no party affiliation, a person
of any party affiliation as appointed by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 5.04. Prohibitions. [Amended as approved 4-23-1996; 6-9-2008 by
Ord. No. 2727, approved 11-4-2008]
The Mayor shall devote full-time to the office. Except where authorized by
law or by this Charter, the Mayor, during his or her term of office, shall
not hold any other Township governmental office or Township governmental
employment in which he or she receives salary, compensation or
emolument. During the period of the term for which he or she was elected
or appointed, even if he or she does not complete such term, he or she
shall not hold any other compensated Township governmental office until
one year after the expiration of the full term for which he or she was elected
or appointed to serve as Mayor, unless he or she is duly elected to such new
position by the citizens in a municipal election.
§ 5.05. Salary.
The Mayor shall receive a salary at a rate established from time to time by
the Board; provided, however, that no increase in the compensation of the
Mayor shall become effective until the commencement of the term of the
Mayor elected at the municipal general election following the authorization
by the Board, and only then if the authorization preceded the election by at
least 6 months; and further provided that a decrease in the compensation
of the Mayor may only be accomplished by referendum (the authorization of
which shall not require the approval of the Mayor).
The Mayor shall receive, in addition to salary, such additional fringe benefits
as are extended to other managerial employees in the employ of the
Township and such other fringe benefits as are authorized from time to time
by the Board.
§ 5.06. Vacancies.
The office of Mayor shall become vacant upon his or her death, resignation,
removal from or forfeiture of office or failure to assume office after election
thereto within 45 days after the commencement of the term thereof. The
Mayor shall forfeit his or her office if he or she:
A. Lacks at any time during his or her term of office any qualifications of
his or her office prescribed by this Charter or by law.
§ 5.03 WHITEHALL CODE § 5.06
C:18
§ 5.07. Filling of a Vacancy.
The Board shall, by appointment by a majority vote of the total number of
the Board, fill any vacancy in the office of Mayor. Should the Board fail, for
any reason whatsoever, to fill a vacancy within 45 days after the vacancy
occurs, then the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County shall, upon
petition of any member of the Board or any five citizens of the Township,
fill the vacancy in such office by appointment. Any person appointed to fill
the vacancy shall possess all the qualifications required of the Mayor as set
forth in the Charter.
§ 5.08. Powers, Duties and Authority.
The Mayor, in addition to any other powers, duties and authority provided
elsewhere in this Charter, by law or by Board action, shall have the
following powers, duties and authority:
B. Is convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude or a crime
relating to the office of the Mayor.
A. He or she shall attend meetings of the Board and have the right to
attend committees thereof and have an equal right with Commissioners
to participate in deliberations. He or she shall have no right to vote on
any matter before the Board or committee thereof.
B. He or she shall have the power to veto ordinances set forth in Article III,
§ 3.21, of this Charter.
C. He or she shall have the duty to preserve order in the Township.
D. He or she shall have the duty to execute and enforce all ordinances and
resolutions of the Board.
E. He or she shall have the duty to sign, on behalf of the Township, such
papers, contracts, obligations and documents that are properly
presented to him or her as may be required by law.
F. He or she shall report to the Board at the first regular meeting of each
month regarding the state of affairs of the Township.
G. He or she shall have the authority to represent the Township in
deliberations with other governmental bodies.
H. He or she shall supervise, appoint, suspend or remove all Township
employees.
I. He or she shall supervise the administration of all agencies of the
Township over which he or she has appointive power.
J. He or she shall cause to be prepared and shall submit to the Board the
annual budget and the capital improvement program for the Township.
§ 5.06 HOME RULE CHARTER § 5.08
C:19
§ 5.09. Deputy Mayor.
The Mayor shall appoint a Deputy Mayor with the approval of the Board.
The Deputy Mayor shall serve as head of the Department of Administration,
shall administer the Township's finances (upon receipt from the Township
Treasurer), and shall have such other duties, powers and authority relating
to the office of Deputy Mayor as may be determined by the Board by
ordinance. His or her appointment shall be in writing filed with the
Secretary of the Township. The Deputy Mayor shall exercise all of the
powers and discharge all of the duties of the Mayor during any absence
or disability of the Mayor, except the power to appoint, suspend or remove
employees, staff or professional consultants, and except such powers, duties
and authority which the Board may, by resolution, determine shall not be
exercised by the Deputy Mayor during any absence or disability of the
Mayor. The Mayor may suspend or remove the Deputy Mayor at any time,
with or without cause.
K. He or she shall submit to the Board and shall make available to the
public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of
the Township as of the end of each fiscal year, but not later than
February 15th of the following year.
L. He or she shall have the authority, subject to the final ratification of the
Board, to negotiate intergovernmental cooperation agreements
pursuant to law.
M. He or she shall have the authority from time to time to appoint and
dissolve voluntary committees of interested citizens to assist and advise
him or her on issued and matters pertaining to his or her office.
N. He or she shall be empowered to exercise any emergency powers that
the Board may establish by ordinance to suppress mobs, riots and
tumultuous assemblies.
O. He or she shall have the power to veto any item of appropriation made
by the Board in adopting or amending the budget or in authorizing any
expenditure of funds. This power shall be subject to the same
procedural requirements and the same right of the Board to override
vetoes as is found in Article III, § 3.21, of this Charter.
P. He or she shall serve as head of the Department of Public Safety.
Q. He or she shall present to the Board from time to time such information
concerning the business and affairs of the municipality as he or she may
deem necessary, or as the Board by resolution may request, and to
recommend such measures for legislative action as may be in the best
interest of the municipality.
R. He or she shall have all necessary incidental powers to perform and
exercise any of the duties and functions as set forth in this Charter or
lawfully delegated to him or her.
§ 5.08 WHITEHALL CODE § 5.09
C:20
ARTICLE VI
TOWNSHIP SOLICITOR
[Amended 6-25-1979 by Ord. No. 1310, approved 11-6-1979;
12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 1661, approved 5-15-1991
§ 6.01. Appointment. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The Mayor, with the approval of the Board by a majority vote of the total
number thereof, shall appoint and fix the compensation of one person
learned in the law, who shall be styled the Township Solicitor. In lieu of the
appointment of one person, the Mayor, with the approval of the Board by
a majority vote of the total number thereof, may appoint a law firm which
shall act as the Township Solicitor.
§ 6.02. Qualifications.
Any individual person appointed Township Solicitor shall possess at least
5 years experience in the active legal practice in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania prior to his or her appointment.
§ 6.03. Removal. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
The Mayor may dismiss the Township Solicitor at any time, with or without
cause.
§ 6.04. Powers and Duties.
The Township Solicitor shall be the chief legal officer of the Township. The
Township Solicitor, in addition to any other powers, duties and authority
provided elsewhere in this Charter, by law or by Board action, shall have
the following powers, duties and authority:
A. He or she shall furnish legal advice and opinions to the Mayor, to the
Board, to the Chairman of any committee of the Board and to all officers
and agencies concerning any legal matter arising in connection with the
exercise of their official powers or performance of their official duties.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
B. He or she shall supervise, direct and control all Township law matters,
except the representation of the Zoning Hearing Board. No official,
officer or agency shall employ other legal counsel, except as may be
permitted by law, without the approval of the Board.
C. He or she shall collect, by suit or otherwise, all debts, taxes and
accounts due the Township which shall be placed with him for collection
by any officer or agency and shall represent the Township and every
officer or agency in all litigation.
§ 6.01 HOME RULE CHARTER § 6.04
C:21
§ 6.05. Access to Records.
The Township Solicitor shall have the right to inspect at reasonable times
the records of any officer and agency of the Township in connection with the
performance of his, her or its powers and duties.
D. He or she shall prepare or approve all contracts, bonds and other
instruments in writing in which the Township is concerned and shall
approve all surety bonds required to be given for the protection of the
Township.
E. At the direction of the Mayor, he or she shall investigate any violation or
alleged violation within the Township of statutes of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, of the United States of America or of ordinances of the
Township or of the County and shall take such steps and adopt such
means as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to enforce or
cause the enforcement within the Township of such statutes and
ordinances. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
F. Upon the request of the Board, the Chairman of any committee of the
Board or of the Mayor, the Township Solicitor shall prepare or assist in
preparing any ordinance or resolution for presentation before the
Board. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
G. With the approval of the Mayor and the Board, the Township Solicitor
may retain special counsel for a particular proceeding. [Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
H. He or she shall do all and every professional act incident to the office
which he or she may be lawfully authorized and required to do by the
Mayor or by an ordinance or resolution of the Board. [Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
§ 6.04 WHITEHALL CODE § 6.05
C:22
ARTICLE VII
TREASURER
[Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 1661, approved 5-15-1991]
§ 7.01. Election, Term and Vacancy. [Amended 8-3-1998, approved
11-3-1998]
§ 7.02. Qualifications. [Amended 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3017,
approved 11-3-2015]
The Treasurer shall be a qualified voter of the Township, shall be at least
25 years of age when elected to office, shall have been a resident of the
Township continuously for one year preceding his or her election and shall
reside in the Township throughout his or her term of service.
A replacement Treasurer shall be a qualified member of the same party as
the person vacating the seat, or, if the person vacating the seat had no party
affiliation, a person of any party affiliation as appointed by the Board of
Commissioners.
A. The Treasurer shall be elected at large by the qualified electors of the
Township for a term of four years.
B. The election of the Treasurer shall be held at a municipal general
election at four-year intervals, except for when a vacancy occurs as
provided in Subsection F of this section, below.
C. The term of an elected Treasurer shall commence at 8:00 p.m. on the
last Monday of January following the year in which he or she is elected.
D. The term of an elected Treasurer shall end at the commencement of the
term for which his or her successor is elected, or when the office of
Treasurer becomes vacant, as provided in Section 7.04 of this Charter,
as amended from time to time.
E. If a vacancy in the office of Treasurer occurs, the term of the appointed
Treasurer shall commence upon his or her appointment, as provided by
Section 7.04 of this Charter, as amended from time to time, and shall
end at the commencement of the term of an elected successor
Treasurer, or when a vacancy in the office of Treasurer again occurs.
F. If a vacancy occurs, a successor Treasurer shall be elected at the next
municipal election, for which the closing date for filing for the primary
election is eight weeks or more after the office of Treasurer becomes
vacant.
Transition: This amendment shall become effective with the
commencement of the term of the next Treasurer elected at a municipal
election following approval of this amendment by referendum.
§ 7.01 HOME RULE CHARTER § 7.03
C:23
§ 7.03. Salary.
The salary of the Treasurer shall be established by the Board by ordinance.
§ 7.04. Vacancy.
The office of Treasurer shall become vacant upon his or her death,
resignation, removal from or forfeiture of office or failure to assume office
after election thereto within 45 days after the commencement of the term
thereof. The Treasurer shall forfeit his or her office if he or she:
§ 7.05. Filling of Vacancy. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The Board shall, by appointment by a majority vote of the total number
of the Board, fill any vacancy in the office of Treasurer. Should the Board
fail, for any reason whatsoever, to fill a vacancy within 45 days after the
vacancy occurs, then the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County shall,
upon petition of any member of the Board, or the Mayor, or of any five
citizens of the Township, fill the vacancy in such office by appointment.
Any person appointed to fill the vacancy shall possess all the qualifications
required of the Treasurer as set forth in this Charter.
§ 7.06. Staff.
The Treasurer may appoint such employees of his office in such manner and
at such compensation as he shall determine. All such compensation shall be
paid by the Treasurer.
§ 7.07. Powers and Duties of the Township Treasurer.
The Township Treasurer shall be the chief fiscal officer of the Township. The
Township Treasurer, in addition to any other powers, duties and authority
provided elsewhere in this Charter, by law or by Board action, shall have
the following powers, duties and authority:
A. Lacks at any time during his or her term of office any qualifications of
his or her office prescribed by this Charter or by law.
B. Is convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude or a crime
relating to the office of the Treasurer.
A. He or she shall receive, collect, account for and deposit into the
Township treasury all taxes, fees, funds, assessments or charges that
are levied, established or received by the Township for general or
special purposes. Such deposits shall be made not later than the first
business day following the day in which the funds are received.
(1) Exception: The Township Bureau of Police may receive and collect
police-related fees and Recreation personnel may receive monies
necessarily collected at the site of recreation facilities.
§ 7.03 WHITEHALL CODE § 7.07
C:24
§ 7.08. Prohibitions. [Amended as approved 4-23-1996; 6-9-2008 by
Ord. No. 2727, approved 11-4-2008]
The Treasurer may act as collector of taxes for the Township and other
municipal corporations, municipalities or political subdivisions. Except
where authorized by law or by this Charter, the Treasurer, during his
or her term in office, shall not hold any other compensated Township
governmental office or Township governmental employment, until one year
after the expiration of the full term for which he or she was elected or
appointed, unless he or she is elected to such Township office by the citizens
in a public election.
(2) All such Bureau collections shall be remitted to the Township
Treasurer on the first business day following receipt of monies.
B. He or she shall disburse Township funds pursuant to valid payment
authorizations made in accordance with § 11.10 hereof.
C. He or she shall arrange for temporary investments of Township funds
and shall make such investments as directed by ordinances.
D. He or she shall deposit the funds of the Township in various
depositories as designated by the Board. All such accounts shall be in
the name of the Township.
E. He or she shall monthly state the accounts and present the same,
together with the books and the vouchers, to the Board for inspection or
audit.
F. He or she shall appoint a deputy or deputies who may sign checks or
drafts of the Township during any absence or disability of the Treasurer.
Written notice of such appointment or appointments shall be filed with
the Secretary of the Township.
§ 7.07 HOME RULE CHARTER § 7.08
C:25

ARTICLE VIII
SECRETARY
§ 8.01. Salary.
The salary of the Commissioner serving as Township Secretary shall be
determined by the Board.
§ 8.02. Powers and Duties of the Secretary.
The Secretary, in addition to any other powers and duties provided
elsewhere in this Charter, by law or by Board action, shall have the
following powers and duties:
A. He or she shall attend all meetings of the Board and shall keep full
minutes of its proceedings.
B. He or she shall assure transcription and placement of the by-laws,
rules, regulations, motions, resolutions and ordinances of the Board in
to appropriate books kept for those purposes.
C. He or she shall preserve the records and documents of the Township
and shall have custody of the corporate seal.
D. He or she shall certify copies of any book, paper, record, by-law, rule,
regulation, resolution, ordinance or other proceedings of the Township
under the seal of the Township.
E. He or she shall attest the execution of all instruments and record all
ordinances.
F. He or she shall file record proof of service of all notices required by law
or ordinance and his or her certificate thereof shall be good evidence of
such notice.
§ 8.01 HOME RULE CHARTER § 8.02
C:27

ARTICLE IX
DEPARTMENTS, ADMINISTRATIVE UNITS, BOARDS, BUREAUS,
COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
[Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 1661, approved 5-15-1991]
§ 9.01. Departments.
The Township shall have the following departments:
§ 9.02. Department Heads. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The Department of Administration shall be headed by the Deputy Mayor
as Director. The Department of Safety shall be headed by the Mayor as
Director. The Department of Operations shall be headed by the director
who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the Board by
a majority vote of the total number of the Board. The Director of the
Department of Operations shall possess bona fide operations, public works
or engineering experience at the time of selection.
§ 9.03. Powers and Duties of Departments.
The Board shall, by ordinance, determine the powers and duties to be
performed by the departments and bureaus thereof.
§ 9.04. Removal. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
A director of a department or a bureau chief may be suspended or dismissed
by the Mayor at any time, with or without cause.
§ 9.05. Personnel Merit System.
All appointments and promotions of Township officers and employees which
do not require the approval of the Board shall be made on the basis of merit
and fitness demonstrated by examination or other evidence of competence.
§ 9.06. Police Civil Service. [Amended 11-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1748,
approved 4-28-1992; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
A. Department of Administration.
B. Department of Public Safety.
C. Department of Operations.
A. All full-time Township police, including managerial persons (which are
defined as those persons with the rank of Lieutenant and above) in the
Township Police Department, whether or not part of any employee
bargaining units for that Department, but excluding the Chief of Police,
§ 9.01 HOME RULE CHARTER § 9.06
C:29
§ 9.07. Procedures for Suspension or Removal of Board,
Commission and Committee Members. [Amended 3-14-1994 by Ord.
No. 1872, approved 5-16-1995]
shall be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to civil service testing, and
shall be entitled to the protection of the provisions, rules, regulations,
and procedures of the Township Civil Service Commission, as amended
from time to time, applicable to hiring, promotion, demotion,
suspension, removal, firing, and all other personnel matters, but only in
their capacity as full-time police.
B. Part-time police shall not be entitled to such civil service protection, but
shall be supervised, appointed, hired, promoted, demoted, suspended,
and removed by the Mayor, pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.08H
of the Home Rule Charter, as amended from time to time.
C. The Chief of Police shall be nominated by the Mayor, and the
nomination shall then be subject to confirmation by a majority vote of
the total number of the Board of Commissioners. Thereafter, the
nominated Chief of Police shall be subject to a noncompetitive
examination by the Civil Service Commission, which shall be
functioning solely as a testing agency. If such nominated person shall be
certified by the Civil Service Commission as qualified, which
certification shall not be an entitlement to civil service protection, then
that person may be appointed as Chief of Police by a majority vote of the
total number of the Board of Commissioners. The Chief of Police shall
not be entitled to civil service protection, and may be suspended,
dismissed, and removed by the Mayor for cause as set forth in the
Administrative Code of Whitehall Township, Pennsylvania, as amended
from time to time. And further provided, that any existing officer who is
appointed as an acting, interim, or temporary Chief of Police and who
serves in that capacity for a period of less than one year shall not forfeit
the civil service protections, if any, previously accorded to that officer.
This Section 9.06C shall apply to the Chief of Police who is incumbent at
the time of this amendment to the Home Rule Charter.
A. Any member of a Board, Commission or Committee established under
authority of the statutes of the Commonwealth, the Home Rule Charter,
or other ordinance of Whitehall Township may be removed from their
position only for malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office or
for other just cause. Such removal shall be by majority vote of the total
membership of the Board of Commissioners. Such motion may be
presented to the Board of Commissioners only after the member and all
Commissioners have received 15 days advance notice of the intent to
take such vote and has had the opportunity to request a hearing in front
of the Board of Commissioners. Procedures for a hearing shall be in
conformity with 2 Pa. Cons. Stat. § 101 et seq. The member who is
subject to removal may make a request to the Board of Commissioners
for a hearing in writing within 10 calendar days of the date when the
party knew or should have known that the motion for removal had been
§ 9.06 WHITEHALL CODE § 9.07
C:30
submitted for consideration by the Board of Commissioners. If a
hearing is requested, any vote on removal shall be postponed until the
Applicant has had an opportunity for a hearing.
B. Procedures for hearings. Hearings for members of Boards,
Commissions and Committees shall be conducted in the following
manner:
(1) Each hearing shall be open to the public unless a closed hearing is
requested by the member subject to removal.
(2) All testimony presented at the hearing shall be given under oath.
Oaths may be administered by a Court Reporter engaged to record
the hearing testimony or the Chairperson, or in his or her absence,
the Vice-Chairperson shall have the power to administer oaths.
(3) The President or Vice President of the Board of Commissioners
shall state the general purpose of the hearing and have the
Secretary read the allegations, charges, or statement for which the
member is being removed, together with the record of any other
action taken against such member. In addition, the Secretary shall
read any written reply or response received from the member
subject to removal.
(4) The Chairperson shall afford each person making charges, or his or
her counsel, an opportunity to make further statements in support
of such allegations of cause, charge, or example of misfeasance,
malfeasance, or nonfeasance. Any party shall have the opportunity
to produce witnesses, with the proponent of removal advancing
first with the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence,
and the member subject to removal shall go last.
(5) The Chairperson shall afford the member to be removed, or his or
her counsel, an opportunity to question or cross-examine any
persons or parties making allegations, and shall also afford the
opportunity to question or cross-examine any witnesses produced
by such person.
(6) The Chairperson shall afford each person making charges an
opportunity to produce any witnesses and to cross-examine any
witnesses produced by the member subject to removal.
(7) The Board of Commissioners shall determine the admissibility of
any evidence and procedures and shall not be bound by technical
rules of evidence.
(8) A stenographic transcript of the proceedings shall be kept and filed
in the archives of the Board of Commissioners, together with any
and all documents, exhibits, or records pertinent to the case. The
records shall be retained or disposed of in accordance with the
Township's Record Retention Ordinance and Schedule.
§ 9.07 HOME RULE CHARTER § 9.07
C:31
(9) At any time during the course of the hearing, the Board of
Commissioners may question or cross-examine the person making
charges, the accused, and any witness.
(10)Within 20 calendar days after the hearing, the Board of
Commissioners shall issue a decision in the form of a written order.
This written decision shall be forwarded to the member subject to
removal. Following the hearing, the Board of Commissioners may
then take action on a motion to suspend or remove the member.
(11) Decisions of the Board of Commissioners may be appealed to the
Lehigh County Court of Common Pleas.
C. Grounds for "just cause" removal. For "just cause" removal shall
include, but not be limited to:
(1) Non-attendance at three consecutive regular meetings of the group
or more than one half of the total number of regular meetings
during a calendar year, without acceptable excuse.
(2) Conviction of a crime of the third degree or above, a crime
involving moral turpitude, or a crime involving the office of the
member.
(3) Moving domicile to a location other than Whitehall Township.
(4) Such other cause as the Board of Commissioners might deem
appropriate, so long as the conduct of the person would make him
or her unfit to continue to hold public office.
This procedure shall prevail over any other policy or ordinance
to the contrary, and shall further apply to positions created by
state statute unless this procedure is deemed to be specifically
preempted by state statute by a court of competent jurisdiction.
This provision shall apply only to appointed uncompensated
offices, and shall not be construed to apply to any employee or
independent contractor of the Township, whether or not covered
by a collective bargaining agreement, civil service, or otherwise.
§ 9.07 WHITEHALL CODE § 9.07
C:32
ARTICLE X
INFORMATION AND COMPLAINTS OFFICE
[Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 1661, approved 5-15-1991]
§ 10.01. Establishment.
The Board may, by ordinance, establish the Office of Information and
Complaints headed by an Information and Complaints Officer. The
functions, powers and duties of the office of Information and Complaints
shall be determined by ordinance, which functions, powers and duties shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
§ 10.02. Appointment and Removal.
The Information and Complaints Officer shall serve at the pleasure of the
Board of Commissioners. The Officer shall be appointed by majority vote
of the Board, but may only be dismissed by two-third majority vote of the
Board.
§ 10.03. Compensation.
The compensation of the Officer shall be established by the Board annually,
by resolution. Compensation shall not be diminished during the tenure of
the Officer.
A. To receive and reply to requests for information.
B. To receive complaints concerning Township services and acts of
Township agencies, authorities, officials and employees which aggrieve
any person, to investigate on complaint or on his or her own initiative
and to make recommendations to remedy the complaints.
C. To obtain such information and make such inquiries from any agency,
authority or person as shall be required for the discharge of the duties
of the Information and Complaints Officer.
D. To compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of files and
documents, buy subpoena or otherwise.
E. To examine the records and documents of any agency or authority and
to enter and inspect, without notice, the premises of any agency or
authority.
F. To recommend such policies or changes in policies that might lead to
improvements in the functioning of Township offices, agencies and
authorities.
G. To report at least annually to the Board, the Mayor and the public.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
H. To adopt rules of procedure and regulations for the operation of the
Office.
§ 10.01 HOME RULE CHARTER § 10.03
C:33

ARTICLE XI
BUDGET AND FISCAL MATTERS
[Amended 8-6-1984 by Ord. No. 1458, approved 11-6-1984;
7-8-1985 by Ord. No. 1507, approved 11-5-1985; 12-28-1989 by Ord.
No. 1661, approved 5-15-1991]
§ 11.01. Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year of the Township shall begin on the first day of January and
end of the last day of December of each year.
§ 11.02. Submission of Budget and Budget Messages. [Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
At a regular or special public meeting of the Board held on or before the
15th day of October of each year, the Mayor shall submit to the Board a
proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying message.
§ 11.03. Budget Message. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The Mayor's message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and
in terms of the work programs. It shall outline the proposed financial
policies of the Township for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the important
features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current year
in financial policies, expenditures and revenues, together with the reasons
for such changes, summarize the Township's debt position and include such
other supporting or explanatory material as the Mayor deems necessary or
appropriate.
§ 11.04. Budget. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all Township funds
and activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by this
Charter, shall be in such form as the Board may require. In organizing the
budget, the Mayor shall utilize the most feasible combination of expenditure
classification by fund, organization unit, program, purpose or activity and
object. The budget shall contain, inter alia, the following:
A. A general summary of its contents.
B. A detailed statement of all estimated income, indicating the existing
and proposed tax levies, as well as other assessments, fees and charges.
C. A detailed statement of all proposed expenditures, including debt
service, for the ensuing fiscal year.
D. The number of proposed employees in every job classification.
§ 11.01 HOME RULE CHARTER § 11.04
C:35
§ 11.05. Budget Limitations.
The total proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total estimated
income.
§ 11.06. Public Record.
The annual budget shall be a public record and shall be available for public
inspection after submission, prior to adoption, and after adoption at the
Township Municipal Building during the Township's regular business hours.
The Board shall publish in one or more newspapers of general circulation in
the Township the general summary of the budget and a notice stating:
§ 11.07. Adoption of Budget. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The annual budget shall be adopted by ordinance, subject to the approval or
veto of the Mayor and the power of the Township Commissioners to override
the veto, as provided in Article III, § 3.21, of this Charter. Final adoption
of the budget shall occur prior to the commencement of the year for which
it is prepared, but only after it has been available for public inspection at
reasonable hours, after public notice thereof, at least 6 days prior to the
time fixed by the Board for adoption of the budget ordinance.
§ 11.08. Modification of Budget. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
At the request of the Mayor, the Board may modify the budget on or before
the 15th day of February of the fiscal year for which the budget was
approved, provided, however, that where the aggregate of modifications
results in an increase or decrease of a departmental appropriation by more
E. Comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures
for the current fiscal year and actual income and expenditures of the
preceding fiscal year.
F. A statement of all proposed expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year,
detailed by offices, departments and bureaus, in terms of their
respective work programs and the methods of financing such
expenditures.
G. All proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year,
detailed by offices, departments and bureaus when practicable and the
proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure.
A. The times and places where copies of the message and budget are
available for inspection by the public.
B. The time and place for a public hearing on the proposed budget. The
public hearing on the proposed budget shall be held not less than 1
week after publication of notice of the hearing.
§ 11.04 WHITEHALL CODE § 11.08
C:36
than 15% of the original approved budget, such modifications shall be made
only by ordinance finally adopted on or before the 15th day of March of the
fiscal year for which the budget was approved and pursuant to procedures
required for the adoption of the original budget.
§ 11.09. Appropriations.
Adoption of the budget and modifications thereof shall constitute
appropriations for the expenditures set forth therein.
§ 11.10. Payment of Funds. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
No expenditure or payment of any funds of the Township shall be made
except upon approval of the Mayor or the Deputy Mayor. Directives for
payment as so approved shall be certified to the Treasurer. All checks or
drafts of the Township shall be signed by the Treasurer or, in his absence or
disability, by a duly designated deputy.
§ 11.11. Independent Audit.
The Board shall provide for an independent annual audit of all fiscal affairs
of the Township by a Certified Public Accountant or a firm of Certified Public
Accountants who have no personal financial interest, direct or indirect, in
the fiscal affairs of the Township government. The Board may provide for
more frequent audits, as well as special audits, as deemed necessary. The
results of the annual audit and a financial statement of the fiscal affairs of
the Township shall be presented to the Board and a summary of the audit
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township by April 1st
of the year following the fiscal year audited.
§ 11.12. Bonds. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices or positions,
the Township Treasurer, Mayor and Deputy Mayor, as well as any other
officer (elected or appointed), agent or employee of the Township as the
Board may determine, shall execute and file with the Township corporate
surety bonds, conditioned for the honest and faithful performance of their
respective duties, in such sums as shall be fixed by the Board. All such
bonds and sureties thereon, before being accepted by the Township, shall
be approved by the Township Solicitor. The agency placing such bonds shall
be determined by the Board and the premium therefor shall be paid by the
Township. Such bonds may provide for one or more additional obligees in
the event that the officer bonded is acting in a dual or similar capacity with
other political subdivisions or governmental or quasi-governmental entities.
§ 11.08 HOME RULE CHARTER § 11.13
C:37
§ 11.13. Tax Limitations. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2602;
approved 11-8-2005]
No taxes levied under the provisions of this Charter shall be levied by
the Township of Whitehall on the following subjects exceeding the rates
specified in this Section:
Tax Tax Limitations
Real Estate 20 mills
Earned Income 1%
Occupation Tax 1/2 mill
Business Tax on Gross Income 1 1/2 mills
Deed Transfer 1% up to $40,000 inclusive 2% of
the amount over $40,000
Per Capita $10
Emergency and Municipal Services
Tax Exemption: Any person whose
total income from all sources is less
than $2,500 per annum
$52 per year
§ 11.13 WHITEHALL CODE § 11.13
C:38
ARTICLE XII
CONTRACTS
[Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 1661, approved 5-15-1991]
§ 12.01. Powers of Mayor. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
All contracts or purchases of the Township involving sums in excess of
those limits as established by the First Class Township Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be in writing and shall be executed
on behalf of the Township by the Mayor. The Mayor shall also execute
all contracts, regardless of amount, for the purchase, sale, leasing or use
of real estate with approval of the Board. Unless otherwise provided by
ordinance, the Mayor may execute contracts or make purchases on behalf
of the Township which do not require competitive bidding under the terms
of the First Class Township Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Authorization for contracts for the construction of public capital
improvements shall be granted by ordinance regardless of the amount
involved. The Mayor, when required to execute a written contract, shall
request the Township Solicitor to approve the same as to form.
§ 12.02. Competitive Bids.
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, no contract for supplies,
material, labor, franchise or other valuable consideration, to be furnished
to or for the Township, shall be authorized on behalf of the Township
except with the lowest responsible bidder after competitive bidding. All
specifications shall be written so as to be applicable to more than one
supplier.
§ 12.03. Bidding Procedure.
The Board shall, by ordinance, establish a system for the competitive
bidding of contracts and purchases, including such definitions, publication
requirements, deposit and bond requirements, conditions, terms, rules,
regulations, waivers and exceptions as it shall from time to time deem
available.
§ 12.04. Exceptions to Competitive Bidding.
Competitive bidding shall not be required under this Charter for:
A. Labor or services rendered by any Township officer or employee.
B. Labor, material, supplies or services furnished by one Township
department to another Township department.
C. Contracts where particular types, models or pieces of new equipment,
articles, apparatus, appliances, vehicles or parts thereof are desired
which are patented and available from only one source.
§ 12.01 HOME RULE CHARTER § 12.04
C:39
§ 12.05. Maximum Term of Certain Contracts.
The term of contracts for the purchase of supplies shall not exceed 1 year.
§ 12.06. Eminent Domain.
The Township shall have no authority to grant to others, by franchise,
contract or otherwise, its power and right of eminent domain.
§ 12.07. Officials with Personal Interest in Contracts.
No elected or appointed Township official or employee, or any corporation,
partnership, association, joint venture or other entity of which he or she
is a member, officer, official, partner, stockholder, joint venturer, associate,
director, employee or consultant, shall solicit, benefit by or be financially
interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract for the purchase of
property or services to be paid from the Township treasury. The provisions
of this Section shall not apply where such official or employee is an
employee of the entity (to which money is to be paid) in a capacity with no
possible influence on the transaction and in which he or she cannot possible
be benefited thereby, either financially or in any other material manner.
§ 12.08. Conflict of Interest.
D. Contracts for labor, materials, supplies or services not requiring
competitive bids pursuant to the terms of the First Class Township Code
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Contracts relating to the acquisition or use of real property.
F. Contracts relating to the sale of real or personal property for value less
than an amount to be established, from time to time, by the Board of
Commissioners.
G. Contracts for professional or unique services.
H. Contracts for emergency repair of public works of the Township.
I. Contracts with other governmental entities, authorities, agencies or
political subdivisions.
A. No elected or appointed official or employee of the Township or any
corporation, partnership, joint venture, association or other entity of
which he or she is a member, officer, official, joint venturer, partner,
stockholder, associate, director, employee or consultant shall represent
any person on any matter before the Township, Township Board or any
of its agencies or officers.
B. No elected or appointed official or employee of the Township shall have
any interest as a member, officer, official, joint venturer, partner,
stockholder, associate, director, employee or consultant of any
corporation, partnership, association, joint venture or other entity
§ 12.04 WHITEHALL CODE § 12.08
C:40
which has a matter pending before the Township, Township Board or
any of its agencies or officers. The provisions of this § 12.08(B) shall
not apply where such official or employee is an employee of the entity
(which has the matter pending) in a capacity with no possible influence
in the matter and in which he or she cannot be benefited thereby, either
financially or in any other material manner.
§ 12.08 HOME RULE CHARTER § 12.08
C:41

ARTICLE XIII
RECALL
§ 13.01. Officers Subject to Recall.
Any person holding an elective office of the Township, whether by election,
succession or appointment to fill a vacancy shall be subject to removal from
office at a recall election in the manner provided in this Article.
§ 13.02. Recall Procedure. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The recall of an incumbent of an elective office shall be initiated upon
petition signed by registered electors of the Township at large equal in
number to at least 30% of the vote cast for the office of Mayor at the last
preceding Mayor election. Every recall petition shall name the office and
officer against whom it is directed.
Each elector signing a recall petition shall add to his or her signature,
his or her residence, election district and the date of signing. Signatures
on a recall petition may be on separate sheets, but each sheet shall have
appended to it the affidavit of some person, not necessarily a signer of
the petition, that, to the best of the affiant's knowledge and belief, the
persons whose signatures appear on the sheet are registered electors of
the Township, that they signed with full knowledge of the contents of the
petition and that their residences are correctly given.
A recall petition shall be tendered for filing to the County Board of
Elections. No signature shall be counted as valid which is dated more
than 60 days prior to the date the petition is tendered for filing. Upon
tender to the County Board of Elections, the petition shall be available for
examination by any interested person. Within 15 days after tender of the
petition, the County Board of Elections shall have authority to pass upon the
validity of the petition and the validity and number of signatures required
thereon. The decision of the County Board of Elections may be appealed to
the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County.
§ 13.03. Notice to Incumbent.
As soon as the County Board of Elections has accepted a recall petition
for filing and determined its validity and sufficiency, the Chairman of the
Election Board shall notify the incumbent named in the petition that the
petition has been filed. Upon receipt of such notice, the incumbent may
resign from office and thereupon the recall proceedings shall terminate.
§ 13.04. Recall Elections.
If the incumbent against whom a recall petition is directed does not resign
from office within 10 days after notice of the filing of such petition shall
have been given to him or her, the County Board of Elections shall arrange
a recall election. If a regular or special election is to be held not less than
§ 13.01 HOME RULE CHARTER § 13.04
C:43
30 days nor more than 90 days after the 10 days have expired, the recall
question shall be placed before the electors at such an election. Otherwise
a special recall election shall be fixed by such Election Board for a date not
earlier than 30 days nor later than 90 days after the 10 days have expired.
The incumbent against whom a recall petition is directed may resign at any
time prior to the recall election and thereupon the election shall not be held.
The following question shall be presented to each elector in a recall
election:
"Shall (Name of officer) be recalled and removed from the office of (name of
office)?"
The above question shall appear as to every officer whose recall is to be
voted upon and provision shall be made for the elector to vote "Yes" or "No"
on the question.
If a majority of the registered electors who vote on the question at a
recall election shall vote "Yes," the incumbent shall be deemed recalled and
removed from office, but if a majority of such registered electors shall vote
"No," he or she shall remain in office.
Should the results of such election be affirmative, the date of the removal
and vacancy in the office shall be 7 days subsequent to the date when the
results of election are certified by the County Board of Elections, unless
such date is further postponed by order of court.
§ 13.05. Disqualification for Office.
No person who has been removed from an elective office by a recall
election, or who has resigned from such an elective office after a recall
petition directed to him or her has been filed, shall be eligible for election
or appointment to any office of the Township within 2 years after his or her
removal or resignation.
§ 13.06. Limitations.
No recall petition shall be filed against any incumbent of an elective office
within the first year or the last 9 months of the term of his or her office or
within 9 months after an unsuccessful recall election against him or her, but
an officer who has been re-elected for a successive term shall be subject to
recall also during the first year of such term.
§ 13.04 WHITEHALL CODE § 13.06
C:44
ARTICLE XIV
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
§ 14.01. General Authority.
§ 14.02. Commencement of Proceedings; Petitioners' Committee;
Affidavit.
Any ten qualified voters may commence initiative or referendum
proceedings by filing with the Township Secretary an affidavit stating they
will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating
the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses
and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be
sent and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the
ordinance sought to be reconsidered.
Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed, the
Township Secretary shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the
petitioners' committee.
§ 14.03. Petitions.
A. Initiative. The qualified voters of the Township shall have power to
propose ordinances to the Board and, if the Board fails to adopt an
ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or
reject it at a Township election, provided that such power shall not
extend to the budget or capital program or any ordinance relating to
appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of Township officers or
employees. No proposed initiative ordinance shall contain more than
one subject and the subject thereof shall be clearly expressed in the
title of such ordinance.
B. Referendum. The qualified voters of the Township shall have power to
require reconsideration by the Board of any adopted ordinance and, if
the Board fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or
reject it at a Township election, provided that such power shall not
extend to the budget or capital program or any emergency ordinance or
ordinance relating to appropriation of money or levy of taxes.
A. Number of Signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be
signed by qualified voters of the Township equal in number to at least
15% of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last
regular Township election.
B. Form and Content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and
style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each
signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be
followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain, or
have attached thereto, throughout their circulation the full text of the
ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
§ 14.01 HOME RULE CHARTER § 14.03
C:45
§ 14.04. Procedure After Filing.
C. Affidavit of Circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it
when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he
or she personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures
thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his or her presence, that
he or she believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons
whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an
opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance
proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
D. Time for Filing Referendum Petitions. Referendum petitions must be
filed within 45 days after final adoption by the Board of the ordinances
sought to be reconsidered.
A. Certificate of Secretary; Amendment. Within 20 days after the petition
is filed, the Township Secretary shall complete a certificate as to its
sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is
defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the
petitioners' committee by registered mail. A petition certified
insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be
amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to
amend it with the Township Secretary within 2 days after receiving the
copy of his or her certificate and files a supplementary petition upon
additional papers within 10 days after receiving the copy of such
certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the
requirements of subsections (B) and (C) of § 14.03, and within 5 days
after it is filed, the Township Secretary shall complete a certificate as to
the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of
such certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail, as in
the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is
certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended petition is certified
insufficient, and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or
request Board review under subsection (B) of this Section within the
time required, the Township Secretary shall promptly present his or her
certificate to the Board and the certificate shall then be final
determination as to the sufficiency of the petition.
B. Board Review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the
petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it, or if
an amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may,
within 2 days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request
that it be reviewed by the Board. The Board shall review the certificate
at its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or
disapprove it.
C. Court Review; New Petition. A determination as to the sufficiency of a
petition by the Board may be appealed to the Court of Common Pleas. A
determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall
not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
§ 14.03 WHITEHALL CODE § 14.05
C:46
§ 14.05. Referendum Petitions; Suspension of Effect of Ordinance.
When a referendum petition is filed with the Township Secretary, the
ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect.
Such suspension shall terminate:
§ 14.06. Action of Petitions.
§ 14.07. Results of Election.
A. When there is a determination of insufficiency of the petition; or
B. When the petitioners' committee withdraws the petition; or
C. Upon certification of the election results, where a majority of the
qualified voters have voted in favor of maintaining the referred
ordinance.
A. Action by Board. When an initiative or referendum petition has been
finally determined sufficient, the Board shall promptly consider the
proposed initiative ordinance in the manner provided in Article III of
the Charter, or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If
the Board fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any
change in substance within 60 days, or fails to repeal the referred
ordinance within 45 days after the date the petition was determined
sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the
voters of the Township.
B. Submission to Voters. A vote by the electorate of the Township on a
proposed or referred ordinance shall be held not less than 45 days and
not later than 1 year from the date of the final Board vote thereon. If no
regular Township election is to be held within the period prescribed in
this subsection, the Board shall petition the County Board of Elections
for a special election; otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same time
as such regular election. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance
shall be made available at the polls.
C. Withdrawal of Petitions. An initiative or referendum petition may be
withdrawn at any time prior to the 15th day preceding the day
scheduled for a vote by the electorate of the Township by filing with the
Township Secretary a request for withdrawal signed by at least seven
members of the petitioners' committee. Upon the filing of such request,
the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings
thereon shall be terminated.
A. Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed
initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon
certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in
the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the Board.
If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one
receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the
extent of such conflict.
§ 14.05 HOME RULE CHARTER § 14.07
C:47
§ 14.08. Repeal.
Any ordinance proposed under the provisions of Article XIII of this Charter,
whether passed by the Board or adopted by a vote of the electors, cannot
be repealed or amended within 2 years of its effective date except by a vote
of the electors.
B. Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred
ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon
certification of the election results.
§ 14.07 WHITEHALL CODE § 14.08
C:48
ARTICLE XV
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 15.01. Amendments.
Amendments to this Charter shall be in conformity with the provisions of
the "Home Rule Charter and Optional Plan Law," Act of April 13, 1972, No.
62, and as said Act may be amended from time to time.
§ 15.02. Election Procedures.
The procedure for nomination and election of all Township officials shall be
in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Election
Code.
§ 15.03. Severability.
It is the intention of the electors of the Township that if this Charter
cannot take effect in its entirety because of the judgment of any court
of competent jurisdiction holding invalid any part or parts thereof, the
remaining provisions of the Charter shall be given full force and effect as
completely as if the part or parts held invalid had not been included herein.
§ 15.04. Oath of Office. [Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 1661,
approved 5-15-1991; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
The Commissioners, the Mayor and such other officers and employees as
the Board may be ordinance determine, prior to assuming office, shall take
and shall sign an oath of office as shall from time to time be prescribed by
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Such oath may be taken and
signed before any district magistrate or notary public of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, and no person shall be permitted to assume such office
until the oath in written form is filed with the Secretary of the Township.
§ 15.05. Public Documents. [Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 1661,
approved 5-15-1991]
All officers, officials or employees of the Township, upon ceasing to hold
office or employment within the Township, shall deliver to his or her
successor or agency head, or to the Township Secretary, all original
documents, models, pictures, plans, photographs, plats, maps, films, seals
and other objects or materials which were prepared for or originated by
such officers, officials or employees in connection with the transaction of
Township business.
§ 15.01 HOME RULE CHARTER § 15.05
C:49

ARTICLE XVI
TRANSITION
§ 16.01. Transition Procedure. [Reserved].
§ 16.02. Continuity.
A. All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative
proceedings involving the Township shall continue, except as modified
pursuant to the provisions of this Charter.
B. All Township ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations which are in
force at the time this Charter is adopted, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Charter, shall continue in force until amended,
modified or repealed.
C. All agencies shall continue until modified by the provisions of this
Charter.
D. All elected officers whose terms do not expire upon the effective date of
the 1989 Charter update shall continue in office.
E. The Township shall continue to own, possess and control all rights and
property, of every kind and nature, owned, possessed or controlled by it
when this Charter takes effect and the Township shall be subject to all
of its debts, obligations, liabilities and duties.
§ 16.01 HOME RULE CHARTER § 16.02
C:51
The Code
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT
§ 16.02 WHITEHALL CODE § 16.02
C:52
Part 1
[AdoptedA5d-m13i-n1i9st7r6atBivyeO Crodd. eNo. 1187]
ARTICLE I
Findings, Short Title and Definitions
§ 1-1. Legislative findings.
The General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania by the Act
of April 13, 1972, P.L. 184, has granted to the Township of Whitehall and
other municipalities within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the right
to adopt a Home Rule Charter and a new form of government and to
exercise the power of local self-government. The citizens of the Township
of Whitehall having elected to be governed under a Home Rule Charter
beginning January 5, 1976, this Part 1 is hereby adopted pursuant to the
directive contained in Article XVI of said Charter in order to provide for the
citizens of Whitehall, a progressive, efficient and economical government.
It is the purpose of this Part 1, in keeping with "Home Rule Charter
and Optional Plans Law of 1972," to permit the broadest power of local
self-government consistent with the Constitution of the United States and
Pennsylvania, and with the provisions of the Home Rule Charter and
Optional Plans Law itself; and its provisions shall be read and interpreted in
the light of such purpose.
§ 1-2. Short title.
This Part 1 shall be known and cited as the "Administrative Code of
Whitehall Township, Pennsylvania."
§ 1-3. Definitions. [Amended 3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1722]
A. The following words and terms when used in this Part 1 shall, unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise, mean and include as follows:
ADMINISTRATIVE — The function of carrying out the policies,
ordinances or mandates of the Board.
ADVISORY — The functions of gathering facts and making
recommendations to the Board or to any other body designated by the
Board.
AGENCY — Department, administrative unit, board, bureau,
commission or committee.
ASSISTANT — The Deputy Mayor as appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the Board.[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
BOARD — The Township Board of Commissioners consisting of those
Commissioners who have assumed office.
BUREAUS — The subdivision of Department of Administration,
Department of Public Safety and Department of Operations.
§ 1-1 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-3
C:53
CITIZEN — Anyone who resides within the boundaries of Whitehall
Township or who directly or indirectly owns, leases or rents real
property within the boundaries of Whitehall Township.
CODE — The Administrative Code of Whitehall Township, Pennsylvania.
COMMITTEE — A body serving for a designated period of time on an ad
hoc and purely advisory basis, comprised of three or more individuals
appointed by the Board.
COURT OF COMMON PLEAS — The Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh
County, Pennsylvania.
DEPARTMENT — A major administrative category of a government
consisting of subordinate bureaus and divisions.
DIVISION — A subdivision of bureau.
EMPLOYEE — Individuals other than elected officials receiving salaries
for services rendered to the Township.
HOME RULE CHARTER — The Home Rule Charter of the Township of
Whitehall as approved by the electors of the said Township November
5, 1974, with amendments, if any, thereafter lawfully adopted and
approved.
INDEPENDENT BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS — It is recognized that,
from time to time, the Township may be required, or may desire, to
establish subordinate boards and commissions which may serve in
either an advisory or quasi-judicial capacity. The following definitions
shall apply with respect to such subordinate boards and commissions:
BOARD — A body established by law or by a valid ordinance of
the Township, on a permanent basis and for indefinite duration, to
perform those functions of a quasi-judicial nature that are specified
in the ordinance creating the board or the law governing it, and
to be composed of three or more individuals, appointed by the
Board for definite terms of office; provided, however, that where
a body falling within this definition shall, by law, be required to
be designated as a commission, that fact shall be clearly stated
in the ordinance creating or governing that commission and that
ordinance shall specify that that commission shall perform the
functions of a board rather than a commission.
(1)
COMMISSION — A body established by law or by a valid ordinance
of the Township, on a permanent basis and for indefinite duration,
to perform those functions of an advisory or administrative nature
that are specified in the ordinance creating the commission or
in the law governing it, and to be composed of three or more
individuals, appointed by the Board for definite terms of office;
provided, however, that where a body falling within this definition
of Commission shall, by law, be required to be designated as a
board, that fact shall be clearly state in the ordinance creating
or governing that Board, and that ordinance shall specify that the
(2)
§ 1-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-3
C:54
§ 1-4. Interpretation.
If any act, matter or thing permitted to be regulated, performed,
accomplished or undertaken by a first class Township within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania is not governed by the provisions of the
Home Rule Charter, the Administrative Code or the other ordinances of the
Township of Whitehall, then the provisions of the First Class Township Code,
Act of June 14, 1931, P.L. 1206, Article I, § 101, as amended, as found at 53
P.S. § 55101, et seq., shall govern, to the extent applicable.
LAW — The Constitution and any statute of the United States of
America and of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
MAYOR — The elected official in whom shall be vested the executive
and administrative powers of the Township government.[Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
MUNICIPAL GENERAL ELECTIONS — Those elections required by the
laws of Pennsylvania to be held in odd-numbered years.
PERSON — An individual, a partnership, an association, a corporation
or other entity.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Whitehall, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
Board shall have only the authority of a Commission, as defined in
this subsection.
B. In this Part 1, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
§ 1-3 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-4
C:55

ARTICLE II
Township and Board of Commissioners
§ 1-5. Meetings. [Amended 8-17-1978 by Ord. No. 1274; 12-11-1979
by Ord. No. 1324; 3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1722]
In addition to the requirements for Board meetings as prescribed in §§ 3.12
and 3.14 of the Home Rule Charter, the following rules shall pertain to all
meetings of the Board:
§ 1-6. Citizens' right to be heard.
In addition to the provisions of the Home Rule Charter, as contained in
Article III, § 3.15 thereof, at all meetings of the Board, reasonable
opportunity shall be granted to all interested citizens to exercise their rights
and privilege to lay legitimate matters before the Board. The Board may
prescribe proper procedure for citizen presentation to insure that at all
times proper parliamentary decorum shall be observed.
§ 1-7. Compensation of Commissioners. [Added 12-9-1985 by Ord.
No. 1529; amended 3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1722; 3-8-1999 by Ord.
No. 2146; 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2525]
A. Notice. The responsibility for all written notices and public
advertisements shall rest with the Secretary.
B. Continuation of adjourned meetings. The Board may adjourn any
organizational, regular or special meetings to a specified time,
reconvene such meeting and take action at the continuation thereof,
provided that notice of the time and place of the continuation was
announced prior to adjournment. The Board may act upon any matter at
a continued meeting which had been considered or tabled prior to
adjournment. No motion shall be required to reschedule a continuation,
as the scheduling shall be determined by the officer presiding at the
time the adjournment.
C. Emergency meetings. In the event the Board shall decree a state of
emergency resulting from a natural or man-made disaster, public notice
of meeting shall be waived. The Board may hold and take action at an
emergency meeting at any time, upon the call of the President of the
Board, or the Vice President in his absence, or the Mayor or any
member of the Board; provided that such meeting is attended by at
least a majority of all members of the Board. [Amended 6-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
D. Board receipt of minutes of public meetings. Each member of the Board
shall receive minutes of all public meetings of the Board no later than
30 calendar days following each meeting. This requirement shall be met
by the Township Secretary who shall be entitled to the use of
stenographic services provided by the Township.
§ 1-5 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-7
C:57
§ 1-8. Return of Township property. [Added 3-11-1991 by Ord. No.
1722]
Any Township property possessed by a member of this Board upon the
completion of his/her term of office shall be promptly returned to the
Township, with due notice of the return of the Township Secretary.
A. Each member of the Board elected or appointed to office on or after the
date hereof shall receive compensation as a Commissioner in the
annual amount of $4,125.
B. Such compensation shall be paid in monthly installments.
§ 1-7 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-8
C:58
ARTICLE III
Mayor
[Amended 12-11-1979 by Ord. No. 1324; 4-17-1980 by Ord. No.
1337; 10-13-1980 by Ord. No. 1356; 3-15-1987 by Ord. No. 1578;
3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1722; 3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1726; 6-13-1994
by Ord. No. 1886; 2-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1922; 3-8-1999 by Ord. No.
2145; 1-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2388; 1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 2662;
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
§ 1-9. Appointment, qualifications and tenure.
The Home Rule Charter sets forth the provisions relating to the
appointment, qualifications and tenure of the Mayor.
§ 1-10. Powers, duties and authority.
In addition to the powers, duties and authority contained in the Home Rule
Charter, Article V, § 5.08, the Mayor shall:
A. Make all reports to the Board each month in writing.
B. Assign one person to administer and supervise the operation of each
bureau.
C. Submit to the Board for its consideration and comment all proposed
personnel rules and regulations, or modifications to existing personnel
rules and regulations, at least 15 days prior to the effective date
thereof.
D. Restrict access to the municipal building and offices by other than
authorized personnel by issuing of building and office keys to the
appropriate Township officials and employees.
E. Be regularly apprised by the Township Treasurer of temporary
investments of Township funds.
F. Cause to be implemented a billing system to assure that all Township
monies received and collected are properly received and applied.
G. The Mayor and his or her designee shall be subject to penalties for
willful failure to execute and enforce any ordinance or resolution, as
required pursuant to Home Rule Charter, Article V, § 5.08(D). Any
alleged violations shall be filed with the District Justice or reported to
the Bureau of Police for investigation. Any prosecution deemed
necessary by the investigated area shall be prosecuted by the Township
Solicitor on behalf of the Township.
H. Supervisor of employees. Pursuant to Home Rule Charter, Article V,
§ 5.08(H), the Mayor shall be responsible to supervise, appoint,
suspend or remove all Township employees.
§ 1-9 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-10
C:59
§ 1-11. Deputy Mayor.
In addition to the powers, duties and authority contained in the Home Rule
Charter, Article V, § 5.09, the Deputy Mayor shall:
I. Supervision of agencies. Pursuant to Home Rule Charter, Article V,
§ 5.08(I), the Mayor shall supervise all Township agencies which he or
she appoints.
J. Voluntary Executive Advisory Committees. Pursuant to Home Rule
Charter, Article V, § 5.08(M), any voluntary advisory committee
established by the Mayor is an Executive ad hoc committee. Any such
committee shall be automatically dissolved upon the termination of the
term of office of the appointing Mayor.
K. Legally authorized expenditures. Pursuant to Home Rule Charter,
Article V, §§ 5.08(B) and 3.21, the Mayor has the power to veto any item
of appropriation. Any such veto, however, is subject to an overriding
vote of the Board of Commissioners. An overriding vote by the Board on
any expenditure item shall mean that the expenditure is legally
authorized without further action.
L. Mayor's performance of duties. Pursuant to Home Rule Charter, Article
V, § 5.08(R), the Mayor has three Township departments to assist in
performance of his or her duties. Additional duties not contrary to the
law or the Home Rule Charter may be delegated to him or her by the
Board with his or her assent.
(1) The Mayor is obligated to enforce all ordinances and resolutions
enacted by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with Article
V of the Home Rule Charter.
(2) The Mayor shall cause copies of all Township Solicitor
communications, both to the Township and for which the Township
is billed and from the Township or any member of the Board of
Commissioners to the Solicitor, to be forwarded promptly to the
Board upon receipt by the Mayor, excepting any privileged
personnel file items.
(3) Data regarding competitive bids, contracts and agreements shall
be communicated by the Mayor to the Board at reasonable
intervals or at the request of the Board.
(4) The Mayor shall make available information regarding Township
expenditures at the request of the Board.
A. Assist the Mayor in the preparation and administration of the budget,
administer a centralized purchasing system for all departments of the
Township government, administer and supervise approved personnel
policies and practices and establish monthly allotments in connection
with the operation of the budget.
§ 1-10 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-11
C:60
§ 1-12. Compensation of Deputy Mayor.
The salary of the Deputy Mayor shall be determined by the Board annually.
§ 1-13. Compensation of Mayor. [Amended 1-10-2011 by Ord. No.
2848, approved 1-11-2011; 1-12-2015 by Ord. No. 2998, approved
1-13-2015; 3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3137, approved 3-12-2019]
The compensation for the Mayor shall be established as follows:
Calendar Year Compensation
2020 $96,745.15
2021 $99,405.63
2022 $102,139.28
2023 $104,948.11
B. Be responsible for the establishment and maintenance of a uniform
accounting and internal control system throughout the Township, which
system shall be so designated as to reflect accurately the assets and
liabilities, income and expenses of the Township and the operation of
the Township budget at any time during the fiscal year.
C. Review every warrant for the expenditure of Township monies, and if
satisfied that such expenditure is within the budget allotment
pertaining thereto, present it to the Township Treasurer for payment.
D. Be responsible for all accounts payable and receivable.
E. Be responsible for establishing a lien docket. All claims shall be
docketed and, where applicable, shall be certified to the Solicitor for
the filing of a municipal lien, where applicable, and shall also be
indexed in the Township lien docket, which will be open for inspection
during regular business hours. The lien docket shall be bound and shall
indicate which liens are paid or satisfied.
F. Once satisfied that expenditures are within the budget allotment,
present copies of proof of purchase slips and/or individually signed
expenditure authorizations for payments of supplies and services other
than payroll items.
G. Have access to all nonprivileged information and obtain and provide
such information when requested by another Township official,
employee, agency or member of the public.
H. Furnish the Township Treasurer with projected cash flow financial
needs of the Township upon the Treasurer's request.
I. Evaluate and report on investment and collection data provided by the
Township Treasurer.
§ 1-11 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-14
C:61
§ 1-14. Fringe benefits; limitations.
A. The Mayor cannot exceed and shall only receive such benefits as are
permitted by the Home Rule Charter and expressly approved by the
Board of Commissioners.
B. The following additional benefits have expressly approved by the Board
of Commissioners:
(1) Use of a Township motor vehicle under the following terms and
conditions:
(a) The Mayor shall not use a Township motor vehicle for the
purpose of going on vacations.
(b) The Mayor shall not take the Township vehicle more than two
miles outside of the jurisdictional limits of Whitehall Township,
except for Township-related trips and purposes (i.e., meetings
in Harrisburg, Three Mayor's Meetings, seminars, municipal
conventions, etc.).
(c) Otherwise the Mayor shall have access to and use of the
Township vehicle on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis.
§ 1-14 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-14
C:62
ARTICLE IV
Departments, Administrative Units, Board, Bureaus, Committees
and Commissions
§ 1-15. Administrative Departments. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
The Township shall have the following administrative departments which
shall be operated under the supervision of the Mayor and shall possess such
powers and duties as the Board shall by ordinance prescribe:
§ 1-16. Duties of the Directors.
Each department head or director shall:
A. Department of Administration.
B. Department of Public Safety.
C. Department of Operations.
D. Such other departments as may be created by amendment of the Home
Rule Charter.
A. Direct employees in the performance of all duties and responsibilities
required of the department and its subordinate agencies as provided by
law, the Home Rule Charter, this Administrative Code or by any other
ordinance of the Township, and direct employees in the performance of
such other duties as may be required by the Mayor and which are not in
conflict with the law, the Home Rule Charter, this Administrative Code
or any other ordinance of the Township. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
B. Be immediately responsible to the Mayor for the effective
administration of his department and all activities and functions
assigned thereto. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
C. Subject to the approval of the Mayor, prescribe the internal
organization of his department and its constituent and subordinate
agencies and the duties of subordinate officers and employees of the
department. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
D. Assign functions, powers and duties to subordinate officers and
employees within his department and modify those assignments.
E. Be responsible for the work of his department, supervise and direct the
work of the employees of his department, measure the performance of
the employees in accordance with approved procedures and report
regularly to the Mayor regarding the performance of his department
and its employees. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
§ 1-15 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-16
C:63
§ 1-17. Department of Administration. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
Reference is hereby made to the Home Rule Charter, § 5.09, Deputy Mayor
and § 1-11.
§ 1-18. Department of Public Safety. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord.
No. 1313]
F. Furnish to any department or agency of the Township any service,
labor, material and equipment that may be needed to perform a
municipal function or service.
G. Prepare and submit to the Mayor whatever reports the Mayor may
require, including periodic reports of departmental activities.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
H. Serve as staff officer to any committee, commission or board that is
assigned to his department by the Mayor. [Amended 6-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
I. Coordinate the activities and work of his department with pertinent
regional and area-wide programs and, if any program shall cease to be
conducted on a regional or area-wide basis and shall be assigned by the
Mayor or the Board to his department, supervise the incorporation of
that program into his department. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
J. Provide the maximum level, quantity and quality of service within the
limitations of the budget.
K. Be responsible for manpower planning within his department.
L. Plan and execute appropriate training for departmental personnel.
M. Recommend to the Mayor, where applicable, policies and procedures
designed to improve the quality of Township functions and services.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
A. The functions of the Department of Public Safety shall be the
administration and control of Township activity pertaining to the
protection of persons and property, except to the extent that any such
activity is expressly charged to any other department, office or agency.
B. The Department of Public Safety shall be headed by the Mayor, who
shall be responsible for the performance of the functions of that
Department. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
C. The responsibilities of the Mayor as Department Head shall be:
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
§ 1-16 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-18
C:64
(1) To enforce laws, municipal ordinances and governmental
regulations.
(2) To develop, implement and administer crime prevention programs.
(3) To conduct and administer those inspection services and programs
assigned to his department by the Board.
(4) To perform other related public safety duties that are devolved to
him by ordinance.
D. The Department of Safety shall be comprised of the following:
(1) Bureau of Fire.
(2) Bureau of Police.
(3) Emergency Management Agency; and such other bureaus as may
be created from time to time by ordinance.
E. Powers and duties of the bureau of police of Whitehall Township:
(1) Police powers. Township police shall have all such powers as are
enumerated in the First Class Township Code, the Crimes Code and
any Pennsylvania statute having general applicability throughout
the Commonwealth.
(2) Police rules and regulations. The Bureau of Police shall be
governed by the rules and regulations of the Whitehall Township
Civil Service Commission. All Bureau rules and regulations shall be
printed and distributed to Bureau police, as well as other Bureau
personnel who are subject to such rules and regulations.
(3) Rights of police:
(a) All positions within the Bureau of Police except for Chief of
Police, shall be attained through impartial Civil Service testing.
(b) Equal educational opportunities shall be available to all police
officers.
(c) Administration favoritism toward police officers shall be
forbidden.
(4) Required seminar on Township law. In addition to all other
mandated police training, the Chief of Police shall, from time to
time, provide a seminar on the Township of Whitehall Code of
Ordinances. This seminar shall also be presented to all new police
officers within six months of their date of employment.
(5) Badge or shield. While on duty, all officers shall wear a badge or
shield and a uniform denoting him or her as "police." The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to undercover police.
§ 1-18 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-18
C:65
§ 1-19. Department of Operations.
(6) Cooperative agreement. No police officer, from a municipality other
than Whitehall, may perform police duties within the Township
unless under and pursuant to a cooperative agreement clearly
stating that the officer is acting pursuant to the direction of his or
her own municipality.
F. Statement of goals of the Bureau of Police. The objectives of the Bureau
of Police within the Department of Public Safety are to effectively
discharge the following duties:
(1) The prevention of crime.
(2) The repression of crime.
(3) The apprehension of offenders.
(4) The recovery of property.
A. The Department of Operations shall include the following bureaus:
(1) Bureau of Planning, Zoning and Development.
(2) Bureau of Public Works:
(a) Division of Works.
(b) Division of Communications, Utilities and Traffic Control.
(3) Bureau of Parks and Recreation; and such other bureaus as may be
created from time to time by ordinance and assigned to the
Department by the Mayor. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
B. The functions of the Department of Operations shall be:
(1) The administration and control of Township activity pertaining to
the construction, installation, operation and maintenance of the
streets, rights-of-way, physical facilities and real and personal
property of the Township.
(2) The planting and maintenance of trees and other vegetation.
(3) The disposal of solid waste, whether performed by Township
personnel, contract with other persons, or otherwise, except to the
extent that any such activity is expressly charged to any other
department, office or agency.
(4) The administration and enforcement of Chapter 22, Subdivision
and Land Development, and Chapter 27, Zoning, within the
Township.
§ 1-18 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-19
C:66
§ 1-20. Boards, Committees and Commissions. [Amended
12-11-1979 by Ord. No. 1324]
All boards, committees and commissions shall be supplied by the Township
with any necessary secretarial services required in the performance of
their Township duties. Board committee and commission members shall be
supplied with suitable facilities for filing materials related to their Township
duties. All Township equipment shall be returned upon termination of
membership on such board, committee or commission. In addition to the
(5) To develop, implement and administer recreation programs for
Township citizens and provide for the care and maintenance of
Township parks and playgrounds.
(6) Street and alley vacations which are requested by petition of the
adjoining property owners shall be approved by the Board of
Commissioners only when those persons petitioning for the street
or alley vacation agree to reimburse the Township for any and all
legal and engineering fees incurred from the vacation petition;
indemnify the Township from and against any and all claims for
damages or lack of access resulting from the vacation petition, in
form satisfactory to the Township Solicitor; and provide such
substitute easements as the Department of Operations and
Township Solicitor deem to be necessary or advisable.
C. The head of the Department of Operations shall bear the official title of
Director of Operations.
D. The responsibilities of the Director of Operations shall be:
(1) To administer, direct and supervise the construction, maintenance
and operation of the physical properties of the Township.
(2) To administer, direct and supervise engineering services.
(3) To submit to the Mayor the estimated expenses that will be
incurred by the Department of Operations for the coming year.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(4) To assure the construction and maintenance of the streets of the
Township and to do whatever is necessary to keep them open to
traffic, except that nothing in this paragraph shall limit or diminish
the responsibility of owners and occupants of property for the
construction, maintenance and repair of sidewalks and the removal
of obstructions from sidewalks.
(5) To assure the installation and maintenance of Township facilities in
and along the streets, including traffic signs and signals,
directional signals and street name signs.
(6) To assure proper provision for and management of the collection
and disposal of solid waste produced in the Township.
§ 1-19 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-20
C:67
providing of secretarial services and storage facilities, the Township
administration shall cause agency members to be recipients of periodic
publications in their respective fields and encourage related learning
experiences.
§ 1-20 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-20
C:68
ARTICLE V
Township Secretary
§ 1-21. Appointment, supervision and tenure.
The Secretary shall be elected by and shall be directly under the supervision
and control of the Board. The provisions in the Home Rule Charter relative
to the powers and duties of the Secretary shall govern the activities of the
Secretary while in office. The Secretary shall serve at the pleasure of the
Board.
§ 1-22. Assistant Secretary.
The Board may designate an Assistant Secretary to act as Secretary in
the absence of the Secretary and to perform all duties delegated to the
Secretary by the Home Rule Charter.
§ 1-21 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-22
C:69

ARTICLE VI
Township Solicitor
§ 1-23. Appointment, qualifications and tenure. [Amended
12-11-1979 by Ord. No. 1324; 3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1722; 6-8-2009
by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
As provided in Article VI of the Home Rule Charter, the Solicitor shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the total
number of the Board. The Solicitor's appointment shall occur at the Board
organizational meeting. The Solicitor, once appointed, may be removed by
the Mayor at any time, with or without cause. Any need for a replacement
shall be approved by Board majority vote at a public meeting.
§ 1-24. Compensation. [Added 12-11-1979 by Ord. No. 1324]
Before receiving any compensation from the Township, the duly-appointed
Solicitor shall enter into a contract with the Township, wherein the scope
of his services and extent of his or her availability for the performance
of Township legal services are stated, and his manner and rate of
compensation are set forth. If the Board shall set any retainer fee for the
Solicitor, such fee shall be stipulated in the annual budget.
§ 1-25. Declaration of conflict of interest. [Amended 12-11-1979 by
Ord. No. 1324]
A. Conflict of interest. The Solicitor shall immediately disclose any real or
potential conflict of interest in proffering legal counsel, according to
state law, the Home Rule Charter or Township ordinances. The Solicitor
shall not be permitted to provide legal counsel to the Township
regarding a dispute with an adversary when he also serves as counsel
to the adversary. Likewise, a Solicitor shall not be permitted to render
legal advice to the Township on a development and also provide advice
and counsel to the developer.
B. Litigation. The Solicitor shall designate copies of all nonprivileged
correspondence from his or her office to be circulated by the Mayor's
office to all members of the Board. The Solicitor shall, before filing any
court cases on behalf of the Township of Whitehall, be satisfied of Board
concurrence. In no case shall there be a civil case filed by the Solicitor
against any committee or commission member who has been appointed
by the Board, and can be also only removed by the Board, without
Board concurrence. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
C. Misuse of Solicitor services. The Solicitor shall be obligated to reveal
any attempted solicitation of his or her legal services by any Township
personnel who may approach him or her for personal legal advice at
Township expense or who request services at Township cost which
serve personal rather than Township interests.
§ 1-23 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-26
C:71
§ 1-26. Special Counsel. [Added 12-11-1979 by Ord. No. 1320]
Any Township official or agency may submit a signed request to the
Township Board of Commissioners for legal counsel that cannot be properly
supplied by the Township Solicitor, in circumstances where a potential
conflict or a real conflict indicates a need for separate legal counsel or when
the Solicitor determines that he does not possess the necessary expertise.
The Board of Commissioners may authorize such representation as needed.
§ 1-27. Application to other solicitors. [Added 3-14-1991 by Ord.
No. 1722]
Section 1-24 regarding compensation, § 1-25 regarding conflict of interests,
litigation and misuse of Solicitor services and § 1-26 regarding special
counsel shall also apply to all special legal counsel, Acting Township
Solicitors and Assistant Township Solicitors.
§ 1-26 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-27
C:72
ARTICLE VII
Treasurer
§ 1-28. Qualifications and tenure. [Amended 3-11-1991 by Ord. No.
1722]
The provisions of the Home Rule Charter relative to the election,
qualifications and tenure of the Treasurer shall govern those matters.
§ 1-29. Operational requirements. [Amended 3-11-1991 by Ord. No.
1722]
§ 1-30. Receipt and disbursement of Township monies. [Amended
11-8-1982 by Ord. No. 1410; 3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1722]
A. Additional staff. The Treasurer is empowered to employ such staff as is
needed to work in the Treasurer's office, within budget constraints
established by the Board of Commissioners.
B. Location of office. The office of the Treasurer will be located at the
Whitehall Township Municipal Building.
C. Estimated expenses. The Treasurer shall annually submit to the Mayor
an estimate of expenses that will be incurred for the coming year by the
Treasurer's office, which estimate shall be included in the prepared
budget of the Mayor. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
A. The Treasurer shall receive all monies paid to the Township and shall
disburse Township monies to the Mayor upon the warrant of the Mayor.
Furthermore, the Treasurer shall keep in proper books, a full and
accurate account of all monies received and disbursed by him or her on
behalf of the Township, specifying the time of receipt and
disbursement, from whom funds were received and to whom disbursed,
on what account funds were received and disbursed and how such
funds were paid. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
B. Billing forms shall be initialed by Department or Bureau personnel or
any other Township entity. The form shall be presented to the
Treasurer's office, together with payment thereof, and the receipted
proof of payment shall be returned to the source. Upon receipt of
payment, any appropriate license, permit, fee or authorization shall be
awarded.
C. In the case of the Bureau of Police parking tickets, all payments shall be
made directly to the Treasurer's office, receipt shall be issued and
recorded and the receipted tickets returned daily to the Bureau of
Police. All money shall be received by the Treasurer, including money
delivered to the Township by mail.
§ 1-28 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-30
C:73
§ 1-31. Maintenance of separate accounts. [Added 11-20-1979 by
Ord. No. 1321; amended 11-8-1982 by Ord. No. 1410; 3-11-1991 by
Ord. No. 1722]
The Treasurer shall establish, from time to time, such separate accounts
as the Treasurer, in his or her discretion, deems necessary for the efficient
operation of the Treasurer's office provided, however, that at a minimum the
following accounts shall be maintained:
§ 1-32. Records maintenance and audits. [Added 11-20-1978 by
Ord. No. 1321; amended 3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1722]
D. This section shall not preclude exceptions granted by other laws or by
the Home Rule Charter for certain collections which are to be made by
the Township Solicitor.
A. Tax account.
B. General fund account.
C. Earned income tax account.
D. Business privilege tax account.
E. Occupation privilege tax account.
F. Highway aid account.
G. Revenue sharing account.
H. Capital reserve sharing account.
I. Debt service account.
J. Developer's escrow account.
A. Audits. The Treasurer's accounts shall be immediately available for
inspection or for any audit authorized by the Whitehall Township Board
of Commissioners.
B. Maintenance of accounts. The Treasurer's accounts shall be maintained
at a Whitehall Township depository as designated by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners. These accounts must be audited at the end of
each fiscal year, or sooner if warranted. The Treasurer shall keep an
accounting of all monies collected as taxes under the authority of any
duplicate or duplicates in his or her possession.
C. Access to all account records shall be made available to the Mayor or to
members of the Board of Commissioners, or both, upon request.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
§ 1-30 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-33
C:74
§ 1-33. Investments. [Amended 4-10-1979 by Ord. No. 1300;
11-8-1982 by Ord. No. 1410; 3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1722]
Investments shall be made by the Township Treasurer or his/her designee
in accordance with existing laws.
A. All monies received by the Township, except those designated for the
general fund shall be invested in approve government obligations,
obligations of federal organizations, and obligations of Pennsylvania
governmental organizations, as set forth in the State Fiscal Code, Act of
April 25, 1929, P.L. 723, § 1, 72 P.S. § 3603, as amended.
B. The Treasurer shall solicit a minimum of three quotations for interest
on investments of all Township funds from financial institutions and
invest said funds to obtain the best possible return. He or she shall
apprise the Treasurer of all temporary investments on not less than a
monthly basis.
C. Authorized investment types:
(1) The Township Treasurer shall have power to provide for the
investment of monies in the General Township Fund or in special
funds.
(2) The Township Treasurer shall invest Township funds consistent
with sound business practice and shall provide for an investment
program subject to the restrictions contained in the State Fiscal
Code, in the Home Rule Charter or in any other ordinance, rule or
regulation adopted by the Board of Commissioners.
(3) Authorized types of investments for Township funds shall be:
(a) United States Treasury bills.
(b) Short-term obligations of the United States governments or its
agencies or instrumentalities.
(c) Deposits in savings accounts or time deposits or share
accounts of institutions insured by the Federal Deposit
Corporation or the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance
Corporation or the National Credit Union Share Insurance
Fund to the extent that such accounts are so insured, and, for
any amount above the insured maximum, provided that
approved collateral for public deposits, as provided by law
thereunder, shall be pledged by the depository.
(d) Obligations of the United States or any of its agencies or
instrumentalities backed by the full faith and credit of the
United States of America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or any of its agencies or instrumentalities backed by the full
faith and credit of the Commonwealth or of any political
subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any of its
§ 1-33 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-33
C:75
§ 1-34. Tax certifications. [Added 3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1723;
amended 5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 2169]
The Treasurer shall be the Township officer authorized to provide tax
certifications upon request by the public. The Treasurer is hereby
authorized to assess, collect and retain, as compensation for providing this
service, a fee of $20 per certificate.
agencies or instrumentalities backed by the full faith and credit
of the political subdivision.
(e) Shares of an investment company registered under the
Investment Company Act of 1940, whose shares are registered
under the Securities Act of 1933, provided that the only
investments of that company are in the authorized investments
for Township funds listed in Subsections C(3)(a) through (d).
(4) In making any investment of Township funds, the Township
Treasurer shall have authority:
(a) To permit assets pledged as collateral under § 163(3)(C) to be
pooled in accordance with the Act of August 6, 1971, P.L. 281,
No. 72, relating to pledges of assets to secure deposits of
public funds.
(b) To combine monies from more than one fund under Township
control for the purpose of a single investment, provided that
each of the funds combined for the purpose shall be accounted
for separately in all respects and that the earnings from the
investment are separately and individually computed, recorded
and credited to the accounts for which the investment was
purchased.
(c) To join with one or more other political subdivisions and
municipal authorities in accordance with the Act of July 12,
1972, P.L. 762, No. 180, entitled "An Act Relating to
Intergovernmental Cooperation," in the purchase of a single
investment, provided that the requirement of § 163(3)(D)(2)
regarding the separate accounting of individual funds and
separate computation and recording and crediting of the
earnings therefrom are adhered to.
§ 1-33 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-34
C:76
ARTICLE VIII
Budget and Fiscal Matters
§ 1-35. Transfer of funds. [Amended 8-17-1978 by Ord. No. 1274;
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
In addition to the provisions under Article XI of the Home Rule Charter, the
transfer of funds from one account to another shall be effected through a
resolution by the Board of Commissioners at the request of the Mayor or
through a resolution initiated by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 1-36. Capital reserve fund. [Added 1-10-1983 by Ord. No. 1421]
There is hereby established a fund to known as a capital reserve fund. The
purpose of this fund is to reserve monies to be used solely for the purpose of
acquiring equipment necessary for the delivery of Township services and for
the maintenance of or addition to the Township's infrastructure including,
but not limited to, Township roads and associated storm sewer systems,
equipment, bridges, traffic lights, buildings and grounds. Any indebtedness
incurred by the Township to fund such equipment or infrastructure shall
be amortized or paid back within the minimum expected service life of that
equipment or infrastructure.
§ 1-37. Annual appropriation to the capital reserve fund. [Added
1-10-1983 by Ord. No. 1421; amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The Board of Commissioners shall annually appropriate an amount from
the Township's General Fund to the capital reserve fund. This amount shall
not be less than the annual depreciation expense of the Township's motor
vehicle fleet. This depreciation expense shall be calculated annually by
the Mayor, or his designee, incorporated in his proposed annual budget
and submitted to the Board of Commissioners. The annual depreciation
expense shall be calculated on a straight line method and in accordance
with generally acceptable accounting procedures.
§ 1-35 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-37
C:77

ARTICLE IX
Assessments for Municipal Improvements, Claims and Liens
[Added 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 1711]
§ 1-38. General rule.
Full payment of all claims and assessments for any municipal improvements
or installations shall be made to the Township within 90 days from the
date of notice of the claim or assessment. If any municipal assessment
or claim remains unpaid in any amount after 90 days from the date of
notice of assessment or claim then municipal lien for the entire amount of
the assessment, as more fully described below, shall be filed against that
property.
§ 1-39. Authorization of payment plans. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
The Mayor and his duly authorized designee are hereby authorized to enter
into the following payment plans with property owners in the Township
for any claims and assessment for municipal improvements including, but
not limited to, curbing and sidewalk installation and all other municipal
improvements and installations.
§ 1-40. Discount for payment within 45 days.
If full payment of the assessment or claim is made to the Township within
45 days from the date of notice of the claim or assessment, the amount of
the assessment shall be discounted by 1%.
§ 1-41. Two semiannual installment payments.
§ 1-42. Four semiannual installment payments.
The property owner may elect to pay the claim or assessment in four equal
installments.
A. The property owner may elect to pay the assessment or claim in two
equal installments.
(1) Payment of the first installment shall be made to the Township
within six months from the date of the notice of claim or
assessment.
(2) Payment of the second installment shall be made to the Township
within 12 months from the date of the notice of claim or
assessment.
B. In the event that this election is made and payments are made in a
timely fashion, in accordance with the schedule of this paragraph, the
Township shall bear the costs and expenses of filing and/or satisfaction
of any municipal liens filed to secure this obligation.
§ 1-38 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-42
C:79
§ 1-43. Interest.
If any amount of any municipal claim or assessment remains unpaid after
90 days after the date of notice of the claim or assessment, interest on the
amount remaining unpaid shall accrue at the rate of 10% per annum from
the date of notice of assessment or claim. All such interest shall be added to
and become part of the municipal claim or assessment.
§ 1-44. Administrative charge.
In the event that any installment payment plan is chosen, the property
owner shall also pay an administrative charge of $50. That administrative
charge is to reimburse the Township for its additional costs incurred in
processing and record keeping for the installment payment plans, not for
any expenses related to filing and satisfying a municipal lien. This
administrative charge shall be added to the amount of the assessment or
claim and any municipal lien which is filed.
§ 1-45. Municipal liens.
All municipal liens filed under this Part 1 shall state and include the
following amounts:
§ 1-46. Costs of lien.
In the event that any installment payment plan is selected and all payments
thereunder are made to the Township in a timely fashion, then the Township
shall bear and absorb all of the costs and expenses of the filing and/or
satisfaction of any municipal lien filed to secure the assessment or claim.
§ 1-47. Costs if owner defaults.
A. Payment of the first installment shall be made to the Township within
six months from the date of the notice of claim or assessment.
B. Payment of the second installment shall be made to the Township within
12 months from the date of notice of claim or assessment.
C. Payment of the third installment shall be made to the Township within
18 months from the date of the notice claim or assessment.
D. Payment of the fourth installment shall be made to the Township within
24 months from the date of the notice of claim or assessment.
A. Claim or assessment amount remaining unpaid.
B. Interest accrued on the amount remaining unpaid, at the rate of 10%
per annum.
C. Administrative charge of $50.
D. Lien filing and satisfaction costs, in the amount of $48.
§ 1-42 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-47
C:80
§ 1-48. Statements of account.
Under any installment payment plan, the Township shall send to the
property owner, on or before the respective six month interval payment due
dates, statements showing:
A. If the property owner fails to make timely payments to the Township
within 90 days or pursuant to the selected installment payment plan,
then the property owner shall bear and pay all of the costs and
expenses of the filing and/or satisfaction of any municipal lien and the
administrative charge as set forth above.
B. In addition, the property owners shall pay any and all costs and fees
incurred in any legal action or proceeding to collect any amount
remaining unpaid of the assessment or charges, interest or costs,
including reasonable attorney's fees, which alone shall not exceed 10%
of the total amount sought to be collected.
A. Total amount of the claim or assessment remaining unpaid.
B. Accrued interest on the amount remaining unpaid.
C. Amount of the current installment payment, including accrued interest.
D. Balance remaining unpaid after the installment payment is made.
§ 1-47 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-48
C:81

Part 2
Board[A Odfo Cptoemdm5i-s1s3i-o1n9e7r6s OBpyeOrradti.o Nnoa.l 1G1u9id3e] lines
ARTICLE X
Operation Guidelines
§ 1-49. Rules of procedure for meetings. [Amended 7-21-1978 by
Ord. No. 1277; 3-18-1980 by Ord. No. 1339; Ord. 12-29-1989;
12-12-1994 by Ord. No. 1907]
A. Organization. At 8:00 p.m. on the first Monday in January of each evennumbered
year the Board shall meet to organize.
(1) Officer. The Board shall, by majority vote of the total members,
elect from its membership a President, a Vice President and a
Secretary, all of whom shall hold office at the pleasure of the Board.
The Mayor shall preside over the election. [Amended 6-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(2) Removal. Should any two members of the Board call for a vote to
remove any or all of the aforementioned officers, the matter shall
be put to a vote. Such action must be effected by a resolution. An
intent to vote upon such resolution must be declared at a regular
public meeting and be introduced and voted on at the next regular
Board meeting. The office shall be declared vacant upon the
passage of such resolution and a vote to appoint a successor may
be taken as the next item of business.
(3) Absence of quorum. If at least four of the seven Board members are
not in attendance at the commencement of a meeting, the
Commissioners present may reschedule the meeting and adjourn. If
the subsequent meeting must also be adjourned for failure to
produce a quorum, those members present shall be considered a
quorum for the purpose of electing officers only.
(4) Notice. At last 48 hours prior notice of any organizational or reorganizational
meeting shall be given to each Board member. The
notice shall include the purpose, place and time of the meeting in
question.
(5) Publication. Notice of the purpose, place and time of the
organizational meeting comporting with requirements of
Subsection A(4) above must be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township and shall be posted at the Township
Municipal Building.
(6) Limitations. In addition to the election of officers, all other
necessary or appropriate business may be transacted at an
organizational or reorganizational meeting.
§ 1-49 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-49
C:83
(7) Legal holiday provision. If a scheduled organizational meeting shall
occur on a legal holiday, said meeting shall be postponed and shall
take place on the following day.
B. Regular meetings. The Board shall hold its regular meetings at least
once per month at 7:00 p.m. on such Mondays as the Board may
schedule.
(1) Notice. The Secretary shall give at least five days prior written
notice of the meeting to each Board member and the Mayor.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(2) Publication. A specific listing of the regular meetings shall be
published once for each calendar year, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township, and it shall be posted at the Municipal
Building. Notice of each regular meeting shall be published and
posted in the same manner at least three, but not more than 30
days, in advance of that meeting, excepting a rescheduled,
adjourned regular meeting, which shall require a forty-eight-hour
publication notice.
(3) Order of business. The Board's agenda shall include the following:
(a) Call to order.
(b) Pledge of Allegiance.
(c) Approval of minutes.
(d) Courtesy of the floor.
(e) Introduction of ordinances for final passage.
(f) Introduction of new ordinances.
(g) Introduction of resolutions.
(h) Other — motions.
(i) Discussion items.
(j) Reports of public officials.
(k) Adjournment.
C. Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the President, by
the Mayor or by the Secretary upon written request of two Board
members. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
(1) Notice. At least 48 hours prior notice shall be given to each
member. It shall include the purpose, place and time, the latter of
which may differ from the regular meeting time.
§ 1-49 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-49
C:84
§ 1-50. General provisions for all meetings. [Amended 11-14-1988
by Ord. No. 1630; Ord. 12-29-1989]
(2) Publication. At least 48 hours notice must be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township and it shall be
posted likewise at the Township Municipal Building.
(3) Limitations. Only that business designated in the public notice may
be acted upon at a special meeting.
D. Continuation of adjourned regular or special meetings. Any regular or
special adjourned meeting may be reconvened at a specified date and
time upon motion duly adopted by the Board and a public
announcement made prior to the original adjournment. The only
matters to be acted upon at the reconvened meeting shall be those
scheduled for, or tabled at, the original meeting. The Secretary shall
publish a twenty-four-hour public notice.
A. Time and place. All meetings of the Board shall be convened in the
public meeting room of the Township Municipal Building or at such
other location as shall be designated in a lawful public meeting notice,
following approval of such other location by the Board of
Commissioners. No meeting shall be scheduled to commence later than
7:30 p.m.
B. Officers. The presiding officer shall be the President, or in his absence,
the Vice President. In the absence of both, the remaining Board
members shall name a temporary presiding officer.
(1) The President's rights shall include participation in all debate,
without leaving his chair. He shall be an ex officio member of all
standing committees. He shall call special meetings, as necessary.
(2) The President's responsibilities. He shall be responsible for
maintaining proper parliamentary decorum. He shall afford anyone
the right to be heard but shall constrain harassment.
(3) The Vice President shall carry out all of the duties of the President
in the absence of the President.
(4) The Secretary shall attend all meetings and keep records of same,
attest to and execute all documents, record all motions, resolutions
and ordinances in separate books, have custody of the Township
corporate seal, execute all notices and distribute all necessary
materials.
C. Meeting agenda and related materials.
(1) The Secretary of the Board of Commissioners is responsible for
preparing the agenda. All materials necessary for preparing the
agenda shall be delivered to the Secretary not later than five days
prior to all regular meetings. Agenda items may be requested by
§ 1-49 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-50
C:85
Board members or the Mayor. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(2) The Whitehall Township Board of Commissioners and Mayor shall
receive 48 hours prior to its regular and special meetings an
agenda containing all scheduled items to be discussed and acted
upon at the meeting, and all available supporting materials and
documents necessary for preparation for such meetings.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(3) No action may be taken on any ordinance or resolution which is not
properly transmitted to the Secretary and properly placed on the
agenda. This provision shall in no manner restrict action on
motions or prevent any citizen of Whitehall Township from being
heard on any subject whatsoever.
(4) A citizen's right to be heard shall not be denied because the item
about which he speaks was not on the agenda.
D. Quorum. In order to conduct business four members of the Board must
be in attendance at a meeting.
E. Decorum. The President of the Board of Commissioners, or such
designee as might be chairing the meeting, shall announce at the
beginning of the meeting or at such time during the meeting as may be
deemed appropriate by the Chairperson that reasonable time
limitations shall be placed upon person speaking on behalf of or against
any position or issue. Such announcement shall specify the number of
minutes which will be allocated to each person who desires to be heard
prior to a vote and/or during the courtesy of the floor segment of the
meetings.
(1) Providing however:
(a) This rule, § 1-50E, may be suspended or modified by a simple
majority vote of the Commissioners present at the meeting,
either for a specific individual or for the amount of time
allotted to a subject area.
(b) With the consent of the Chair, persons who have indicated a
desire to speak may yield a portion or all of his/her time
allotment to another person. The Chair may set reasonable
limits on the number of yielded time allotments which may be
used by a party as circumstances may require.
(c) The Board may utilize any timing system or device to measure
the time allotment or notify the speaker of remaining or
expired time, so long as such system or device does not disturb
the decorum of the proceedings or unreasonably distract the
speaker.
§ 1-50 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-50
C:86
§ 1-51. Rules for the form of ordinances, resolutions and motions.
[Amended 8-11-1980 by Ord. No. 1354; 10-20-1980 by Ord. No.
1356]
Every legislative act of the Board of Commissioners shall be by ordinance
or resolution.
(d) The Commissioners shall retain the right to interrupt and
terminate a speaker for the following reasons:
[1] The speaker has exhausted his/her time, including time
yielded.
[2] The speaker is addressing a topic unrelated to the motion
or topic being considered.
[3] The speaker becomes unduly loud, uses profanity or makes
inflammatory statements inappropriate for a public
meeting.
F. Voting. All votes on motions, resolutions or ordinances shall be by roll
call announced by the Secretary and entered in the minutes. The roll
call order shall be rotated with the presiding officer voting last. A
majority vote, that is, a vote of four yeas or four nays shall constitute
action by the Board, unless the Charter expressly requires a greater
number.
G. Waiver of notice. A Commissioner's presence at a meeting constitutes
waiver of notice, unless he is present solely to object to the meeting as
unlawful.
H. Records. All records shall be kept by the Secretary. Minutes of all public
meetings shall be available for public view at the Municipal Building
during regular Township business hours and at the Whitehall
Community Library.
I. Public right to be heard. Residents of the Township shall have the right
to be heard on any action before the Board prior to such action being
taken. Nonresidents may be heard at the discretion of the Board. Each
speaker shall state his name and address upon being recognized. He
shall also have the right to place legitimate matters before the Board
during the Courtesy of the Floor segment of any public meeting. The
Board may impose reasonable time, place and manner limitations on
any speaker.
J. Mayor's participation. The Mayor shall have the right to attend Board
meetings and deliberate, and he shall have voice, but not vote. He may
also attend committee sessions. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
A. All proposed ordinances and resolutions shall be in written form and
shall be assigned a Bill Number indicating the year of their introduction
§ 1-50 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-51
C:87
§ 1-52. Procedures for presentation and adoption of ordinances,
resolutions and motions. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
and the ordinance and resolution number for that year. Upon final
adoption, a consecutive ordinance or resolution number will be
assigned to the bill by the Secretary and the same shall be incorporated
into the official records of the Township. The headings of all ordinances
and resolutions shall include the general purpose. Their introductory
sections shall identify the legislative enactment as that of the Board
of Commissioners of the Township of Whitehall, County of Lehigh,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(1) Concluding all ordinances and resolutions shall be the signature of
the Board President, duly dated and attested to by the Board
Secretary, followed by the Mayor's signature, also duly dated, if he
approves the legislation.
(2) In the event of a veto by the Mayor and a subsequent override by
the Board of Commissioners, the ordinance in question will
expressly indicate this legislative action.
B. Motions may be either in written form (if submitted prior to a meeting)
or introduced orally.
A. Presentation. Any Board member or the Mayor may introduce an
ordinance or a resolution, but it must be presented in writing and
available to the Secretary at least five days prior to the meeting at
which it shall be introduced. A motion may be presented to the
Secretary in the same manner or it may be introduced orally at a
meeting. An ordinance need only be read at length once, unless
otherwise specified by the Home Rule Charter § 3.24.
B. Adoption. Within three days of passage by the Board, an ordinance or
resolution shall be forwarded to the Mayor. The Mayor shall either
return the document signed and approved within 10 days thereafter, or
vetoed, together with his written objections to same. Failure to return
the document shall render it finally adopted on the 11th day thereof. If
the effective date does not appear in an ordinance, it shall be deemed
finally adopted 30 days following passage. The only ordinance which
shall take effect less than 30 days after adoption, absent a bona fide
emergency, is the Township budget ordinance. All motions may be
adopted by a majority vote of the Board. The Secretary shall affix the
Township seal to legislation, upon its final adoption. He shall also
publish all ordinances once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township within 30 days after final adoption. All adopted ordinances,
resolutions and motions shall be entered in separate, permanent books
and shall be available for public inspection both at the Township
Municipal Building and in the Whitehall Community Library.
§ 1-51 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-52
C:88
§ 1-53. Rules of procedure for Committees. [Amended 7-12-1976 by
Ord. No. 1199; Ord. 12-29-1989]
§ 1-54. Parliamentary procedure.
Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the proceedings of the Board on any
matters not specifically provided herein. A copy of said book shall be issued
to each Board member requiring same.
C. Attribution. If an individual Commissioner or the Mayor submits an
ordinance, a resolution, a written motion or a discussion item for a
meeting agenda, the originator's name or initials shall be noted on the
agenda adjacent to the agenda items so submitted.
A. To achieve maximum legislative efficiency and to insure open
communication with all facets of the community, the Board shall
appoint committees from among its members as well as special
committees, which shall be created by resolution, as the need arises.
(1) Ad hoc committees of the Board may be formed for a specific
purpose and situation, and shall be terminated upon completion of
the assigned task.
(2) Individual Commissioners may represent the Board through
meetings with joint committees from other organized public or
quasi-public entities such as the Whitehall-Coplay School Board
and the Police Pension Board.
(3) Liaison committees may be named to any or all Township civic
organizations or groups. Once they are duly established they shall
request continued legislative contact.
(4) Standing committees.
(a) Standing committees shall be available for any legislative
problems relating to the matters each addresses, as follows:
[1] Legal and legislative.
[2] Internal hearings and appointments.
(b) These committees shall establish their own operating rules and
may forward requests for action directly to the Board, by
majority vote of committee members or by request of the
Board. Each committee shall be deemed a creation by the
Board and each Board member is expected to chair one
committee.
(5) Committees of the Whole, consisting of the entire Board, shall be
convened as determined by the Board. Such committees' functions
shall include, but not be limited to, legislative problems relative to
administration, budget and finance.
§ 1-52 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-55
C:89
§ 1-55. Amendments.
A proposed amendment to these rules must be adopted by ordinance,
presented at a regular meeting after proper notice.
§ 1-55 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-55
C:90
Part 3
[AdEompetergde1n-c1y1 -I1n9te6r5imB yGOovrder. nNmo.e n7t63]
ARTICLE XI
Emergency Interim Government
§ 1-56. Statement of policy. [Amended 10-9-1995 by Ord. No. 1944]
Because of the existing possibility of attack upon the United States of
unprecedented size and destructiveness, and in order, in the event of such
an attack, to assure continuity of government through legally constituted
leadership, authority and responsibility in offices of the Township, to
provide for the effective operation of Township government during an
emergency and to facilitate the early resumption of functions temporarily
suspended, it is found and declared to be necessary to provide for additional
officers who can exercise the powers and discharge the duties of and for
the Township; and to provide for emergency interim succession to Township
offices in the event the incumbents thereof and their deputy assistants or
other subordinate officers authorized, pursuant to law, to exercise all the
powers and discharge the duties of such offices (hereinafter referred to
as "Deputies") are unavailable to perform the duties and functions of such
offices.
§ 1-57. Definitions. [Added 10-9-1995 by Ord. No. 1944]
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings as given
hereinafter, unless specifically stated otherwise:
ATTACK — Any attack or series of attacks by an enemy or otherwise of the
United States causing or which may cause substantial damage or injury to
civilian property or person in the United States in any manner by sabotage
or by the use of bombs, missiles, shell fire or atomic, radiological, chemical,
nuclear, bacteriological or biological means or other weapons or processes.
EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR — A person designated pursuant to
this Code in the event the officer is unavailable to exercise the powers and
discharge the duties of an office until a successor is appointed or elected
and qualified, as may be provided by the Constitution, statutes, charters and
ordinances or until the lawful incumbent is able to resume the exercise of
the powers and discharge the duties of the office.
OFFICE — Includes all offices, the powers and duties of which are defined
by the Constitution, statutes, charters and ordinances.
UNAVAILABLE — A vacancy in office exists and there is no deputy
authorized to exercise all the powers and discharge the duties of the office,
that the lawful incumbent of the office, including any deputy exercising the
powers and discharging the duties of an office because of a vacancy and
his duly authorized deputy are absent or unable to exercise the powers
and discharge the duties of the office, or the officer is not present within
the emergency operating center of the Township Municipal Building or at a
§ 1-56 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-57
C:91
designated site of government for the Township of Whitehall in the event of
the destruction of the municipal building.
§ 1-58. Site of government.
The site of government for the Township of Whitehall shall be the Township
Municipal Building and in the event of its destruction, the highest ranking
emergency interim successor who may be otherwise available shall
designate the site of Township government.
§ 1-59. Emergency interim successors to office. [Amended 3-9-1979
by Ord. No. 950; 5-13-1976 by Ord. No. 1187; 10-10-1977 by Ord.
No. 1252]
Pursuant to the Act of Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
of October 23, 1959, P.L. 1369, as amended, in the event of an attack,
the following shall be the emergency interim successors to office for the
Township of Whitehall when duly elected or appointed officers are
unavailable and the normal functions of local government have been
disrupted:
A. Mayor. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
B. Deputy Mayor. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
C. Board of Commissioners of the Township of Whitehall, or a quorum of
thereof.
D. President of the Board of Commissioners.
E. Vice President of the Board of Commissioners.
F. Secretary of the Board of Commissioners.
G. Remaining Commissioners, in descending order of their ages.
H. Head of the Department of Operations.
I. Chief of Police.
J. Chief of Fire Department.
K. Captains in the Bureau of Police, in descending order of their seniority.
L. Detectives in the Bureau of Police, in descending order of their
seniority.
M. Sergeants in the Bureau of Police, in descending order of their seniority.
N. Assistant Fire Chiefs, in descending order of their seniority.
§ 1-57 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-60
C:92
§ 1-60. Formalities of taking office. [Added 10-9-1995 by Ord. No.
1944; amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
Prior to taking up the duties to which they may temporarily succeed,
emergency interim successors shall take such oath as may be required for
them to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office to which
they may succeed.
§ 1-61. Period in which authority may be exercised. [Added
10-9-1995 by Ord. No. 1944; amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
Officials authorized to act as emergency interim successors are empowered
to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of an office as herein
authorized only after an attack upon the Unites States as defined herein has
occurred.
§ 1-62. Priority of authority of emergency interim successors;
restoration of normal functions of government.
The emergency interim successors to office, in the order designated herein,
shall take and direct and perform all necessary legislative and executive
functions of Township government until such time as the normal functions
of Township government can be restored. It shall be the duty of each
emergency interim successor to restore the normal functions of
government, as defined by law (Act of 1959, P.L. 1369), as quickly as
possible.
§ 1-63. Duty to proceed to site of government.
All designated emergency interim successors to office shall have the duty
to proceed as quickly as possible to the site of government and, in the
event this is not possible, he or she shall designate his or her successors
to office in accordance with the "Emergency Interim Executive and Judicial
Succession Act of 1959," who shall in turn proceed as quickly as possible
to the site of government. Said designation shall be made in writing and
signed by said officer.
§ 1-64. Relinquishment of control by emergency interim successors
in office.
As normal functions of local government are restored, each emergency
interim successor in office shall relinquish control to the officers
immediately preceding in the order as designated herein, unless preceding
emergency interim successors in office shall waive the power to control in
favor of a successor.
§ 1-65. Emergency interim successors to comply with constitution
and law and with civil defense regulations and directions.
Each emergency interim successor in office shall comply with all Federal
and State Civil Defense Acts, regulations and directions, as well as the
§ 1-60 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-65
C:93
laws and Constitutions of the United States and the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 1-66. Certain State Civil Defense Acts incorporated by reference.
[Amended 10-9-1995 by Ord. No. 1944]
The following State Civil Defense Acts, as amended, are incorporated by
reference herein and made a part thereof, to the extent that they may be
applicable, as fully as though the same were set forth at length.
§ 1-67. Declaration of disaster emergency. [Added 10-9-1995 by
Ord. No. 1944; amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
When acting as an emergency interim successor, said emergency interim
successor may declare a local disaster emergency under and pursuant
to the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Act, thereby authorizing the
Whitehall Township Emergency Management Organization to act in
accordance with the plan and program of the Pennsylvania Emergency
Management Agency, which includes the responsibility for the emergency
management response and recovery within the territorial limits of the
Township.
A. Act of March 19, 1951, P.L. 28.
B. Act of April 13, 1942, P.L. 37.
C. Act of July 28, 1959, P.L. 579.
D. Act of October 23, 1959, P.L. 1365.
E. Act of October 23, 1959, P.L. 1369.
F. Act of October 23, 1959, P.L. 1373.
§ 1-65 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-67
C:94
Part 4
Appointed Boards And Committees
ARTICLE XII
Planning Commission
[Adopted 4-12-1971 by Ord. No. 1020; amended in its entirety
2-14-1972 by Ord. No. 1063]
§ 1-68. Planning Commission established. [Amended 5-13-1976 by
Ord. No. 1187; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2775]
A Township Planning Commission, to be composed of seven members,
is hereby established for the Township of Whitehall. All members of the
Commission shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for
necessary and reasonable expenses per regularly scheduled meetings as
established by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 1-69. Appointment, term and vacancy.
Each member of the Planning Commission shall be a resident of the
Township of Whitehall and shall be appointed by the Board of
Commissioners for a term of four years or until his successor shall be
appointed and qualified, except that the terms of the members to be
appointed to the Commission of seven members shall be fixed such that
not more than two members shall be reappointed or replaced during any
calendar year. The chairman of the Planning Commission shall promptly
notify the Board of Commissioners concerning vacancies and each such
vacancy shall be filled for its unexpired term.
§ 1-70. Removal.
Any member of the Planning Commission, once qualified and appointed,
may be removed from office with or without cause, by a majority vote of the
Board of Commissioners, after such member has received 15 days advance
notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection
with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
§ 1-71. Conduct of business. [Amended 5-13-1976 by Ord. No. 1187;
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
The Commission shall elect its own chairman, vice-chairman and secretary
who shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. The Commission
may make and alter rules, bylaws and regulations to govern its procedures
consistent with the ordinances of Whitehall Township and the laws of the
Commonwealth. The Commission shall make a full record of its business.
Reports of the Commission's activities may be made as often as may be
necessary or as requested by the Board of Commissioners. All official
actions of the Planning Commission shall be made by resolution, concurred
in by a majority of those members present who represent a quorum. Such
resolutions shall be numbered consecutively for each calendar year and
§ 1-68 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-71
C:95
shall be signed by the Chairman and attested to by the Secretary of the
Commission. Administrative assistance shall be provided by the Mayor as
determined between the chairman of the Commission and the Mayor. The
Planning Commission shall meet at least once monthly and such meetings
shall be open to the public. It may schedule other work sessions as required.
§ 1-72. Powers and duties of the Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission shall have the power and shall be required to:
A. Prepare the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the Township
and present it for the consideration of the Board of Commissioners and
the general public.
B. Maintain and keep on file records of its actions. All records and files
shall be maintained by and in the possession of the Board of
Commissioners at the Township Municipal Building.
C. Prepare and present for consideration of the Board of Commissioners
and, after adoption, maintain and make recommendations for changes
to:
(1) An official map of the Township.
(2) A zoning ordinance.
(3) Subdivision and land development regulations.
(4) Planned residential development regulations.
(5) A building code.
(6) A housing code.
D. Promote public interest in, and understanding of, the Comprehensive
Plan and planning.
E. Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private agencies
and individuals as to the effectiveness of the development and planning
proposals of such agencies and individuals.
F. Hold public hearings and meetings.
G. Require from other departments and agencies of this Township,
through their proper channels and through such individuals as may be
in positions of authority, such available information as relates to the
work of the Planning Commission.
H. In the performance of its functions, to enter upon any land to make
examination and surveys either after permission has been obtained
from the landowner or after public notices.
I. Do such other act or make such studies as may be necessary to fulfill
the obligations and duties imposed by this article.
§ 1-71 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-73
C:96
§ 1-73. Township Engineer.
In the performance of its powers and duties, any act or recommendation of
the Planning Commission which involves engineering considerations shall
be subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
§ 1-74. Advisory Commission.
Any recommendations made to the Board of Commissioners by the
Whitehall Township Planning Commission shall be advisory only.
§ 1-73 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-74
C:97

ARTICLE XIII
Park and Recreation Board
[Adopted 12-15-1976 by Ord. No. 1228]
§ 1-75. Establishment.
The Whitehall Township Park and Recreation Board is hereby established
as an advisory board to the administrative and legislative branches of
Township government.
§ 1-76. Membership. [Amended 4-16-1979 by Ord. No. 1305]
A. The Park and Recreation Board shall consist of eight members
representing the following population centers:
(1) Allen Crest.
(2) Cementon.
(3) Egypt.
(4) Fullerton.
(5) Hokendauqua.
(6) Stiles.
(7) West Catasauqua.
(8) Schadt Avenue.
B. Said members shall be the Chairpersons of the following respective
playground associations, or their designates, duly appointed by the
Board of Commissioners, with the approval of the Mayor: [Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(1) Allen Crest Playground Association.
(2) Cementon Athletic Association.
(3) Egypt Memorial Playground Association.
(4) Fullerton Memorial Community Center, Inc.
(5) Hokendauqua Playground Association.
(6) Stiles Playground Association.
(7) West Catasauqua Playground Association.
(8) Schadt Avenue Playground Association.
C. The Chief of the Bureau of Parks and Recreation shall be an ex officio
member of the Park and Recreation Board.
§ 1-75 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-76
C:99
§ 1-77. Duties and responsibilities.
The duties and responsibilities of the Board shall be:
D. A duly-appointed member who is unable to attend a regular monthly
meeting of the Park and Recreation Board may designate a substitute
from his or her respective playground association to attend said
meeting on behalf of the absent delegate. Such a substitute shall
exercise the duties and powers of the corresponding, regular Board
member at the specific meeting which the substitute is authorized to
attend. Proof of any substitute authorization shall be entered into the
Park and Recreation Board minutes before approval of the minutes of
the meeting attended by a substitute.
A. To formulate rules of procedures to conform with this article.
B. To conduct its regular business meetings in the Township Municipal
Building and to assure that all meetings are open to the public.
C. To serve as an advisory group to the Township Board of Commissioners
and the Mayor in matters relative to the Township recreation program
and its citizens leisure time needs. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
D. To assure that the administrative and legislative branches of Township
government are constantly apprised of the respective associations'
proceedings; to this end, the Board shall maintain records of its
proceedings and of community recreational needs.
E. To provide the Township Department of Operations with annual
proposed association budgets and anticipated programs.
§ 1-76 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-77
C:100
ARTICLE XIV
Environmental Advisory Council
[Adopted 3-17-1977 by Ord. No. 1236]
§ 1-78. Creating an Environmental Advisory Council. [Amended
10-9-1995 by Ord. No. 1444; 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
An advisory council, to be known as the "Whitehall Township Environmental
Advisory Council," is hereby created.
§ 1-79. Membership. [Amended 4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 1449;
5-11-1992 by Ord. No. 1766; 7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 2691]
The Environmental Advisory Council shall be composed of nine residents of
Whitehall Township.
§ 1-80. Appointment. [Amended 10-9-1995 by Ord. No. 1944;
8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
Council members shall be appointed in accordance with the following
procedures:
§ 1-81. Compensation.
Council members shall receive no compensation for their services, but may
be reimbursed for the expenses actually and necessarily incurred by them
in the performance of their duties.
§ 1-82. Activities. [Amended 10-9-1995 by Ord. No. 1944]
The Environmental Advisory Council is to be advisory to and shall
coordinate its activities with the Board of Commissioners, the Township
administration and the Planning Commission.
§ 1-83. Chairman and Secretary. [Amended 10-9-1995 by Ord. No.
1944]
The Environmental Advisory Council shall designate a Chairman and a
Secretary.
A. All Council members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners
of the Township of Whitehall.
B. Council members' terms of office shall expire on December 31st of the
last year of their term of office.
C. Duly appointed Council members shall serve a term of three years
except that initial appointment shall be so staggered that the terms of
approximately 1/3 of the membership shall expire each year.
D. One member may also be a member of the Whitehall Planning
Commission.
§ 1-78 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-84
C:101
§ 1-84. Duties. [Amended 10-9-1995 by Ord. No. 1944]
The Environmental Advisory Council shall have the following duties:
§ 1-85. Meetings, minutes and reports. [Amended 10-9-1995 by Ord.
No. 1944; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
The Environmental Advisory Council shall meet on a monthly basis or more
often as needed. The Environmental Advisory Council shall keep minutes
of its meetings and records of its activities. These shall be provided to the
Board of Commissioners and Mayor.
§ 1-86. Expenses. [Added 8-8-1988 by Ord. No. 1621]
The Board of Commissioners of Whitehall Township may, from time to time,
appropriate funds for the expenses incurred by the Environmental Advisory
Council.
A. Identify environmental problems.
B. Monitor the Township recycling program and make recommendations
regarding the operation of the program in an effective and efficient
manner.
C. Provide public awareness of environmental issues and encourage
citizen participation in community environmental programs such as
recycling.
D. Make recommendations for implementation of Right-to-Know Law and
hazardous materials controls.
E. Oversee planning, maintenance and inventory of the Township tree
stock.
F. Evaluate landscaping plans.
G. The Environmental Advisory Council shall keep records of its meetings
and activities.
§ 1-84 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-86
C:102
ARTICLE XV
Civil Service Commission
[Adopted 12-29-1989]
§ 1-87. Civil Service Commission establishment and appointment.
There is hereby created and established a Township Civil Service
Commission which shall be composed of three members who shall be
qualified electors of the Township and who shall be appointed by the
Township Board of Commissioners initially to serve for the terms of two,
four and six years, and as terms expire, to serve for terms of six years.
All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except
that members may be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable expenses
not to exceed $25 per scheduled hearing or meeting. Each member of the
Commission, before entering upon the discharge of the duties of his office,
shall take an oath or affirmation to support the Constitution of the United
States and of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to perform his official
duties with fidelity.
§ 1-88. Vacancies.
Any vacancy occurring in the Civil Service Commission for any reason
whatsoever shall be filled for the unexpired term within the period of 30
days after such vacancy occurs.
§ 1-89. Incompatible offices.
No member of the Civil Service Commission shall at the time hold an
elective or appointed Township office, except that one member of the Civil
Service Commission may be a member of the Township Board of
Commissioners.
§ 1-90. Organization of the Commission and quorum.
The Civil Service Commission first appointed shall organize within 10 days
of its appointment and shall elect one of its members as the Chairman and
one as the Secretary. The Commission shall thereafter meet and organize
on the first Monday of each even-numbered year. Each Commission member
shall be notified in writing of each and every meeting. Two members of
the Commission shall constitute a quorum and no action of the Commission
shall be valid unless it shall have the concurrence of at least two members.
§ 1-91. Minutes and records.
The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and records of
examinations and other official actions. All recommendations of applicants
for appointment received by the Commission shall be kept and preserved
for a period of five years. All applications filed with the Commission shall be
open to public inspection.
§ 1-87 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-92
C:103
§ 1-92. Investigations.
The Commission shall have power to make investigations concerning all
matters touching the administration and enforcement of the civil service
provisions of this article and the rules and regulations adopted hereunder.
The Chairman of the Commission is hereby given power to administer oaths.
§ 1-93. Subpoenas. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
§ 1-94. Annual report.
The Commission shall make an annual report to the Township
Commissioners containing a brief summary of its work during the year,
which report shall be available for public inspection.
§ 1-95. Clerks and supplies. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The Township shall furnish to the Commission, at its request, such clerical
assistance as may be necessary for the work of the Commission. The
Township shall provide a suitable and convenient room for the use of the
Commission. The Commission shall order from the Township the necessary
stationary, postage, printing or supplies and the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners shall aid the Commission in carrying out the provisions of
this article.
§ 1-96. Rules and regulations. [Added 3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1722]
The Commission shall have power to prescribe, amend and enforce rules
and regulations for carrying into effect the provisions of this article and
A. The Commission shall have the power to issue subpoenas over the
signature of the Chairman to require the attendance of witnesses and
the production of records and papers pertaining to any investigation or
inquiry. The fees of such witnesses for attendance and travel shall be
the same as for witnesses appearing in the courts and shall be paid
from appropriations for the incidental expenses of the Commission.
B. All officers in public service and employees shall attend and testify
when required to do so by the Commission. If any person shall refuse or
neglect to obey any subpoena issued by the Commission he shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this
article continues shall constitute a separate offense. If any person shall
refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena issued by the Commission, it
may apply by petition to the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County
for its subpoena to be honored, requiring the attendance of such
persons before the Commission or the Court, there to testify and to
produce any records and papers necessary, and in default thereof to be
held in contempt of Court.
§ 1-92 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-96
C:104
shall be governed thereby. Before any such rules and regulations become
effective, the same shall first be approved by the Township Board of
Commissioners. When such rules and regulations have been so approved
they shall not be annulled, amended or supplemented without the approval
of the Township Board of Commissioners. All rules and regulations and
modifications thereof shall be printed for public distribution at the expense
of the Township.
§ 1-97. Physical and psychological examinations. [Added 6-11-2001
by Ord. No. 2327]
After the appointing authority selects a candidate from the certified list of
three for appointment to the vacant position, that candidate shall submit
to a physical examination, a psychological examination and a voice stress
analyzer examination by the appropriate experts. If the candidate
successfully passes the physical examination, the psychological examination
and the voice stress analyzer examination then that employee shall be
appointed to the vacant position in the Police Department for which he/
she had applied. The appointment shall be contingent upon successfully
passing the physical examination, the psychological examination and the
voice stress analyzer examination. Failure to pass any of the examinations
shall result in the candidate being rejected from consideration. The rejected
candidate may appeal this decision under § 1-66. The physician,
psychologist or certified voice stress analyzer operator shall be the one
chosen by the Township, unless for cause, the Civil Service Commission
directs otherwise.
§ 1-96 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-97
C:105

ARTICLE XVI
Appointment and Removal Procedures for All Board, Commission
and Committee Members
[Adopted 11-13-1979 by Ord. No. 1323]
§ 1-98. Procedures for Board appointments to all Boards,
Commissions and Committees. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2775]
All persons appointed to any board, commission or committee established
by the Board of Commissioners shall be appointed by majority vote of the
total current membership of the Board of Commissioners by a Board motion,
not by ordinance or resolution with the exception of the Zoning Hearing
Board and the Building Code Board of Appeals.
§ 1-99. Procedures for suspension or removal of Board, Commission
and Committee members. [Amended 3-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1872]
A. Any member of a Board, Commission or Committee established under
authority of the statutes of the Commonwealth, the Home Rule Charter
or other ordinance of Whitehall Township may be removed from their
position only for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or
for other just cause. Such removal shall be by majority vote of the total
membership of the Board of Commissioners. Such motion may be
presented to the Board of Commissioners only after the member and all
Commissioners have received 15 days advance notice of the intent to
take such vote and has had the opportunity to request a hearing in front
of the Board of Commissioners. Procedures for a hearing shall be in
conformity with 2 P.S. § 101 et seq. The member who is subject to
removal may make a request to the Board of Commissioners for a
hearing in writing within 10 calendar days of the date when the party
knew or should have known that the motion for removal had been
submitted for consideration by the Board of Commissioners. If a
hearing is requested, any vote on removal shall be postponed until the
applicant has had an opportunity for a hearing.
B. Procedures for hearings.
(1) Hearings for members of Boards, Commissions and Committees
shall be conducted in the following manner:
(a) Each hearing shall be open to the public unless a closed
hearing is requested by the member subject to removal.
(b) All testimony presented at the hearing shall be given under
oath. Oaths may be administered by a court reporter engaged
to record the hearing testimony or the Chairperson, or in his or
her absence, the Vice-Chairperson shall have the power to
administer oaths.
§ 1-98 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-99
C:107
(c) The President or Vice President of the Board of Commissioners
shall state the general purpose of the hearing and have the
Secretary read the allegations, charges or statement for which
the member is being removed, together with the record of any
other action taken against such member. In addition, the
Secretary shall read any written reply or response received
from the member subject to removal.
(d) The Chairperson shall afford each person making charges, or
his or her counsel, an opportunity to make further statements
in support of such allegations of cause, charge or example of
misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance. Any party shall have
the opportunity to produce witnesses, with the proponent of
removal advancing first with the burden of proof by a
preponderance of the evidence and the member subject to
removal shall go last.
(e) The Chairperson shall afford the member to be removed, or his
or her counsel, an opportunity to question or cross-examine
any persons or parties making allegations, and shall also afford
the opportunity to question or cross-examine any witnesses
produced by such person.
(f) The Chairperson shall afford each person making charges an
opportunity to produce any witnesses and to cross-examine
any witnesses produced by the member subject to removal.
(g) The Board of Commissioners shall determine the admissibility
of any evidence and procedures and shall not be bound by
technical rules of evidence.
(h) A stenographic transcript of the proceedings shall be kept and
filed in the archives of the Board of Commissioners, together
with any and all documents, exhibits or records pertinent to
the case. The records shall be retained or disposed of in
accordance with the Township's record retention ordinance
and schedule.
(i) At any time during the course of the hearing, the Board of
Commissioners may question or cross-examine the person
making charges, the accused and any witness.
(j) Within 20 calendar days after the hearing, the Board of
Commissioners shall issue a decision in the form of a written
order. This written decision shall be forwarded to the member
subject to removal. Following the hearing, the Board of
Commissioners may then take action on a motion to suspend or
remove the member.
(k) Decisions of the Board of Commissioners may be appealed to
the Lehigh County Court of Common Pleas.
§ 1-99 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-99
C:108
C. Grounds for "just cause" removal.
(1) For "just cause" removal shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Nonattendance at three consecutive regular meetings of the
group or more than 1/2 of the total number of regular meetings
during calendar year without acceptable excuse.
(b) Conviction of a crime of the third degree or above, a crime
involving moral turpitude or a crime involving the office of the
member.
(c) Moving domicile to a location other than Whitehall Township.
(d) Such other cause as the Board of Commissioners might deem
appropriate, so long as the conduct of the person would make
him or her unfit to continue to hold public office.
(2) This procedure shall prevail over any other policy or ordinance to
the contrary and shall further apply to positions created by state
statute unless this procedure is deemed to be specifically
preempted by state statute by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(3) This provision shall apply only to appointed uncompensated offices
and shall not be construed to apply to any employee or independent
contractor of the Township, whether or not covered by a collective
bargaining agreement, civil service or otherwise.
§ 1-99 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-99
C:109

ARTICLE XVII
Shade Tree Committee
[Adopted 6-14-1993 by Ord. No. 1841]
§ 1-100. Creation and membership.
§ 1-101. Organization, records and meetings.
§ 1-102. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meaning hereby ascribed to them, except in those instances where the
context already indicates a different meaning.
COMMITTEE — The Shade Tree Committee of the Township of Whitehall.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, association, partnership or
corporation.
A. A Shade Tree Committee is hereby created as a subcommittee of the
Environmental Advisory Council and shall consist of a minimum of three
members and a maximum of five, all of who shall be residents of the
Township. Members of the Committee shall be appointed by the Board
of Commissioners after nominations are presented by the
Environmental Advisory Council for staggered terms of three years. The
first member shall be appointed to serve one year. The second member
appointed shall serve two years and the third member appointed shall
serve three years. Additional members appointed shall serve two and
three year terms respectively.
B. The members of the Committee shall serve without pay but they may be
reimbursed actual authorized expenses within the funds budgeted for
such activities by the Board of Commissioners.
C. A vacancy on the Committee, which occurs for reasons other than the
expiration of term, shall be filled by the Board of Commissioners upon
nomination of the Environmental Advisory Council for the unexpired
portion of the term.
A. Members of the Committee shall elect a Chairman, Vice-Chairman and
such other officers as they may determine necessary. All officers shall
be eligible for reelection.
B. The Committee shall keep a written record of its meetings in
accordance with law which shall be maintained within the minutes of
the Environmental Advisory Council. The Committee shall provide the
Board of Commissioners with minutes and annual or other reports of its
activities as may be requested or required.
C. For the purpose of taking action, a quorum (a majority) of members
must be present.
§ 1-100 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-102
C:111
SHADE TREE — Any tree, shrub or woody plant within the right-of-way of
any public highway of the Township of Whitehall or that part of any tree,
shrub or other woody plant which extends within the lines of any public
highway.
§ 1-103. Responsibilities of the Shade Tree Committee.
§ 1-104. Authorized activity.
The Committee is hereby authorized, but not limited to, perform the
following activities with regard to trees.
A. The Committee shall advise on the planting, maintenance and removal
of trees. Such advise may include:
(1) Recommendations of tree species for public areas.
(2) Recommendations for controlling diseases and pests damaging
trees.
(3) Recommendations for tree maintenance.
(4) Recommendations for public education/information programs
concerning the importance and care of trees.
(5) Recommendations on the Department of Public Works rules and
regulations regarding tree planting, maintenance and removals.
B. The Committee through the Environmental Advisory Council shall
prepare for the Board of Commissioners' approval, a plan for street
trees in the Township. The plan should include a listing of existing trees
(including species and location). The plan may also identify locations for
new plantings, desirable specie changes, etc.
C. In developing the plan, the Committee should consult with other
Township Boards and Commissions. The plan should recognize the
benefits of a public tree program and the need to control expenses
(both in the short term and long-term) of planting, maintenance,
removals, clean up and all other costs associated with a tree program.
The Committee shall review the plant annually and/or at other times, at
the request of the Board of Commissioners.
A. The Committee may solicit and accept grants and contributions on
behalf of the Township. All funds obtained by the Committee shall be
expended for the specific purpose(s) or under the stipulations set by the
contributor or the Committee with specific approval of the Board of
Commissioners.
B. The Committee or its designee may issue permits for the removal of
trees in the rights-of-way. These permits should state the reason behind
the removal in order for the Committee to track potential deforestation.
§ 1-102 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-104
C:112
§ 1-105. Tree damage.
No person shall plant, cut down or remove any shade trees under the
jurisdiction of the Shade Tree Committee or fasten any sign, nails, wire,
rope or other materials to, around or through any such shade tree or
deposit, place, store or maintain any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other
material which may impede the free passage of water, air or fertilizer to the
roots of any such shade tree, unless he shall first obtain permission from
the Shade Tree Committee to do so. Exception: newly planted trees may be
guyed to provide stability during the first three growing seasons following
planting.
§ 1-106. Trees on private property.
The owner of the property upon which a tree is rooted shall trim branches
from any shade trees overhanging the public streets and highways of the
Township so that they do not obstruct the light from any streetlight or
obstruct other traffic control devices and so that there shall be a clear
height of 14 feet above the surface of the street and eight feet over the
sidewalk. If any property owner shall neglect or refuse to trim any shade
tree as required by this section, upon notice in writing by the Committee, or
its designee, within the time limits specified in such notice, the Committee,
or its designee, may cause such trimming to be done at the expense of the
landowner. Exception: See § 1-108, "Exemptions."
§ 1-107. Trees affecting health and safety.
C. The Committee or its designee may make, publish and enforce
regulations for the care and protection of the shade trees of the
Township. No such regulations shall be in force until they have been
approved and ordained by the Board of Commissioners and published at
least twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township.
A. Potentially hazardous trees in public areas. Trees in public areas which,
in the opinion of the Committee or the Department of Public Works, are
seriously damaged, diseased, disfigured or constitute a hazard to the
public may be removed by the Department of Public Works. Prior to tree
removals from public rights-of-way notice shall be provided to the
property owner(s) immediately adjacent to the tree(s) to be removed.
Notices shall also be provided to the Board of Commissioners. The
property owner may appeal the removal to the Committee and the
Environmental Advisory Council. If not satisfied with the decision of the
Committee or the Council, the property owner may appeal to the Board
of Commissioners.
B. Immediate hazards in public areas. When, in the opinion of the Shade
Tree Commission or the Department of Public Works, a tree or
portion(s) of a tree in public areas constitutes an immediate hazard to
persons or property, the Department of Public Works shall remove the
hazard without notice or appeal.
§ 1-104 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-107
C:113
§ 1-108. Exemptions.
The following persons shall be deemed exonerated from the obligations to
pay for the removal of a tree or portion of the tree to Whitehall Township:
C. Potentially hazardous trees on private property. Trees on private
property which, in the opinion of the Shade Tree Commission, after
consultation with an arborist, are sufficiently damaged, diseased or in
such condition as to contribute a potential hazard to the public or to
other trees on public property, may be ordered, removed, partially
removed or treated. Property owners so ordered shall have 10 days
following receipt of the order to appeal through the Department of
Public Works to the Committee. The Shade Tree Committee shall hear
the appeal and make a determination within 10 days of the receipt of
the appeal. Decisions of the Committee shall be appealable as provided
by law. Appeals to the Committee shall be recorded and decisions shall
be written and shall include findings of fact. Following a determination
by the Committee that said tree should be removed, partially removed
or treated, the property owner shall comply within five days. If the
property owner shall fail to refuse to remove or treat said tree, the
property owner shall be subject to the penalty specified in the penalty
section of this Article XVII. In addition, the Department of Public Works
is authorized to remove said hazardous tree or portions thereof. All
costs for such work shall be assessed to the property owner. Exception:
See § 1-108, "Exemptions."
D. Immediate hazards on private property. When, in the opinion of the
Committee or the Department of Public Works, as confirmed by a
qualified arborist, a tree or portion(s) of a tree on private property is
infected with Dutch Elm Disease, blight or otherwise constitutes an
immediate hazard to the public or other tree on public or private
property, the property owner shall immediately be notified of the hazard
and requested to eliminate it. If the hazard is not eliminated, the matter
shall be considered by the Committee at a public meeting. Upon
determination that the tree is an immediate threat or hazard, the
Department of Public Works is authorized to remove or order the
removal of the tree or portion of the tree after five days notice to the
property owner. All costs for such work shall be assessed to the
property owner. Exception: See § 1-108, "Exemptions."
A. All households whose income from all sources if less than $15,000 per
year and where the head of the household is:
(1) An adult individual age 62 years or older as of December 31 of the
prior calendar year.
(2) Widows or widowers age 50 or older as of December 31 of the prior
calendar year.
§ 1-107 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-108
C:114
§ 1-109. New development.
Each developer shall provide a minimum of one tree every 40 feet to 60 feet
which shall be planted in the right-of-way. There shall be at least two species
of trees planted per development, placement of trees to be determined by
the Shade Tree Committee or their designee. Comments on subdivision and
land development plans from the Committee shall be provided in written
form to the Planning Commission.
§ 1-110. Tree location.
Where shade trees are to be planted along a street or highway where no
curbs exist, planting location should be specified stating footage behind the
proposed curbline where trees may be planted. The location of the proposed
curbline shall be determined solely by the Township's designated Engineer
or surveyor. Further, no trees shall be planted, either new or by replacement
of an existing tree in the grass area between the curb and sidewalk if that
area is less than four feet in width unless viewed and approved by the Shade
Tree Committee.
(3) Persons permanently and totally disabled as determined utilizing
criteria developed and hereinafter to be developed by the Social
Security Administration.
(4) Persons deemed legally blind in accordance with the appropriate
Social Security Administration criteria.
A. Tree specifications.
(1) Trees shall be of nursery stock quality, grown under the same
climatic conditions as at the location of development.
(2) All planting shall be done in conformity with good nursery and
landscape practice and to the standards established by the Shade
Tree Committee.
(3) Trees permitted shall be of symmetrical growth, free of insects,
pests and disease.
(4) All trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of two to 2 1/2
inches at a height of six inches above the ground or ball level and
shall have a minimum height of 13 feet with a minimum seven-foot
single straight trunk to the first lateral primary branches above the
ground or ball level.
(5) All trees planted in the rights-of-way of a new development shall
remain in place for a minimum of two years and shall remain the
responsibility of the developer for those two years or the expiration
of the subdivision maintenance agreement. Exception: Diseased or
damaged trees shall be replaced by the developer within those two
years with no penalty.
§ 1-108 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-111
C:115
§ 1-111. Payment of damages.
In the event of a shade tree being damaged, the Shade Tree Commission
may make a charge for repairs to the tree, plus the devaluation of the tree
against the person causing the damage to the said tree. In the event of a
shade tree being destroyed by any person, the Shade Tree Committee may
make a charge for the appraised value of the tree plus the cost of removal
and replacement thereof, against the person causing the destruction of said
tree.
§ 1-112. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this section continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 1-113. Recommended trees.
The following list may be amended as deemed necessary by the Committee.
A. Armstrong Maple.
B. Emerald Queen Maple.
C. Scanlon Maple.
D. Red Maple.
E. Sugar Maple.
F. Hedge Maple.
G. Thornless Honey Locust.
H. Red Oak.
I. Pin Oak.
J. London Plane.
K. Willow Oak.
L. Cleveland Maple.
M. October Glory Maple.
N. Gingko (male only).
O. Sweet Gum.
P. Black Gum.
§ 1-111 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-113
C:116
Q. Little Leaf Linden
R. Silver Leafed Linden.
S. Crimean Linden.
T. European Hornbean.
U. Kwanzan Cherry (high graft).
V. Scarlet Oak.
W. Hawthorne.
§ 1-113 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-113
C:117

ARTICLE XVIII
Recreation Commission
[Adopted 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 1868]
§ 1-114. Recreation Commission established.
The Whitehall Township Recreation Commission is hereby established as
an advisory board to the administrative and legislative branches of the
Township government. The purpose of the Recreation Commission is to
foster the development, use and maintenance of the system of parks,
recreational programs and opportunities to residents of Whitehall
Township. In addition, the purpose of the Commission is to seek informed
input, recommendations and plans to utilize the resources of the Township
to the greatest efficiency and to implement the recreational programs for
residents. In addition, the Whitehall Township Recreation Commission is
created as an organizational umbrella for other advisory boards within the
Township, to foster communication, cooperation and efficiency.
§ 1-115. Membership. [Amended 11-12-2001 by Ord. No. 2342;
12-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2447]
A. The Whitehall Township Recreation Commission shall consist of 10
members, including one representative from each of the following:
(1) Whitehall Township Park and Recreation Board.
(2) Whitehall Beautification and Garden Club.
(3) Whitehall senior citizens.
(4) Whitehall Historical Preservation Society.
(5) The disabled or handicapped community.
(6) Ironton Rail-Trail Commission.
B. The remainder of the 10 seats shall be filled by members "at large." All
member shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Whitehall
Township. The representative from each of these groups sitting on the
Commission need not be the chairperson of the group, but shall be a
member in good standing of that group at all times while serving as that
group's representative on the Recreation Commission. Each group shall
be given the option of electing their own representative, subject to
ratification by the Board of Commissioners, but, if such an option is not
exercised at least four weeks prior to the meeting of the Board of
Commissioners at which appointments are made, said appointment
shall be made by the Board of Commissioners. All appointed members
shall be residents of Whitehall Township throughout their terms. In the
event the representative of one of the groups listed in Subsection A(1)
through (6) above ceases membership in said group, a new
representative shall be appointed in the manner previously stated to fill
the unexpired term of that member. The Bureau Chief for Recreation
§ 1-114 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-115
C:119
§ 1-116. Appointment.
All Whitehall Township Recreation Commission members shall be appointed
in accordance with the following procedures:
§ 1-117. Compensation. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
Commission members shall receive no compensation for their services but
may be reimbursed for the expense actually and necessarily incurred by
them in the performance of their duties so long as prior approval has been
given by the Bureau Chief of Recreation and affirmed by the Mayor or his
or her designee.
§ 1-118. Activities.
The Whitehall Township Recreation Commission shall be advisory and shall
coordinate all activities with the Bureau Chief of Recreation, the Board of
Commissioners and other appropriate Township officials.
§ 1-119. Officers.
At its organization meeting, the Whitehall Township Recreation Commission
shall elect its own officers for positions of chairperson, vice chairperson,
financial secretary and secretary from among its members. The terms of
officers shall be for a duration of one year. Officers may repeat themselves
in any office up to a period of three consecutive one year terms.
shall sit as an ex officio member of the Recreation Commission, but
shall not have a vote.
A. All Commission members shall be appointed by the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of Whitehall pursuant to the
procedures set forth in § 1-98 of the Administrative Code of Whitehall
Township and subject to § 1-115 above.
B. The appointment of the initial membership shall be three members for a
term of one year, three members for a term of two years and three
members for a term of three years. Thereafter, all persons appointed
shall serve a term of three years or the remainder of the unexpired term
for which they have been appointed unless removed sooner by the
Board of Commissioners for "just cause."
C. Grounds for removal for "just cause" shall include, but are not limited
to, nonattendance at three consecutive regular meetings or more than
1/2 of the total number of regular meetings during the calendar year
without acceptable excuse or conviction of a crime of the third degree
or above, a crime involving moral turpitude or a crime involving the
office of the member. Members shall also be removed for "just cause" if
they cease membership in the designated group which they represent
or cease to be domiciled in Whitehall Township.
§ 1-115 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-120
C:120
§ 1-120. Powers.
The Whitehall Recreation Commission shall have the following powers:
§ 1-121. Reservation of powers.
This section shall not be construed to modify, limit or alter the powers,
duties and responsibilities of the Whitehall Township Park and Recreation
Board, established by Ord. No. 1228, 12-16-1976 (§ 1-411 et seq.). That
Board shall continue to function with the duties and responsibilities
currently within its charge.
A. Recommend plans and programs to the appropriate agencies for the
enhancement of Township owned facilities and Township sponsored
programs, in accordance with the park, open space and recreation plan
adopted by the Township.
B. Make recommendations for the possible use or expansion of use of open
park area within the Township.
C. Review any subdivision and land development plans which may be
submitted to the Township and make such recommendations and
reports as may be deemed appropriate to the Planning Commission or
Township Engineer for incorporation into land use comments.
D. In cooperation with the other agencies represented on the Recreation
Commission, as well as the Bureau Chief of Recreation and the
Township Bureau of Planning, Zoning and Development, assist in
planning and coordinating the use of facilities for special events
sponsored by the Township.
E. Make recommendations for the use or location of recreational fees or
lands dedicated to the Township as a part of a subdivision and land
development or building permit process pursuant to the Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10503.
§ 1-120 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-121
C:121

ARTICLE XIX
Tax Appeals Board
[Adopted 5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 2170]
§ 1-122. Tax Appeals Board established.
A Township Tax Appeals Board, to be composed of three members, is
hereby established for the Township of Whitehall. All members of the Tax
Appeals Board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed
for necessary and reasonable expenses not to exceed $20 per regularly
scheduled meeting.
§ 1-123. Appointment, term and vacancy. [Amended 8-8-2005 by
Ord. No. 2578]
Each member of the Tax Appeals Board shall be a resident of the Township
of Whitehall. Members of the initial Tax Appeals Board appointed by the
Board of Commissioners shall have the following terms: one member shall
be appointed for a one year term, one member shall be appointed for a
two year term and one member shall be appointed for a three year term.
Thereafter members of the Tax Appeals Board shall be appointed by the
Board of Commissioners for terms of three years or until his/her successor
shall be appointed and qualified. The chairman of the Tax Appeals Board
shall promptly notify the Board of Commissioners concerning vacancies and
each such vacancy shall be filled for its unexpired term.
§ 1-124. Removal.
Any member of the Tax Appeals Board, once qualified and appointed, may
be removed from office pursuant to the procedures of § 1-99 hereof.
§ 1-125. Conduct of business. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The Tax Appeals Board shall elect it own chairman, vice-chairman and
secretary who shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. The
Tax Appeals Board may make and alter rules, bylaws and regulations to
govern it procedures consistent with the ordinances of Whitehall Township
and the laws of the Commonwealth provided the same are approved, by
motion, of the Board of Commissioners. The Tax Appeals Board shall make
a full record of its business. Reports of the Tax Appeals Board's activities
may be made as often as may be necessary, or as requested by the Board of
Commissioners. All official actions of the Tax Appeals Board shall be made
by resolution, concurred in by a majority of those members present who
represent a quorum. Such resolutions shall be numbered consecutively for
each calendar year and shall be signed by the chairman and attested to
by the secretary of the Tax Appeals Board. Administrative assistance shall
be provided by the Mayor as determined between the Chairman of the
Tax Appeals Board and the Mayor. The Tax Appeals Board shall meet as
§ 1-122 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-125
C:123
and when needed and such meetings shall be open to the public. The Tax
Appeals Board may schedule other work sessions as required.
§ 1-126. Powers and duties of the Tax Appeals Board.
The Tax Appeals Board shall have the power and shall be required to:
A. Hold hearings on taxpayer appeals filed under and pursuant to the
Whitehall Township Taxpayers Bill of Rights, Ord. No. 2144, 3-8-1999
(§ 24-701 et seq.). The Board shall conduct hearings and make
decisions in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) The Board shall give written notice to the appellant and the Board
of Commissioners. The notices herein requested shall state the
time, place and location of the hearing.
(2) Hearings shall be held within 30 days from the date of the
applicant's request therefor, unless the applicant has agreed, in
writing, to an extension of time. The Board of Commissioners may
prescribe reasonable fees with respect to hearings before the Tax
Appeals Board. Fees for said hearings may include costs and
necessary administrative overhead connected with the hearings.
The costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of the Tax
Appeals Board, expenses for technical consultants or expert
witness costs.
(3) The parties to the hearing shall be the appellant and the Township.
(4) The chairman or acting chairman of the Board shall have power to
administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of relevant documents and papers
including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
(5) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to present evidence and argument
and to cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues. The
Mayor shall appoint a solicitor to represent the Tax Appeals Board.
Such solicitor shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners.
Such solicitor shall not be the Township Solicitor or any one in the
Township Solicitor's office. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(6) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial
or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
(7) The Board shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings. The
appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the
appellant and the Board. The cost of the original transcript shall be
paid by the Board if the transcript is ordered by the Board, or shall
be paid by the person appealing from the decision of the Board if
such appeal is made, and in either event, the cost of additional
copies shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies.
§ 1-125 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-126
C:124
In other cases, the party requesting the original transcript shall
bear the cost thereof.
(8) The Board shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any
party or his/her/its representatives in connection with any issue
involved except upon notice an opportunity for all parties to
participate; shall not take notice of any communication, reports,
staff memoranda or other materials, except advice from their
solicitor, unless all parties are afforded an opportunity to contest
the material so noticed; and shall not inspect the site or its
surroundings with any party or his representative unless all parties
are given an opportunity to be present.
(9) The Board shall render a written decision within 45 days after the
last hearing before the Board. Each decision shall be accompanied
by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, together with the
reasons therefor.
(10) A copy of the final decision shall be delivered to the appellant
personally or mailed to him/her/it not later than the day following
its date.
B. Maintain and keep on file records of its actions. All records and files
shall be maintained by and in the possession of the Board of
Commissioners at the Township Municipal Building.
§ 1-126 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-126
C:125

Part 5
Authorities
ARTICLE XX
Coplay-Whitehall Sewer Authority
[Adopted 4-4-1963 by Ord. No. 712]
§ 1-127. Organization of a Sewer Authority jointly with Borough of
Coplay. [Amended 3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1722]
The Board of Commissioners of this Township did, in 1963, organize an
Authority jointly with the Borough of Coplay, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania,
under provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and
supplemented, known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945" (the
"Authorities Act"), for the following purposes: to acquire, hold, construct,
improve, maintain, operate, own and lease, either in the capacity of lessor
or lessee, sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof and sewage treatment
works, including works for treating and disposing of industrial waters.
§ 1-128. Execution of Articles of Incorporation. [Amended
3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1722]
The President of the Board of Commissioners and the Secretary of this
Township did execute, on behalf of this Township. Articles of Incorporation
for such authority, which articles may not be amended without express
approval of a majority of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 1-129. Membership. [Amended by Ord. -/-/1989]
The members of the Board of the Authority shall be seven in number and
shall be apportioned as follows:
Township of Whitehall
Lehigh County, Pennsylvania
4
Borough of Coplay
Lehigh County, Pennsylvania
3
§ 1-130. Necessity for enactment.
The enactment of this article is deemed necessary for the benefit of and
preservation of the public health, peace, comfort and general welfare of
citizens of this Township and will increase the prosperity of citizens of this
Township.
§ 1-131. Renewal. [Added 5-11-2005 by Ord. No. 2562]
A. The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Whitehall does hereby
authorize, approve and require the continued existence and operation
§ 1-127 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-131
C:127
of the CWSA for an additional term of 50 years, through January 20,
2055, for the health, safety and welfare of the community.
B. The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Whitehall, through its
President, Secretary and Solicitor, are hereby empowered and directed
to sign any such documents or authorize any such action to be taken in
cooperation with the Borough of Coplay and the administration of the
CWSA, consistent with this section, to assure the continued operation
of the CWSA for an additional 50 years as aforesaid.
§ 1-131 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-131
C:128
ARTICLE XXI
Whitehall Township Authority
[Adopted 8-11-1947 by Ord. No. 443]
§ 1-132. Organization of the Authority. [Amended 3-11-1991 by Ord.
No. 1722]
The Board of Township Commissioners of Whitehall Township, Lehigh
County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, did, in 1947, organize an Authority
for the said Township, pursuant to the provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945,
P.L. 382, as amended, for the purposes specified in said Act.
§ 1-133. Name of Authority. [Amended 3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1722]
The name of the Authority shall be the Whitehall Township Authority.
§ 1-134. Appointment and compensation of Board members.
The Board of Township Commissioners of Whitehall Township, Lehigh
County, Pennsylvania, shall, at a meeting held not later than one month
prior to January 1 in each year in which a vacancy occurs on the Board
of said Authority, appoint as a member of the Board a citizen of Whitehall
Township to succeed the member whose term expires on January 1, of the
next succeeding year.
§ 1-135. Articles of Incorporation. [Amended 9-12-1988 by Ord. No.
1623; 3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1722]
The authorized officers of the Board of Commissioners did execute and
deliver Articles of Incorporation of said Whitehall Township Authority, which
articles may not be amended without the express approval of a majority of
the Township Board of Commissioners.
§ 1-136. Powers of Authority. [Amended 3-11-1991 by Ord. No.
1722]
The Whitehall Township Authority shall have all the powers granted by the
Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended, except as otherwise set forth in
this Administrative Code or the terms of the Articles of Incorporation.
§ 1-137. Whitehall Township Authority to confine its operations to
water projects. [Added 3-23-1964 by Ord. No. 741; amended
7-10-1995 by Ord. No. 1940]
A. The Charter of the Whitehall Township Authority is extended to August
1, 2038.
A. The Whitehall Township Authority shall confine its operations and legal
jurisdiction to the construction, operation, maintenance, establishment,
and service of water systems and water to the residents of the Township
of Whitehall or such other legal municipal entities with which the
§ 1-132 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-137
C:129
§ 1-138. Authority not authorized to undertake sewer projects.
[Added 3-23-1964 by Ord. No. 741]
The Whitehall Township Authority shall no longer have any power or
authority to undertake any sewer projects and shall not have the power or
authority to make any extensions of any existing sewer facilities.
Whitehall Township Authority and the other governmental entity shall
execute a written agreement setting forth the terms and conditions of
service. Each such contract in a new municipal entity (i.e., Township
or borough) must be approved by resolution by the Whitehall Township
Board of Commissioners prior to becoming effective.
B. Once a new municipal entity is being served by the Whitehall Township
Authority under an approved municipal contract, new project contracts
for expansion shall require formal review and approval of the Whitehall
Township Board of Commissioners only if the expansion will service
more than 20 new equivalent dwelling units within a three-year period.
C. The Whitehall Township Authority shall continue to file reports and
keep the Whitehall Township Board of Commissioners advised of new
projects and lines undertaken by the Whitehall Township Authority and
the Whitehall Township Authority shall be responsible for compliance
with any other law, statute or regulation governing water service
authorities operating cross municipal boundaries.
§ 1-137 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-138
C:130
ARTICLE XXII
Whitehall Township Industrial and Commercial Development
Authority
[Adopted 2-25-1974 by Ord. No. 1134; amended in its entirety
3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1722]
§ 1-139. Organization of the Authority.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Whitehall, County of
Lehigh, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania did, in 1974, duly organize an
Industrial and Commercial Development Authority in said Township, county
and Commonwealth, under the Industrial and Commercial Development
Authority Law (73 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 301-314).
§ 1-140. Articles of Incorporation.
The President of the Board of Commissioners and the Secretary of the
Township did execute, on behalf of the Township, Articles of Incorporation
for such Authority, which articles may not be amended without the express
approval of a majority of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 1-139 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-140
C:131

Part 6
[Adopted 4-1T2o-w1n9s7h1ipB ySeOarld. No. 1017]
ARTICLE XXIII
Seal
§ 1-141. Official seal adopted; description.
§ 1-142. Penalty for unlawful reproduction or use of seal. [Amended
6-9-1989 by Ord. No. 1356]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company or corporation to use
any reproduction of the official seal of the Township hereinabove described
and adopted in this Part 6 or any imitation or design of the same except
for the usual and customary purposes of decoration and display. Any person
who shall use such reproduction, or any imitation or design of the official
seal of the Township of Whitehall for advertising or other purposes except
for decoration or display, or shall print, stamp or emblazon thereon any
word, legend or device not duly authorized as hereinbefore stated shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
A. The Township of Whitehall hereby adopts a Municipal Seal as outlined
in the print hereon, in accordance with the following description and
the color impression attached hereto and made part of this Part 6.
B. The shield containing representation of industrial, educational and
governmental facilities is intended to represent the broad cross section
of activity which contributes to the strength and balance of our
community.
C. The designation "First Class Township, Lehigh County, 1902," together
with the letter "W" located in the lower portion of the shield represents
the date when Whitehall was decreed to be a First Class Township.
D. The wreath which embraces the shield and the banner located below
the shield and overlapping the wreath and containing the words "Of
People, By People, and For People" stands for the dedication of
governmental officials, both elected and appointed, to the citizens of
Whitehall.
E. The words "Founded 1867" located above the shield and between the
tips of the wreath stands for the date Whitehall Township became a
separate governmental unit.
F. The double circle containing the words "Whitehall Township,
Pennsylvania" and five-pointed stars represents the five major villages
of the Township: Cementon, Egypt, Fullerton, Hokendauqua and West
Catasauqua.
G. The border located on the outside of the circles represents a replica of
the sun's rays to indicate that Whitehall will forever have its place
under the sun.
§ 1-141 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-142
C:133
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this section
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 1-143. Custody of official seal.
The Township's official seal shall be in the custody of the Township
Secretary, subject to such requirements as are prescribed by the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 1-142 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-143
C:134
Part 7
Pensions, Retirement And Social Security
ARTICLE XXIV
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System
[Adopted 12-14-1964 by Ord. No. 755; amended in its entirety
3-10-2008 by Ord. No. 2718]
§ 1-144. Amendment of member benefits.
Whitehall Township, being a member municipality of the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement System, hereby elects to change its member benefits
in that System as authorized by the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Law, as amended, and does hereby agree to be bound by all the
requirements and provisions of said Article and the Law, as the case may be,
and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise, placed upon member
municipalities by said amendment, as the case may be. All references
hereafter shall be based on benefits negotiated.
§ 1-145. Membership requirements and prohibitions. [Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
Membership in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be
mandatory for all full-time municipal employees of the Township.
Membership for part-time employees is optional. The election by parttime
employees to join the System must be made within one year after
the employee first enters the service of the Township. Membership for
elected Commissioners is prohibited except for Commissioners who were
pre-existing members as of July 1, 1988. Membership for the Mayor and
Township Treasurer is mandatory. Membership for employees hired on a
temporary or seasonal basis, and individuals paid only on a fee basis is
prohibited.
§ 1-146. Credit for prior service.
Credit for prior service for original members is granted for each year or
partial year thereof that the member was employed by the Township from
the original date of hire or the expiration of the member's probationary
period if one so existed. Benefits provided to members in the agreement
dated March 10, 2008, shall accrue based on all credited service granted
and earned in accordance with this section.
§ 1-147. Payment of obligations.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and
the agreement between the Board and Whitehall Township shall be made
by the Township in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Law and Act 205 of 1984, the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act.
§ 1-144 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-148
C:135
§ 1-148. Pension plan agreement; liability of Township.
§ 1-149. Repealer; effective date.
Whitehall Township intends this article to be the complete authorization
of the Township's municipal pension plan, and it shall become effective
and specifically repeal Ordinance Number 2482 either immediately or on
January 1, 2008, which is the effective date of the Agreement dated March
10, 2008, between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System and
Whitehall Township, whichever is later.
§ 1-150. Filing of copy; effective date for membership.
A duly certified copy of this article and the referenced agreement shall
be filed with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Membership for the municipal employees
of Whitehall Township in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System
shall be effective the first day of January, 1965, with the revised plan
structure reflected in the agreement dated March 10, 2008, effective the
first day of January, 2008.
A. As part of this article, the Township agrees that the System shall
provide the benefits set forth in the agreement between the Board and
Whitehall Township, dated March 10, 2008.1 The passage and adoption
of this article by Whitehall Township is an official acceptance of said
agreement and the financial obligations resulting from the
administration of said benefit package.
B. Whitehall Township hereby assumes all liability for any unfundedness
created or which may be created due to the acceptance of the benefit
structure outlined in the above-referenced agreement.
1. Editor's Note: The pension plan agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-148 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-150
C:136
ARTICLE XXV
Police Pensions
[Former Article XXV, Police Pensions, adopted 12-9-1957 by Ord.
No. 615, as amended, was superseded 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 2760.
The current Police Pension Plan and any subsequent amendments
are on file in the Township offices.]
§ 1-151. through § 1-166. (Reserved)
§ 1-151 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-151
C:137

ARTICLE XXVI
Social Security for Township Officers and Employees
[Adopted 1-12-1953 by Ord. No. 538]
§ 1-167. Social Security enabling legislation.
The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in regular session, enacted a statute, known as Act No. 491,
which is the Enabling Act provided for in § 218 of Public Law 734, 81st
Congress, United States, which designated the Secretary of Labor and
Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act as the state agency to
implement the coverage of employees and officers under the said Old Age
and Survivors Insurance System.
§ 1-168. Execution and delivery of plan and agreement authorized.
The Township of Whitehall is hereby authorized to execute and deliver to
the state agency a plan, or plans, and agreement, required under § 6 of said
Enabling Act and the Social Security Act, to extend coverage to employees
and officers of the Township of Whitehall, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania,
and do all other necessary things to effectuate coverage of employees and
officers under the Old Age and Survivors Insurance System.
§ 1-169. Payroll deduction system, matching Township payments
authorized. [Amended 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 1252]
The Director of the Department of Administration or his designee is hereby
authorized to establish a system of payroll deduction to be matched by
payments by the Township of Whitehall to be made into the contribution
fund of the Social Security Act through the office of the state agency, and
to make charges of this tax to the fund or funds, from which wage or
salary payments are issued to employees of the Township of Whitehall. Such
payments are to be made in accordance with the provisions of the law
and regulations promulgated by the state agency and the Federal Social
Security Administrator. Such payments which are delinquent shall bear
interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month until such time as payments are
made.
§ 1-170. Appropriation into contribution fund; date participation
commences.
Appropriation is hereby made from the general fund, or funds, of the
Township of Whitehall, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, in the necessary
amount to pay into the contribution fund as provided in § 4 of the Enabling
Act and in accordance with the plan, or plans, and agreement. Authority is
given to the President and the Secretary of the Board of Commissioners of
the Township of Whitehall, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, to enter into an
agreement with the state agency, which agreement shall be in accordance
with Act No. 491 and with § 218 of the Social Security Act. Such plan
§ 1-167 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-170
C:139
and agreement shall provide that the participation of Whitehall Township,
Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, shall commence as of January 1, 1953.
§ 1-170 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-170
C:140
ARTICLE XXVII
Firemen's Relief Association
[Adopted 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
§ 1-171. Recognition of Firemen's Relief Association.
§ 1-172. Certification to Auditor General.
The Board of Commissioners shall annually certify to the Auditor General of
the Commonwealth, the name of the active association and the percentage
of service it contributes to the protection of the Township. Such certification
shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor General.
§ 1-173. Annual appropriation.
There is annually appropriated from the Township Treasury all such sums
of money that may hereafter be paid into the Township Treasury by the
Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes paid on
premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuant of 1984 Act of
December 18, No. 205, § 701 et seq. as hereafter amended, supplemented,
modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania. Such
monies received by the Township Treasurer from the State Treasurer shall
be distributed to the duly recognized association(s) within in 60 days of
receipt. The funds shall be distributed on the basis of the percentage of
service established in the certification to the Auditor General and with other
provisions of the Act.
A. The following association is hereby recognized as actively engaged in
providing fire protection and/or emergency services in the Township of
Whitehall.
Whitehall Township Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association
B. The above named association has been formed for the benefit of its
members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or
permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
C. The above named Association of the Township of Whitehall is
designated the proper association to receive such funds as are due and
payable to the Township Treasurer by the Treasurer of the State of
Pennsylvania from the tax on premiums from foreign fire insurance
companies.
§ 1-171 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-173
C:141

ARTICLE XXVIII
Firefighters Length of Service Awards Program
[Adopted 1-13-1992 by Ord. No. 1757]
§ 1-174. Establishment of program; deposit of previously authorized
funds.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Whitehall hereby
establishes the Whitehall Township Volunteer Firefighters Length of Service
Awards Program under the terms and conditions set forth in this article.
All funds previously authorized for a length of service awards program for
volunteer fighters serving in Whitehall Township shall be deposited into the
fund created under this article.
§ 1-175. Definitions.
When used in this article the following terms shall have the meaning set
forth below, unless a different meaning is plainly required by the context:
ANNIVERSARY DATE — Each December 31.
COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of
Whitehall, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
COMMITTEE — The committee appointed by the Commissioners under
§ 1-180 to administer the program.
COMPANY — The Whitehall Township Bureau of Fire, a volunteer fire
company serving Whitehall Township, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, or its
successors.[Amended 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 3131]
FUND — The fund described in § 1-179 to hold the funds to be used
to provide benefits under the program, and designated the Volunteer
Firefighters Length of Service Awards Program Fund.
PARTICIPANT — Any person who is a participant in the program under the
requirements of § 1-177.
PROGRAM — The Whitehall Township Volunteer Firefighters Length of
Service Awards Program as described in this article, as amended from time
to time.
PROGRAM YEAR — Each one year period beginning on January 1 and
ending on the following December 31.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Whitehall, a Pennsylvania municipal
corporation and Home Rule Charter municipality, located in Lehigh County,
Pennsylvania.
YEARS OF SERVICE — As of any given date shall have the meaning ascribed
to that term in § 1-176.
YEARS OF POST-1990 SERVICE — As of any given date shall have the
meaning ascribed to that term of § 1-176A.
§ 1-174 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-175
C:143
YEARS OF PRE-1991 SERVICE — As of any given date shall have the
meaning ascribed to that term in § 1-176B.
§ 1-176. Service.
§ 1-177. Participation. [Amended 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 3131]
§ 1-178. Benefits. [Amended 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 2304]
A. Years of post-1990 service. [Amended 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 3131]
(1) A person shall be credited with one year of post-1990 service for
every program year beginning after December 31, 1990, in which
he/she was deemed an active member of the Fire Department by
the Fire Chief of Whitehall Township or his/her designate.
(2) A year of post-1990 service for any given program year shall be
credited on the last day of the program year.
B. Years of pre-1991 service. [Amended 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 3131]
(1) A person shall be credited with one year of pre-1991 service for
every calendar year beginning on or before January 1, 1990, in
which he/she was deemed an active member of the Fire
Department by the Fire Chief of Whitehall Township or his/her
designate.
(2) A year of pre-1991 service for any given calendar year shall be
credited on the last day of the calendar year.
C. Years of service. The number of a person's years of service as of any
given date (the "determination date") shall be equal to the sum of:
(1) The number of years of post-1990 service credited to the person as
of the determination date.
(2) The lesser of the following two numbers:
(a) The number of years of pre-1991 service credited to the person
as of the determination date.
(b) The number of years of post-1990 service credited to the
person as of the determination date, multiplied by five.
A. In general. Except as provided in Subsection B, a person shall be a
participant in the program on any date after December 31, 1990, that
he/she is a member of the company.
B. There shall be no maximum number of participants in the program at
any given time.
A. Normal benefit. Subject to the rules of Subsection F limiting payments
in the case of inadequate funding or termination of the program:
§ 1-175 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-178
C:144
(1) General rule. Each participant (or former participant) shall receive
monthly benefit payments from the fund, commencing on the date
described in Subsection A(2) and continuing on the first day of each
succeeding calendar month until the participant or former
participant receives 120 monthly payments in an amount equal to
$10, multiplied by the lesser of: [Amended 1-14-2019 by Ord.
No. 3131]
(a) The number of years of service credited to the participant as of
the date benefit payments commence; or
(b) Thirty.
(2) Commencement of benefits. Program benefits under this
Subsection A shall commence on the later of:
(a) The first day of the first calendar month following the month of
the participant's 60th birthday.
(b) The first January 1 as of which the participant has credit for at
least five years of post-1990 service.
(3) Additional benefits for additional service after benefits commence.
If any participant shall have credit for fewer than 30 years of
service at the time benefit payments commence under this
Subsection A, and shall receive credit for any additional years of
service after benefit payments commence, the participant shall
receive supplemental benefits for each additional year of service up
to and including the 30th year of service. The supplemental benefit
for each such additional year of service shall be $8 per month,
commencing on the first day of the month after the participant
received credit for the year of service and continuing on the first
day of each succeeding calendar month until the participant or
former participant receives 120 monthly payments of supplemental
benefits for that particular year of service.
(4) Death benefit. If a participant under this Subsection A shall die
before he/she receives all of the payments described in Subsection
A(1), the remaining payments shall continue to be paid to his/her
designated beneficiary. A participant may designate any
beneficiary he/she desires, and may designate multiple, contingent
and/or successive beneficiaries. Such records of beneficiaries shall
be kept on file with the Whitehall Township Volunteer Firefighters
Relief Association. A beneficiary designation may be revoked or
changed at any time without the consent of the beneficiary. In
absence of any beneficiary designation, or if all beneficiary
designations shall die before all payments shall have been
completed, the benefit payment(s) shall be paid to the participant's
surviving spouse, if any, or if there is no surviving spouse, or if the
spouse shall die, to the participant's estate. [Amended 1-14-2019
by Ord. No. 3131]
§ 1-178 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-178
C:145
B. Special benefit for older firefighters at program inception. Subject to
the rules of Subsection F limiting payments in the case of inadequate
funding or termination of the program:
(1) Election of special benefit. Any person who is a participant on
February 1, 1992, has attained age 60 by that date and has credit
for at least 20 years of pre-1991 service may elect, on or before
January 1, 1992, to receive the special benefits provided under this
Subsection B in lieu of the ordinary benefit provided under
Subsection A. Any election to receive the benefits of this
Subsection B shall be irrevocable after February 1, 1992, and shall
constitute a waiver of all rights or claims to receive the ordinary
benefit described in Subsection A.
(2) Benefit. Each participant who elects to receive the special benefits
of this Subsection B shall receive monthly benefit payments from
the Fund, commencing on February 1, 1992 and continuing on the
first day of each succeeding calendar month until January 1, 1997,
in an amount equal to:
(a) Five dollars multiplied by
(b) The lesser of -
[1] The number of years of pre-1991 service credited to the
participant.
[2] Thirty.
(3) Death benefit. If a participant who has elected the special benefit
under this Subsection B shall die before he/she receives all of the
payments described in Subsection B, the remaining payments shall
continue to be paid to his/her designated beneficiary. A participant
may designate any beneficiary he/she desires, and may designate
multiple, contingent and/or successive beneficiaries. Such records
of beneficiaries shall be kept on file with the Whitehall Township
Volunteer Firefighters Relief Association. A beneficiary designation
may be revoked or changed at any time without the consent of the
beneficiary. In absence of any beneficiary designation, or if all
beneficiary designations shall die before all payments shall have
been completed, the benefit payment(s) shall be paid to the
participant's surviving spouse, if any, or if there is no surviving
spouse, or if the spouse shall die, to the participant's estate.
[Amended 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 3131]
C. Production of information. Before any payment shall be made under this
program to or on account of a participant or former participant, the
recipient of such payment shall file with or make available to the
Committee such information as the Committee may, from time to time,
require to determine the recipient's rights and benefits under the
program, complete all income or other tax forms, withhold income or
other taxes and make payments.
§ 1-178 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-178
C:146
§ 1-179. Township contributions; the fund.
D. Election of benefits. All applications for benefit payments, elections to
receive the special benefit under Subsection B, and beneficiary
designations shall be made on forms supplied by the Committee and
within such reasonable periods of time as may be prescribed by the
Committee. The time provided in the article for the commencement or
payment of any benefits shall be subject to compliance with the
requirements of Subsection C and this Subsection D.
E. No other benefits. No benefits other than those stated in this § 1-178
shall be payable under this program. In particular, this program shall
not pay any death benefits or other amounts after the death of a
participant or former participant, except as provided in Subsection
B(3).
F. Limitation or termination of benefits in the event of inadequate funding
or program termination. Notwithstanding any provision of this article to
the contrary, no benefits shall be paid at any time from any source other
than the Fund. If the assets in the Fund at the time any amount is
payable under this § 1-178 are inadequate to pay all amounts then
payable, all payments due at that time shall be reduced pro rata so that
the total amount payments made at that time shall be equal to the total
amount of assets in the Fund at that time. If there are no assets in the
Fund at the time an amount is payable under this § 1-178, the payment
shall not be made. All amounts reduced or eliminated by virtue of this
subsection shall be considered permanently forfeited and shall not be
retroactively reinstated or paid in arrears if future contributions are
made to the Fund, unless the Commissioners shall expressly state to the
contrary by resolution at time such future contributions are made to the
Fund.
A. Establishment of the Fund. The Township hereby establishes a separate
Township account, to be known as the Volunteer Firefighters Length of
Service Awards Program Fund (hereinafter, the "Fund"), to hold
amounts to be used for the payment of benefits under the program.
Except as provided in this article, the Fund shall be used exclusively to
pay the benefits described in this article.
B. Contributions to the Fund. The Township may, from time to time, make
appropriations or contributions to the Fund from any legal source.
However, the Township shall under no circumstances be required to
make any appropriations or contributions to the Fund at any time, even
if the amount in the Fund shall be or become inadequate to pay the
benefits specified in § 1-178.
C. Actuarial recommendations. Every three years, on or about September
1, the Committee shall provide the Commissioners with an actuarial
report of the amount of contributions which should be made to the Fund
during the following program year so that, when combined with the
actuarially appropriate contributions in the future year, the Fund will
§ 1-178 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-179
C:147
have adequate assets to pay all present and future program benefits in
full. This calculation shall be made by an actuary in the same manner
that minimum annual pension plan contributions under the Municipal
Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, 53 P.S. § 895.101
et seq., based on such assumptions of interest rate, income, mortality,
length of service, age and number of participants as the actuary shall
believe are reasonable in the aggregate. However, the Township and
the Commissioners shall have no obligation to make any contributions
or appropriations to the Fund based on the actuarial report so
submitted. [Amended 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 3131]
D. Investment of the Fund. The assets in the Fund shall be invested by the
Township Treasurer in accordance with the instructions of the
Committee and may be invested in any investment authorized for
fiduciaries under 20 Pa.C.S.A., Ch. 73, notwithstanding the general
investment rules of § 1-33.
E. Nature of the Fund. All contributions and the income thereon held in
the Fund shall at all times remain an asset of the Township until
actually paid to participants or their beneficiaries. The assets held in
the Fund shall not be held in trust, but shall remain subject at all times
to the claims of general creditors of the Township. No participant,
former participant or beneficiary shall have any preferred claim on, or
beneficial interest in, any asset of the Fund prior to the time they are
actually paid to the participant, former participant or beneficiary. All
rights under this article are mere unsecured claims. The program and
the benefits which are payable under the program or which may
become payable in the future under the program if additional years of
service are credited to any participant, shall remain at all times
"unfunded" as to the program participants, former participants or their
beneficiaries within the meaning of that term for purposes of federal tax
or labor law. The Fund and the program are designed to insure that all
benefits are subject to a "substantial risk of forfeiture" prior to actual
payment so that no federal income tax shall be payable until they are
actually paid. If, for any reason, additional restrictions shall be required
at any time to insure all benefits are subject to a "substantial risk of
forfeiture" prior to actual payment, this article shall be deemed to be
amended to include such restrictions as if they were set out herein at
length as of the date such additional restrictions are required.
F. Source of program benefits. The Fund is designed to be and shall be the
sole source of the benefits provided under the program. No other
Township funds or accounts shall be used for the purposes of the
program.
G. Spendthrift provisions. No benefit under this program shall be subject
in any manner to anticipation, alienation, ale, transfer, assignment,
pledge, encumbrance or charge and any attempt to do so shall be void,
except as specifically provided in this program, nor shall any such
benefit be in any manner liable for or subject to garnishment,
attachment, execution, levy or other legal process for the collection of
§ 1-179 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-179
C:148
§ 1-180. Administration and management of the program and the
fund.
debts, or liable for or subject to the debts, contracts, liabilities,
engagements or torts of any participant, former participant or
beneficiary. In the event the Committee shall find that any participant,
former participant or beneficiary under this program has become
incompetent, bankrupt or insolvent, or that any attempt has been made
to anticipate, alienate, sell, transfer, assign, pledge, encumber or
charge any of his benefits under the program except as specifically
provided in the program, then such benefit shall cease and terminate
and in such event the amounts which would otherwise have been paid
as such a benefit shall be paid or applied to or for the benefit of such
participant, former participant or beneficiary, his spouse, children or
other dependents, or any of them, in such manner as the Committee
may find proper from time to time.
H. Payment of benefits from the Fund. All benefit payments specified in
§ 1-178 shall be considered authorized and appropriated expenditures
from the Fund without any further action by the Commissioners.
A. Administrative Committee.
(1) The Committee. The program shall be administered by a committee
of not less than three individuals who shall serve at the pleasure of
the Commissioners (the "committee"). The appointment of this
Committee shall be made by motion or resolution. Any member of
the Committee may resign by delivering his written resignation to
the Commissioners and to the Committee.
(2) Organization and operation of the Committee. A majority of the
appointed members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for
all actions taken by the committee. Any such action may be taken
either by vote at a meeting or in writing without a meeting. The
Committee may authorize any one or more of its members to
execute any document or documents on behalf of the Committee, in
which event the Committee shall notify the Mayor and Treasurer in
writing of such action and the name or names of its member or
members so designated. Thereafter, the Mayor and Treasurer shall
accept and relay upon any document executed by such member or
members as representing action by the Committee until the
Committee shall file a written revocation of such designation. The
Committee may adopt such bylaws and regulations as it deems
desirable for the conduct of its affairs. [Amended 6-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(3) Powers and duties. The Committee shall administer the program
and the Fund in accordance with the terms of this article, shall
direct the Township Treasurer and Mayor to make the benefit
payments provided under this program and shall have all powers
necessary to carry out the provisions of the program. The
§ 1-179 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-180
C:149
Committee shall interpret the program and shall determine all
questions arising in the administration, interpretation and
application of the program. Any such determination by the
Committee shall be conclusive and binding on all persons.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(4) Advisors and consultants. With the consent of the Commissioners,
the Committee may appoint such accountants, attorneys,
investment advisors, consultants and other persons as it may deem
necessary or desirable in connection with the administration of the
program and the Fund. The Committee shall be entitled to rely
exclusively upon, and shall be fully protected in any action taken by
it in good faith in relying upon, any opinions or reports which shall
be furnished to it by any accountant, counsel or other consultants.
(5) Records and reports. The Committee shall keep a record of all its
proceedings and acts and shall keep all such books of account,
records and other data as may be necessary for the proper
administration of the program. The Committee shall notify the
Commissioners, the Mayor and the Township Treasurer of any
action taken by the Committee and, when required, shall notify any
other interested person or persons. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(6) Payment of expenses. Unless otherwise determined by the
Commissioners, the members of the Committee shall serve without
compensation for services as such, but all expenses of the
Committee shall be paid from the Fund or any other Township
account in such manner as the Commissioners shall determine.
Such expenses shall include any expenses incident to the
functioning of the Committee including, but not limited to, fees of
accountants, counsel, consultants, investment advisors and other
specialists and any other costs of administering the program.
(7) Immunity from liability; indemnification. No member of the
Committee shall incur any liability for any action or failure to act
except with respect to his own gross negligence or willful
misconduct. The Township shall and does hereby indemnify each
member of the Committee against any and all claims, losses,
damages, expenses and liabilities arising from any action or failure
to act, except when the same is judicially determined to be due to
the gross negligence or willful misconduct of such member. In
addition, the Committee and any member or agent thereof shall be
fully protected in relying upon the advice of any counsel, consultant
or actuary appointed by the Committee or the Township.
B. Nondiscrimination. Whenever there is a choice or decision to be made
by the Township or the Committee in connection with the
administration of the program, the result shall be uniformly applied
then and thereafter in all similar circumstances so that there shall be no
discrimination in the operation of the program.
§ 1-180 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-181
C:150
§ 1-181. Amendment and termination.
§ 1-182. Miscellaneous provisions.
A. Amendment. The Commissioners may by ordinance at any time, and
from time to time, modify or amend, in whole or in part, any or all of the
provisions of the program, including the method of financing the
program, provided that no modification or amendment may be made
which would have the effect of reducing the benefits which any
participant or beneficiary would have received under the program in
the absence of the modification or amendment based on the amount of
service credited to the relevant participant or former participant
through the date of the modification or amendment [other than a
reduction or elimination of benefits under § 1-178F], regardless of
whether such reduction or elimination was caused directly or indirectly
by the modification or amendment to the program.
B. Right of termination. The Commissioners reserve the right to terminate
the program for any reason at any time and to discontinue contributions
to this program. In the event, benefits shall be paid over time from the
Fund in accordance with the provisions of § 1-178 until all assets of the
Fund are exhausted, provided that no additional years of service shall
accrue for benefit purposes after the date of the termination.
Alternatively, if the program is to be continued by contributions from
the company or any firefighters' relief association or other related
organization, the assets of the Fund shall be transferred to the
organization which is continuing the program, subject to the limitations
stated in the "provided" clause of Subsection A.
A. No employment rights, etc. Nothing contained in this article shall be
construed or interpreted as giving any person the right of employment
by the Township, making any person an employee of the Township,
giving any person the right to membership or to retain membership in
the company, or granting any person the right to receive training by the
company or the Township or to respond to fire calls within the
Township. Nothing contained in this article shall effect or impair any
conditions of membership in the company, the right of the company to
control its members, the right of the Township to regulate or control
firefighting operations within the Township or the right of the company
to terminate the services or membership of any person.
B. Construction. When used herein, the masculine shall include the
feminine and neuter and the singular shall include the plural, and vice
versa, as appropriate.
§ 1-181 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-182
C:151

Part 8
(SNeoen uAnlsioo:n " AWnhdi tMehaanlal gTeomwnensht iEpm Ppelrosyoenen Rele Rguullaetsi oAnnsd A Rnedg Buleanteiofintss"
For Procedural And Administrative Provisions And Union Employee
Benefits Are As Described In The Relevant Collective Bargaining
Agreement The In Effect.)
ARTICLE XXIX
Scope
[Adopted 5-12-1969 by Ord. No. 929]
§ 1-183. Scope of provisions. [Amended by Ord. -/-/1991]
A. This article provides regulations for sick leave, family funeral leave,
holidays, vacations, personal days, leaves of absence, other
compensated leave and other fringe benefits (Articles XXIX through
XXXIV) for all nonunion and management Township employees whose
employment is not subject to any collective bargaining agreement,
which shall include all male or female salaried employees, except
elected officials, on the active payroll of Whitehall Township, in addition
to and including all regularly employed laborers and all special or
substitute employees in the Police Department and Fire Department.
B. Sick leave, family funeral leave, holidays, vacations, personal days,
leaves of absence, other compensated leave and other fringe benefits
for those Township employees whose employment is subject to and
governed by a collective bargaining agreement shall be regulated by,
described by and limited to the provisions of that collective bargaining
agreement. Any provisions outlined below which are not addressed in
their collective bargaining agreement shall apply to all full-time
employees.
C. Article XXXVI, "Personnel Rules and Regulations," shall apply to and
govern the employment of all Township employees, including all male
and female employees on the active payroll of Whitehall Township,
regardless of the status, length or type of employment, excepting only
elected officials and those employees which are expressly excluded by
the terms of their collective bargaining agreement with the Township.
§ 1-183 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-183
C:153

ARTICLE XXX
Sick Leave
[Adopted 5-12-1969 by Ord. No. 929]
§ 1-184. Sick leave entitlement. [Amended 2-26-1973 by Ord. No.
1096; Ord. -/-/1991]
Sick leave entitlement shall accrue from the employment date as follows, to
wit:
§ 1-185. Compensation for authorized leave; exceptions.
Township employees shall receive full salary or compensation for any such
authorized leave, except as hereinafter otherwise provided.
§ 1-186. Workmen's compensation coverage. [Amended by Ord. -/-
/1991]
§ 1-187. Conditions for authorization of sick leave. [Amended
5-13-1976 by Ord. No. 1187; Ord. -/-/1991; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
A. Any person who is a Township employee for a period of three months or
less shall not be entitled to any sick leave whatsoever.
B. All other Township employees shall be entitled to one day per every two
months of employment for the first year; and one day per every month
for the second year of employment; and 1 1/2 days per each month of
the third and subsequent years of employment; provided, however, that
sick leave time may be accumulated and carried over from year to year,
but not in excess of 90 days.
A. In the event that an injury, illness or other events or causes for a sick
leave by a Township employee is determined to be covered by the
Pennsylvania Workmen's Compensation Law, the employee shall
thereupon be entitled to receive such compensation thereafter provided
by the Pennsylvania Workmen's Compensation Law.
B. During the mandatory "waiting period" prior to receiving any benefits
or compensation under the Workmen's Compensation Law, the
employee may elect, but shall not be required, to use part or all of the
sick leave entitlement under this article.
C. The employee shall not be required, but may elect, to use part or all of
the sick leave entitlement under this article in lieu of or in addition to
receipt of benefits under the Workmen's Compensation Law.
A. If an employee needs to call off sick, that employee's supervisor shall be
notified at least one hour before that employee's normal starting time.
No sick leave shall be authorized for any Township employee for a
period greater than three days unless such sickness is reported by a
§ 1-184 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-187
C:155
certificate signed by a physician stating that he has examined the
employee within the first three days of such employees illness and that
the nature of the illness is such that it was not caused by improper
habits of the employee, and that the employee is unable to work by
reason of such illness; and further, that he is confined to his home
or a recognized medical institution or hospital, clearly setting forth
the probable duration of such illness. Such physician's certificate shall
be presented to the Mayor on or before the fifth day of such illness.
The Mayor shall have the discretion to require a reexamination of
the employee by another physician. If the employee shall refuse to be
examined by another physician as so directed, he shall forfeit all sick
leave for such illness except for the first three days thereof.
B. The Mayor may also request a physician's certificate of illness,
whenever sick time abuse becomes evident.
C. Failure to submit a physician's certificate of illness when requested by
the Mayor shall subject the employee to disciplinary action.
§ 1-187 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-187
C:156
ARTICLE XXXI
Holidays
[Adopted 5-8-1967 by Ord. No. 848]
§ 1-188. Definitions. [Amended 3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1722]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FULL TIME PERSONNEL — Those persons employed by the Township of
Whitehall, on a salary or hourly basis, who devote at least 37 1/2 hours per
week to the exclusive business of Whitehall Township.
RATE OF PAY — The amount of compensation received by a person on a
regular work day.
§ 1-189. Holiday provisions. [Added by Ord. -/-/1991]
§ 1-190. Holidays established. [Amended by Ord. -/-/1991]
The following holidays are hereby established for observation by the
Township:
A. Paid holidays shall be provided to all full-time personnel effective with
the date of hire.
B. To receive holiday pay, full-time personnel must work the business day
before and after the holiday.
(1) An authorized absence for those days may be approved prior to the
holiday.
(2) If full-time personnel request a sick day before or after a holiday, a
doctor's note shall be submitted upon return to work.
(3) Any unauthorized absences shall cause the holiday pay to be
forfeited.
A. New Year's Day.
B. Good Friday.
C. Memorial Day.
D. Independence Day (July 4th).
E. Labor Day.
F. Thanksgiving Day.
G. Day following Thanksgiving.
H. Christmas Eve Day.
I. Christmas Day.
§ 1-188 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-190
C:157
§ 1-191. Holiday pay. [Amended 5-13-1976 by Ord. No. 1187; Ord. -/-
/1991; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
When, in the discretion of the Mayor, it shall be necessary for full-time
personnel to work on any of the holidays enumerated in § 1-190 of this
article, then that person shall receive 1 1/2 time their rate of pay for the
actual number of hours worked, in addition to any other compensation or
pay for the holiday to which that person is entitled.
§ 1-192. Exceptions; consultants.
Nothing contained hereby shall be construed or interpreted to entitle any
person employed by the Township of Whitehall on a consulting or retainer
basis to any rights or privileges under this article.
J. Employee's birthday (under their collective bargaining agreement,
police personnel observe President's Day rather than employee's
birthday).
§ 1-190 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-192
C:158
ARTICLE XXXII
Vacations
[Adopted 5-8-1967 by Ord. No. 847]
§ 1-193. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYMENT DATA — The day on which an employee of the Township of
Whitehall becomes full-time personnel.
FULL-TIME PERSONNEL — Those persons employed by the Township of
Whitehall, on a salary or hourly basis, who devote in excess of 37 1/2 hours
per week to the exclusive business of Whitehall Township.
§ 1-194. Eligibility for paid vacations. [Amended by Ord. -/-/1991]
§ 1-195. Vacation schedules for full-time personnel. [Amended
11-1-1979 by Ord. No. 1319; Ord. -/-/1991]
A. Paid vacation time accrues for full-time personnel at the then existing
rate of pay from the employment date as set forth in § 1-195 of this
article and is prorated annually on that basis, but shall not be taken
during the first calendar year of employment.
B. Carryover or compensation prohibited.
(1) Accrued vacation time shall be taken in the current calendar year
during which it becomes available.
(2) Unused vacation time shall not be carried over into the next
calendar year without prior approval of the Mayor. [Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(3) Full-time personnel shall not receive monetary compensation for
any unused vacation at the end of the calendar year.
A. The following vacation schedule shall be established for full-time
personnel of the Township of Whitehall, including all Bureau and fulltime
nonunion clerical employees:
Full Calendar Years of Service Vacation Leave Allowance
Per Year
Less than 1 year 0 days
More than 1 year, but less than 2
years
5 days
More than 2 years, but less than 5
years
10 days
More than 5 years, but less than 10
years
15 days
§ 1-193 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-195
C:159
§ 1-196. Dates for vacations. [Amended 5-13-1976 by Ord. No. 1187;
Ord. -/-/1991]
§ 1-197. Exceptions.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed or interpreted to entitle
any person employed by the Township of Whitehall on a consulting or
retainer basis to any paid vacation.
Full Calendar Years of Service Vacation Leave Allowance
Per Year
More than 10 years, but less than 15
years
20 days
More than 15 years, but less than 20
years
25 days
20 years and above 30 days
B. As otherwise established by the Board of Commissioners in appointing
the Director of the Department of Operations or the Deputy Mayor, in
establishing any new position or in establishing this benefit for any new
or existing employee for an existing position, all of which fringe benefits
shall be established by an ordinance in accordance with § 3.20, Certain
Specific Actions Requiring an Ordinance, § 5.09, Deputy Mayor, and
§ 9.02, Department Heads, of the Home Rule Charter. [Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
C. The current vacation entitlement, for those employees who are entitled
to vacation in excess of 25 days per year at the date of adoption this
article, shall continue unchanged for so long as those employees are
still employed by the Township.
A. All vacation request must be made in either half or full days in advance
of utilization.
B. Approval is required by the Bureau Chief or Mayor for all requests with
consideration given to ensure adequate departmental staffing.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
C. Seniority will dictate when conflicting requests are made
simultaneously or at the beginning of the current year.
D. Approval of other requests made throughout the year will be granted on
a first-come-first-served basis.
§ 1-195 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-197
C:160
ARTICLE XXXIII
Personal Days
[Adopted by Ord. -/-/1991]
§ 1-198. Accrual.
Personal days accrue for full-time employees as follows: One day of the
employee's regular number of working hours earned at the completion of
each four-month period.
§ 1-199. Use.
Personal days must be used during the calendar year in which they are
earned. Personal time may be used in one hour increments.
§ 1-198 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-199
C:161

ARTICLE XXXIV
Leave of Absence
[Adopted by Ord. -/-/1991]
§ 1-200. Grant of leave.
The Township recognizes that circumstances may arise which require that
an employee be absent for an extended period of time for either medical
or personal reasons. In such an instance, the employee may be granted
an unpaid leave of absence, depending upon the circumstances of the
individual situation.
§ 1-201. Date and start of leave.
An unpaid leave of absence shall begin the date the employee is deactivated
from the Township payroll. An employee shall be deactivated from payroll
and placed on a leave of absence only after that employee has used the
amount of other leave time either available to or requested by the employee.
§ 1-202. Medical disability leave.
§ 1-203. Date of deactivation.
An employee who is granted a medical leave of absence shall be deactivated
from Township payroll for the duration of the leave. The date of deactivation
shall depend upon which of the following options the employee chooses:
A. In the event an employee is unable to work for a protracted period of
time due to illness or a non-job-related injury, that employee may be
granted a medical leave of absence upon presentation of proper
certification from a physician that the employee is unable to work.
B. Medical disability leave may be granted for a maximum period of 26
weeks, beginning on the day the employee is deactivated from the
Township payroll.
C. The employee shall continue to be covered by Township-paid health,
disability and life insurance benefits during the authorized medical
leave period.
A. Use of leave time accruals.
(1) Use up all accumulated sick and/or other accrued leave time
available prior to deactivation from payroll.
(2) Use only a portion of accumulated sick and/or other accrued leave
time available prior to deactivation from payroll.
B. Application for disability benefits.
(1) File an application for disability benefits under the Township's
short-term disability insurance, which provides for a maximum of
§ 1-200 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-203
C:163
§ 1-204. Personal leave of absence.
26 weeks of benefits in lieu of compensation through Township
payroll.
(2) Waive disability benefits.
A. A personal leave of absence is a nonmedical leave of absence. All fulltime
employees in good standing with length of service over one year
may request a personal leave of absence. A personal leave of absence
must be approved by the Bureau Chief and Mayor, but shall not exceed
30 days. Approval shall not be unreasonably withheld but may be
denied if workload or staffing would be adversely affected. Abuse of a
personal leave shall result in immediate dismissal. [Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
B. During the personal leave of up to 30 days, the eligible employee shall
continue to be covered by Township-paid health, disability and life
insurance benefits. An employee whose leave of absence extends
beyond 30 days shall not be covered by such benefits. If the employee
wishes to continue insurance coverage at the employee's own expense,
then the employee may contact the personnel/benefits coordinator to
discuss the options available.
§ 1-203 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-204
C:164
ARTICLE XXXV
Other Compensated Leave
[Adopted by Ord. -/-/1991]
§ 1-205. General provisions.
Additional instances may arise when an employee needs to be away from
work for reasons unrelated to vacation, personal or sick time. Those
instances are identified, for which the Township shall provide other
compensated leave, as follows:
§ 1-206. Funeral leave. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
When an employee experiences a death in the family, the following time off
with pay shall be provided:
§ 1-207. Military leave. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
Time off with pay shall be provided for employees who are required to
attend active training, provided a copy of orders received is furnished to the
Mayor in advance of such leave.
§ 1-208. Jury duty. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
The Township recognizes an employee's obligation to fulfill a jury duty
summons. Every effort shall be made to permit time off with pay. However,
instances may occur when the Mayor shall require the employee to request
the court to reschedule the dates of attendance.
A. Immediate family. Four days, the last day shall be the day after the
funeral. Immediate family shall include spouse, parents, children,
siblings, mother/father-in-law or any relative that resided with the
employee, grandparents of the employee, grandchildren.
B. Other family members. One day, for the funeral. Other family members
include grandparents, spouse's grandparents, aunt, uncle, cousin and
in-laws.
C. Additional time off. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
(1) Additional time off with pay may be allowed in case of long
distance, provided permission is secured in advance from the
Mayor.
(2) The Mayor or his/her designee may extend the period of time off,
without pay, at his/her discretion as the case may warrant.
A. The employee shall notify his/her supervisor immediately upon receipt
of a jury duty summons.
§ 1-205 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-208
C:165
B. Employees shall continue to receive full pay for jury duty service,
provided that:
(1) Upon return to work, a receipt for payment received for services
rendered as a juror shall be submitted to the Mayor.
(2) The employee shall reimburse the Township in an amount equal to
the payment amount received for jury duty, within five working
days following the employee's return to work.
(3) If that reimbursement is not timely received, then the employee's
next paycheck shall be adjusted so that the employee shall not have
received any pay from the Township for the days of jury duty
service.
C. If the jury duty extends beyond 30 days, then the Township may request
written confirmation from the court administrator, attesting to the need
for that employee to continue serving as a juror for the duration of the
trial.
§ 1-208 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-208
C:166
ARTICLE XXXVI
Personnel Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 8-9-1971 by Ord. No. 1040]
§ 1-209. Personnel rules and job classifications adopted. [Amended
3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1722; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
The Township of Whitehall has adopted, for the purpose of establishing
rules and regulations for the employees of Whitehall Township, the
personnel rules and regulations and job classifications of Whitehall
Township, which shall remain on file and available for inspection in the
office of the Deputy Mayor.
§ 1-210. Administration of personnel rules. [Amended 5-13-1976 by
Ord. No. 1187; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
Administration of the personnel rules and regulations shall be by the Mayor
and his designated representatives.
§ 1-211. Amendments to personnel rules. [Amended 5-13-1976 by
Ord. No. 1187; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
Amendments to the personnel rules and regulations shall be prepared by
the Mayor and shall be presented to the Board of Commissioners for their
concurrence.
§ 1-212. Residency requirements. [Added 4-14-1977 by Ord. No.
1241; amended 11-11-1985 by Ord. No. 1524; Ord. -/-/1991;
8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
A. All persons employed by the Township of Whitehall on a full-time basis
on December 11, 1985, shall be required to maintain his/her domicile
within 10 miles of the prescribed geographic boundaries of Whitehall
Township. He/she shall maintain his/her domicile within said area
during the course of his/her employment with the Township. Employees
residing outside these prescribed boundaries as of December 11, 1985,
are exempt from the requirements of this § 1-212.
B. Should any Township employee presently residing outside of the
established geographic limits change his/her domicile after December
11, 1985, he/she shall be required to make his/her domicile within the
herein established geographic limits.
C. All persons who become employed by the Township of Whitehall
following May 14, 1977, shall commence residence within the
geographical limits established herein within a period of six months. An
additional six months grace period may be granted by the Board of
Commissioners upon good cause shown.
§ 1-209 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-213
C:167
§ 1-213. Violation. [Added 4-14-1977 by Ord. No. 1241; amended
11-11-1985 by Ord. No. 1524]
§ 1-214. Consistency with federal, state or other funded programs.
[Added 4-14-1977 by Ord. No. 1241]
None of the provisions of this article shall apply to the extent that they
are inconsistent with the provisions or intent of federal or state statutes or
regulations.
§ 1-215. Applications from Township residents. [Added 11-11-1985
by Ord. No. 1524]
It shall be incumbent upon the Township Administration to receive and
review in the most favorable light employment applications from individuals
residing within Whitehall Township at the time of application.
A. Any employee found in violation of § 1-212 of this chapter will be
permitted a grace period of 60 days within which to correct the
violation, following the date that he is served with written notice setting
forth the precise nature of the violation.
B. Any employee found in violation of § 1-212 after the 60 days grace
period will be subject to immediate dismissal, provided he is afforded
the opportunity of having a public or private hearing before the Mayor
and the Board of Commissioners within a two week period from the
date of the notice of his dismissal. Employees who are governed by the
rules and regulations of the Whitehall Township Civil Service
Commission shall be entitled to have a hearing in accordance with the
rules and regulations of Whitehall Township Civil Service Commission,
in lieu of the hearing required by this section. [Amended 6-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
§ 1-213 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-215
C:168
ARTICLE XXXVII
Legal Defense and Liability Indemnification
[Adopted 3-9-1987 by Ord. No. 1580]
§ 1-216. Definitions.
Unless a context indicates otherwise, the words and phrases in this section
shall have the following meanings:
EMPLOYEE — Any officer, employee, servant, as well as any member of
a Board, commission, committee, division or department of the Township,
including elected or appointed officials and persons acting on behalf or in
service of the Township in any official capacity, whether with or without
compensation. Employee does not include an independent contractor under
contract with the Township who is providing services to the Township but
who does not serve in an official capacity. Employee does include former
employees for acts and omissions within the scope of their employment
during their former employment with the Township.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Whitehall, a Home Rule Charter
municipality situate in Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
§ 1-217. Provisions for legal defense of employees.
As a condition of service or employment with the Township, the Township
shall provide an employee, subject to the conditions and requirements of
this section and notwithstanding the fact that such employee may have
concluded service or employment with the Township, such defense as may
be reasonably necessary to defend any claim, civil action or proceeding filed
against such employee, in his or her official or individual capacity or both,
on account of an act or omission in the scope of his or her employment as
an employee of the Township.
A. The Township may provide for a defense by the Township Solicitor or by
employing other counsel for this purpose or by purchasing insurance
which requires that the insurer provide the defense. The Township has
no right to recover such expenses from the employee defended, except
as otherwise provided herein.
B. The Township may refuse to provide for the defense of an action against
an employee if the Township determines that:
(1) The act or omission was not within the scope of such employee's
employment.
(2) Such employee acted or failed to act because of actual fraud or
actual malice.
(3) The lawsuit or other legal proceeding was brought by or on behalf
of the Township.
§ 1-216 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-217
C:169
§ 1-218. Indemnification of employees.
If legal representation of an employee is undertaken by the Township, all
conditions of representation are met and a judgment is entered against
the employee or a settlement made, the Township shall pay such judgment
or settlement, provided that the Township may, at its discretion, appeal
as necessary such judgment. Notwithstanding the provisions of this
subsection, the Township shall not be liable for any punitive or exemplary
damages against an employee unless the Township, in its discretion, shall
determine such damages shall be paid by the Township, nor for the payment
C. The provisions of this section shall be applicable, provided that the
following conditions are met:
(1) The employee shall, in writing, request the Township to provide for
the defense of the employee within 15 days after service of any
claim, demand, notice or summons or other process upon the
employee. Such written request shall be filed together with the
claim, demand, notice or summons or other process with the
Mayor. The Township, in its discretion, may provide requested
defense for any of its employees who fail to make a request within
the time prescribed by this subsection. [Amended 6-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(2) In addition to the notice provided in Subsection C(1), the employee
shall, as soon as practical, give further written notice, identifying
the officers or employees involved, all information known to the
employee involved, all information known to the employee with
respect to the date, time, place and circumstances surrounding the
incident or conduct giving rise to the claim or proceedings, as well
as the names and addresses of all person allegedly injured or
otherwise damaged thereby and the names and addresses of all
witnesses.
(3) The employee shall cooperate with the Township Solicitor or other
attorney designated by the Township and employed for the
provision of defense and, upon request, assist in making
settlements of any suits and enforcing any claim or any right of
contribution or indemnity against any person or organization who
may be liable to the Township because of any damage or claim of
loss arising from said incident or cause of conduct.
(4) Such employee shall attend interviews, depositions, hearings and
trials and shall assist in securing and giving evidence and obtaining
attendance of witnesses.
(5) Such employee shall not accept nor voluntarily make any payment,
assume any obligation, or incur any expense, other than for first
aid, to others at the time of any incident or course of conduct rise to
any such claim, loss or damage.
§ 1-217 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-218
C:170
of any costs, judgments or settlements which are paid through an applicable
contractor policy of insurance.
§ 1-219. Requirements of cooperation by employees.
In the event that an employee fails or refuses to comply with any of the
conditions of this section or cooperate with counsel employed by Township,
then all the provisions of this section shall be inapplicable and have no force
or effect with respect to any such claim or litigation. Nothing herein stated
shall preclude an employee from providing his or her own representation
with regard to any claim or litigation.
§ 1-220. Failure by Township to defend.
If the Township determines that an employee does not come within the
provisions of this section and thus fails or refuses to provide an employee
with a defense and a court of competent jurisdiction later determines
that such a claim does come within the provisions of this section, then
the Township shall pay any judgment rendered against the employee and
reasonable costs and fees incurred by the employee in defending against
the claim. The Township shall additionally pay any attorney's fees incurred
in obtaining the determination that such claim is covered by the provisions
of this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed to deprive an
employee of the right to petition a court of competent jurisdiction to compel
the Township to perform the dues imposed by this section.
§ 1-221. Township remedies.
If the Township determines that a claim against an employee does come
within the provisions of this section and if the employee fails to cooperate
in good faith in the defense of the claim or action or if a court of competent
jurisdiction later finds that such claim does not come within the provisions
of this section, then the Township shall be reimbursed for any payments
made by it for any judgment, or portion thereof, and costs or fees incurred
by or on behalf of the employee's defense and the Township shall also be
reimbursed for costs or expenses incurred in obtaining the determination
that such claim is not covered by the provisions of this section.
A. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to modify or amend
any provision of any policy of insurance or any employee thereof as a
named insured. In the event of any conflict between this section and the
provisions of any such policy of insurance, the policy provisions shall be
controlling; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section
shall be deemed to limit or restrict any employee's right to full coverage
pursuant to this section, it being the intent of this section to provide
complete coverage outside and beyond insurance policies which may be
in effect, while not compromising the terms and conditions of such
policies by any conflicting provisions contained in this section.
B. Nothing in this section shall be additionally construed as abrogating or
waiving any limitation of liability presently or hereinafter made
§ 1-218 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-221
C:171
§ 1-222. Effective dates.
The provisions of this section shall apply to any pending claim or lawsuit
against an employee or any such claim or lawsuit hereafter filed,
irrespective of the date of the events or circumstances which are the basis
of such claim or lawsuit. Provided, however, that in any pending claim,
action or proceeding for which the Township is currently providing defense
for an employee, that such employee shall not be required to provide a
written request for the provision of defense.
applicable to the Township or its employees which would otherwise
be applicable in any action or proceeding to which this section would
apply.
§ 1-221 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-222
C:172
Part 9
Police Force
ARTICLE XXXVIII
Creation of Part-Time Force
[Adopted 3-13-1972 by Ord. No. 996]
§ 1-223. Creation and appointment. [Amended 10-14-1974 by Ord.
No. 1154; 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 1252; 12-8-1980 by Ord. No.
1358; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
There is hereby established and created the Whitehall Township part-time
police force, the members of which shall be appointed by the Mayor (Home
Rule Charter, § 5.08H) upon recommendation of the Chief of Police.
§ 1-224. Term. [Amended 5-13-1976 by Ord. No. 1187; 12-8-1980 by
Ord. No. 1358; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
Part-time policemen shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor or until a
submitted resignation shall be accepted by the Mayor.
§ 1-225. Qualifications.
All members of the part-time police force shall be persons of good character,
residents of Whitehall Township and shall not be less than 18 nor more than
55 years of age at the time of their appointment.
§ 1-226. Duties. [Amended 10-14-1974 by Ord. No. 1154; 12-8-1980
by Ord. No. 1358]
The part-time police force shall obey all rules of the Police Department of
the Township of Whitehall applicable to them. They shall have all the police
powers, but they shall perform only such police duties as are assigned to
them by the Chief of Police and shall act only when in uniform. The Chief
of Police is authorized to prepare an organizational structure chart and to
develop and implement such rules and regulations as shall be necessary to
govern the administration of the part-time police force.
§ 1-227. Compensation. [Added 12-8-1980 by Ord. No. 1358;
amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
All services performed by part-time police shall occur within the geographic
limits of the Township of Whitehall and shall be on a voluntary basis. Parttime
police shall serve without pay, except when a part-time policeman is
employed as a substitute or supplementary police officer by authority of the
Mayor, he may be paid for his services at the rate annually recommended
by the Mayor and approved by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 1-223 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-228
C:173
§ 1-228. Workmen's compensation. [Amended 12-8-1980 by Ord.
No. 1358]
Part-time policemen shall be deemed to be employees of the Township
when performing police duties under the discretion of the Chief of Police.
Such part-time policemen shall be covered by Workmen's Compensation
during such times in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 1-229. Uniform. [Amended 12-8-1980 by Ord. No. 1358]
Each member of the part-time police force shall provide himself with the
prescribed uniform at his own expense. The Board of Commissioners may,
in its discretion, contribute financially toward the cost of uniforms.
§ 1-228 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-229
C:174
ARTICLE XXXIX
Warrantless Arrest
[Adopted 5-12-1997 by Ord. No. 2032]
§ 1-230. Short title.
This article shall be known and cited as "The Whitehall Township Guidelines
of Warrantless Arrest Ordinance."
§ 1-231. Definitions.
§ 1-232. Offenses covered.
Police officers may only make arrests without warrants under this article for
the following summary offenses (hereinafter referred to collectively as the
"summary offenses"):
§ 1-233. Requirements for arrest without warrant.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings indicated hereinbelow, except where the context clearly
indicates or expressly requires a different meaning.
DEFENDANT — Any person charged with committing any of the
offenses covered by this article.
POLICE OFFICER — Any person employed by Whitehall Township
Police Department as a law enforcement officer.
B. In this article the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and
neuter.
A. 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503 (relating to disorderly conduct).
B. 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5505 (relating to public drunkenness).
C. 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5507 (relating to obstructing highways and other public
passages).
D. 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6308 (relating to purchase, consumption, possession or
transportation of liquor or malt or brewed beverages).
A. Prior to making an arrest without a warrant pursuant to this article, the
police officer must, upon view, have probable cause to believe that:
(1) The defendant has committed a crime involving one of the four
summary offenses.
(2) The defendant's conduct is ongoing.
(3) The defendant's conduct imperils the personal security of any
person or endangers public or private property.
§ 1-230 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-233
C:175
§ 1-234. Making an arrest without warrant.
When making an arrest without warrant pursuant to this article, the police
officer shall follow the guidelines of the Whitehall Township Police Policy
and Procedures, as amended from time to time.
§ 1-235. Procedure following arrest without warrant.
B. Probable cause exists where the facts and circumstances within the
knowledge of the arresting officer are reasonably trustworthy and
sufficient to warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe that the
person to be arrested has committed a crime involving one of the four
summary offenses.
A. Where a defendant has been arrested without a warrant, the defendant
shall be either released from custody pursuant to Subsection A(1) of
this section or taken before the proper issuing authority pursuant to
Subsection C of this section.
(1) When a defendant has been arrested without a warrant, the
arresting police officer may, when the police officer deems it
appropriate, promptly release the defendant from custody when
the following circumstances have been met:
(a) The defendant is a resident of the Commonwealth.
(b) The defendant, after arrest, poses no threat of immediate
physical harm to any other person or to himself or herself.
(c) The arresting police officer has reasonable ground to believe
that the defendant will appear before a court as required.
(d) The defendant does not demand to be taken before an issuing
authority.
B. A citation shall be issued to the defendant at the time of release and
thereafter the case shall proceed as if the proceedings had been
instituted by issuing a citation to the defendant.
C. When a defendant has not been released from custody under
Subsection A, the defendant shall be taken without unnecessary delay
before the issuing authority where a citation shall be filed against the
defendant. The defendant shall be given an immediate trial unless:
(1) The Commonwealth is not ready to proceed or the defendant
requests a postponement, and in either event the defendant shall
be given the opportunity to deposit collateral for appearance on the
new date and hour fixed for trial.
(2) The defendant's criminal record must be ascertained before trial as
specifically required by statue for purposes of grading the offense
charged, in which event the defendant shall be given the
opportunity to deposit collateral for appearance on the new date
§ 1-233 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-235
C:176
§ 1-236. Parental notification.
and hour fixed for trial, which shall be after the issuing authority's
receipt of the required information.
A. Any warrantless arrest of a person under the age of 18 charging a
violation of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503 (relating to disorderly conduct), § 5505
(relating to public drunkenness) and/or § 5507 (relating to obstructing
highway and other public passages), the police officer shall notify the
defendant's parents or guardian of the charge(s).
B. In any warrantless arrest of a person under the age of 21 charging a
violation of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6308 (relating to purchase, consumption,
possession or transportation of liquor or malt or brewed beverages), the
police officer shall notify the defendant's parents or guardian of the
charge(s).
C. The name and address of the parents or guardian and an indication that
notification was made shall be listed on any citation issued for any of
the charges listed in this section.
§ 1-235 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-236
C:177

Part 10
[AdoptedM1u-1n1i-c1ip9a6l5 BBuyilOdirndg. No. 766]
ARTICLE XL
Municipal Building
§ 1-237. Site of government established.
The site of government for the Township of Whitehall is hereby established
at the municipal building located at 3219 MacArthur Road, Whitehall,
Pennsylvania.
§ 1-238. Meetings of Board of Commissioners and other Township
business to be conducted at municipal building. [Amended by Ord. -
/-/1991]
All meetings of the Board of Commissioners and all Township business
shall be conducted at and from said site, or at such other location as shall
be designated in a lawful public notice, following approval of such other
location by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 1-239. Uses of municipal building. [Added 2-8-1965 by Ord. No.
770; amended by Ord. -/-/1991; 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
All governmental functions for and on behalf of the Township of Whitehall
and its citizens including, but not limited to, the following, shall be located
at and performed from the municipal building, except to the extent that
another location for performance is designated and approved by the Board
of Commissioners:
A. Meetings of the Board of Commissioners.
B. Managerial and executive functions performed for the Township.
C. Chief of Fire Department and his various appointees and subordinates.
D. The Township Treasurer's office, including collection of taxes, and the
various functions of the Treasurer's office. The municipal building shall
be the only central office for the collection of Township taxes.
E. Storage and maintenance of Township records and files.
F. Use as an emergency operating center for Sector 3 of the Whitehall-
Coplay Civil Defense Area.
G. Meetings of the various board and agencies as created by the Township
of Whitehall.
H. Maintenance and storage of various Township equipment as may be
decided upon by the Board of Commissioners.
I. Any other use by various departments of Township government as may,
from time to time, be designated by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 1-237 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-240
C:179
§ 1-240. Use of building by officials, employees and appointees
during normal business hours. [Added 2-8-1965 by Ord. No. 770]
The municipal building may be used by all officials, elected or appointed,
and by the employees or appointees of the various departments, agencies
or board of the Township of Whitehall during normal business hours.
§ 1-241. Days and hours of operation. [Added 2-8-1965 by Ord. No.
770; amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
The hours of operation of the municipal building for normal government
functions shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., E.S.T., E.D.S.T., as the case
may be, from Monday through Friday, inclusive, excepting such holidays as
may be decided upon by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 1-242. Use of building for other functions; rental therefor. [Added
2-8-1965 by Ord. No. 770]
The said municipal building may be used for any public functions or
purposes, other than those specified herein, as from time to time the Board
of Commissioners may so decide, indicating the hours of use and the rental
for said use, if any.
§ 1-240 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-242
C:180
Part 11
Bids, Cont[rAadcotsp,t ePdro BcyurOermde. n-/t-s/1 A9n9d1 ]Purchases
ARTICLE XLI
Scope, Application and Exclusions
§ 1-243. Definitions.
The words and phrases appearing below, when used in this Part 11, shall
have the meaning assigned to them below, but only for the purposes of this
Part 11, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.2
CONTRACT DOCUMENTS — All documents created specifically for the
particular Township contract under consideration, but shall not include
standards, publications, reference works, specifications, codes or other
similar publications which were or are prepared for general use or
reference in the trade or industry, independent of the Township contract.
Contract documents shall include, but not be limited to, the drawings,
plans, specifications, general conditions of the contract, supplementary
conditions, special conditions, instructions to bidders, invitation to bid, bid
bonds, performance and payment bonds, maintenance bonds, insurance
certificates, requests for bids, requests for proposals, proposals or bids
by contractors, contractors' prequalification documents and all other
documents prepared for, used with, resulting from or otherwise associated
with a Township contract.
TOWNSHIP CONTRACTS — All bids, contracts, purchases and other
procurements by the Township of Whitehall for supplies, materials, labor,
services, equipments, franchises, insurance, transportation, conveyance or
lease of real estate, utilities or other valuable consideration, whether to be
furnished to or for the Township or to be provided from or by the Township.3
§ 1-244. Scope.
All Township contracts shall comply with this Part 11, except as provided by
other applicable laws.4
§ 1-245. Advertisement and competitive bids; general rule.
All Township contracts shall be awarded only after and on the basis of the
advertisement and competitive bidding procedures hereinafter specified,
unless excluded by this Part 11 or other applicable laws.5
2. Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.03.
3. Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.02.
4. Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, §§ 12.02 and 12.03.
5. Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, §§ 12.02 and 12.03.
§ 1-243 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-246
C:181
§ 1-246. Exclusions by type.
The following types of Township contracts are generally excluded from
the application of the advertising and competitive bidding procedures and
provisions of this Part 11, but are subject to all of the other provisions of
this Part 11:
A. Home Rule Charter. Those types of contracts listed in § 12.04 of the
Whitehall Township Home Rule Charter, as amended from time to time,
are excluded from competitive bidding, as follows:
(1) Labor or services rendered by any Township officer or employee.
(2) Labor, material, supplies or services furnished by one Township
department to another Township department.
(3) Contracts where particular types, models or pieces of new
equipment, articles, apparatus, appliances, vehicles or parts
thereof are desired which are patented and available from only one
source.
(4) Contracts for labor, materials, supplies or services not requiring
competitive bids pursuant to the terms of § 1802 of the First Class
Township Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (53 P.S.
§ 56802), as amended from time to time.
(5) Contracts relating to the acquisition or use of real property.
(6) Contracts relating to the sale of real or personal property for value
less than an amount to be established by the Board of
Commissioners.
(7) Contracts for professional or unique services.
(8) Contracts for emergency repair of public works of the Township.
(9) Contracts with other governmental entities, authorities, agencies
or political subdivisions.6
B. First Class Township Code. Those types of contracts excluded from
advertising and competitive bidding procedures by § 1802 of the First
Class Township Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (53 P.S.
§ 56802), as amended from time to time, as follows:
(1) Those for maintenance, repairs or replacements for water, electric
light or public works of the Township, provided they do not
constitute new additions, extension or enlargements of existing
facilities and equipment but a bond may be required by the
Commissioners as in other cases of work done.
(2) Those made for improvements, repairs and maintenance of any
kind made or provided by any Township through its own
6. Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.04.
§ 1-246 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-246
C:182
§ 1-247. Exclusions by contract amount.
employees; provided, however, that all materials used for street
improvement, maintenance and/or construction in excess of the
same dollar amount limit ($10,000) as contained in § 1802 of the
First Class Township Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
(53 P.S. § 56802), as amended from time to time, be subject to
the advertising and competitive bidding requirements contained
herein.
(3) Those where particular types, models or pieces of new equipment,
articles, apparatus, appliances, vehicles or parts thereof are
desired by the Commissioners which are patented and
manufactured products.
(4) Those involving any policies of insurance or surety company bonds,
those made for public utility service under tariffs on file with the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, those made with another
political subdivision or a county, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the federal government, any agency of the
Commonwealth or the federal government or any municipal
authority, including the sale, leasing or loan of any supplies or
materials by the Commonwealth or federal government or their
agencies. But the price thereof shall not be in excess of that fixed
by the Commonwealth, the federal government or their agencies.
(5) Those involving personal or professional services.
A. Township contracts for amounts less than the statutory limit for
competitive bidding ($10,000), as set forth in § 1802(a) of the First
Class Township Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania [53 P.S.
§ 56802(a)], as amended from time to time, are generally excluded from
the application of the advertising and competitive bidding provisions of
this Part 11, but are subject to the requirements of Subsection B of this
section, §§ 1-260 and 1-261 and all of the other provisions of this Part
11.
B. Township contracts for amounts less than the statutory limit for
competitive bidding ($10,000), as set forth in § 1802(a) of the First
Class Township Code [53 P.S. § 56802(a)], as amended from time to
time, but for amounts greater than the statutory limit for either written
or telephonic price quotations ($4,000), as set forth in § 1802(A.1) of
the First Class Township Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
[53 P.S. § 56802(A.1)], as amended from time to time, shall be obtained
in accordance with the requirements of said § 1802(A.1) of the First
Class Township Code [53 P.S.§ 56802(A.1)], as amended from time to
time, as stated in § 1-261, "Written and Telephonic Price Quotations Per
First Class Township Code" of this Part 11, unless excluded or provided
otherwise in this Part 11.
§ 1-246 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-248
C:183
§ 1-248. Optional advertisement and competitive bidding
procedures and other requirements. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
Advertisement and competitive bidding procedures and other contract
requirements or provision may be utilized or required for any Township
contract, even though not otherwise required by this Part 11, when directed
or designated by either the Board of Commissioners or the Mayor, in their
respective discretion.
§ 1-249. Discretionary provisions; decisions and resolution of
conflicts. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
A. In the absence of direction from the Board of Commissioners regarding
the application of any discretionary provision of this Part 11 to any
Township contract, the decision of the Mayor shall control and govern
the procurements and award of that particular Township contract.
B. When the Board of Commissioners provides explicit direction, or in the
event of a conflict between an explicit direction of the Board of
Commissioners and the Mayor regarding application of any
discretionary provision of this Part 11 to any Township contract, the
direction of the Board of Commissioners shall be controlling and shall
govern.
§ 1-248 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-249
C:184
ARTICLE XLII
Authorization and Ordinances
§ 1-250. Authorization. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The Mayor shall be authorized to make and execute Township contracts
which do not require advertisement and competitive bidding under
§ 1802(a) of the First Class Township Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania [53 P.S. § 56802(a)], unless otherwise provided or restricted
by the Home Rule Charter, this Administrative Code, any authorizing
ordinance, or otherwise, all as amended from time to time.7
§ 1-251. Ordinance required.
The following Township contracts shall be authorized by an ordinance
approved by the Board of Commissioners:
§ 1-252. Ordinance for real estate transactions.
A. Any capital expenditures in excess of $25,000.8
B. The grant, renewal or extension of a franchise.9
C. Construction of public capital improvements, regardless of the amount
involved.10
D. Any intergovernmental contract in excess of $25,000, except those of
an emergency nature when required for the protection of life and
property, in which case such emergency agreement shall be ratified by
ordinance as soon as possible thereafter.
A. All Township contracts for the purchase, sale, conveyance, leasing or
use of any real estate or lands to or from the Township shall be
authorized by an ordinance approved by the Board of Commissioners.11
B. Final action on any such ordinance, including amendments thereto,
shall be taken only after two public hearings thereon, with at least 10
day intervals between each of the public hearings and with at least 10
days prior public notice of each public hearing published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township.12
7. Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.04C.
8. Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 3.20K.
9. Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 3.20D.
10.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.04D.
11.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, §§ 3.20G, 3.23 and 12.01.
12.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 3.24.
§ 1-250 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-253
C:185
§ 1-253. Eminent domain.
The Township shall have no authority to grant to others, by franchise,
contract or otherwise, its power and right of eminent domain.13
§ 1-254. Delegation. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The Mayor may assign or delegate any of his rights, duties or functions
under this Part 11 to another Township official, department head or chief or
consultant or engineer with appropriate qualifications or expertise.
13.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.06.
§ 1-253 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-254
C:186
ARTICLE XLIII
Advertising and Notice14
§ 1-255. Advertising.
§ 1-256. First advertisement.
§ 1-257. Daily newspapers.
If the advertisement is published in one or more daily newspapers, the
advertisement shall appear at least two times, with an interval of at least
three days between the successive advertisements.
A. Advertising shall consist of publication of an advertisement or notice to
bidders in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the County of
Lehigh.
B. The published advertisement shall state the day, date, time and place
where the bids shall be publicly received, opened and read.
C. All advertisements shall contain a full set of contract documents or else
describe how sets or copies of the contract documents can be viewed
and obtained.
D. When the advertisement does not contain a full set of contract
documents, the advertisement shall state all of the following regarding
the place or organization from which the contract documents are to be
obtained:
(1) Name.
(2) Street address.
(3) Mailing address, if different from street address.
(4) Telephone number.
(5) Regular business hours.
(6) Amount and terms of any deposit.
(7) Name and title of the particular person to be contacted.
A. The first advertisement shall be published at least seven days prior to
the date stated in the advertisement for the receipt of bids.
B. The last advertisement shall be published at least three days prior to
the date stated in the advertisement for the receipt of bids.
14.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.03.
§ 1-255 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-258
C:187
§ 1-258. Weekly newspapers.
If the advertisement is published in one or more weekly newspapers, the
advertisement shall appear published at least two times, at once a week for
two successive weeks.
§ 1-259. Availability of plans and specifications.
All contract documents shall be on file and available for review or purchase
at the location stated in the advertisement at least seven days before the
date advertised for the receipt of bids.
§ 1-260. Mailing to three prospective bidders. [Amended 6-8-2009
by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
In addition to public advertisement, at least the text of the public
advertisement shall be mailed by First Class mail, postage prepaid, to at
least three persons or businesses which the Mayor reasonably believes may
be interested in bidding on the particular Township contract, unless the
Mayor documents why such mailing is not feasible or practical. The Mayor
may choose to send such notice to more than three such prospective bidders
and may send any additional contract documents deemed to be necessary
for advisable.
§ 1-261. Written and telephonic price quotations per First Class
Township Code.
The following procedures shall be utilized when and as required for
Township contracts ($4,000 to $10,000) by § 1802(A.1) of the First Class
Township Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania [53 P.S.
§ 56802(A.1)], as amended from time to time.
A. Written or telephonic price quotations from at least three qualified and
responsible contractors shall be requested by mailing a "request for
quotation" form to at least three such contractors.
B. In lieu of price quotations, a memorandum shall be kept on file showing
that fewer than three qualified contractors exist in the market area
within which it is practicable to obtain quotations.
C. A written record of telephonic price quotations shall be made.
D. The written record shall contain at least the following information:
(1) Date of the quotation.
(2) The name of the contractor.
(3) The name of the contractor's representative.
(4) The construction, reconstruction, repair, maintenance or work
which was the subject of the quotation.
§ 1-258 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-261
C:188
§ 1-262. Contracts less than statutory limits. [Amended 8-11-2008
by Ord. No. 2740]
For Township contracts for amounts less than the statutory limit for either
written or telephonic price quotations $4,000, as set forth in Section
1802(A1) of the First Class Township Code [53 P.S. § 56802(a.1)], as
amended from time to time, the following procedures shall be utilized:
(5) The price.
E. Records of written price quotations, written records of telephonic price
quotations and memoranda shall be retained for a period of at least
three years. All "request for quotation" forms received from
contractors, plus the cover sheet, shall be attached to the requisition to
document compliance with this requirement.
F. The price quotation from the contractor must be in writing prior to
acceptance by the Township.
G. The description and specifications in the "request for quotation" form
shall be clear and generic enough that all potential contractors can
respond and shall not be limited to proprietary products. The
Township's requirements for delivery, dates and quantities shall be
stated to assure that the requests for quotation are fair and equitable to
all potential contractors.
A. If a Township contract is for an amount of $2,000 or less, then only one
telephone call to a contractor shall be required to execute a contract.
B. If a Township contract is for an amount in excess of $2,000, to and
including $4,000, then:
(1) At least three potential contractors shall be telephoned for
competitive prices.
(2) A written record of the price quotations shall be kept for at least
three years.
(3) The written records shall indicate the name of the contractor and
the individual contacted and the price quotation.
(4) The contractor shall be requested to submit a written quote to
follow up the telephonic quotation.
(5) Request for quotation forms shall be used when deemed
appropriate, especially approaching the statutory limit of $4,000.
§ 1-261 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-262
C:189

ARTICLE XLIV
Bidding Procedures15
§ 1-263. Scheduling. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The day, date, time and location for receipt, opening and reading of all bids
shall be scheduled by the Mayor, in his discretion.
§ 1-264. Change in opening. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The Mayor may reschedule and change the day, date, time and location for
the receipt, opening and reading of all bids at his discretion, provided that
the rescheduled day, date, time and location is publicly advertised at least
three days before the rescheduled date for the receipt, opening and reading
of all bids and further provided that all bidders who have either submitted
a bid or registered with the Township as having purchased, picked up or
reviewed a set of contract documents renotified, either the telephone or
mail, of the rescheduled bid opening day, date, time and location.
§ 1-265. Receipt, opening and reading of bids. [Amended 6-8-2009
by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
All bids shall be received, opened and read by the Mayor at a public
meeting at the day, date, time and location stated in the advertisement or
rescheduled date, as provided herein.
§ 1-266. Public disclosures. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The reading of all bids shall include the identity of the bidder, the bid or
quoted prices, any terms or conditions which the bidder was free to specify
or enter as part of his bid and whether or not the bidder has complied
with all of the bid requirements for a bid bond, prequalification and any
other documentation required at the time of bid submission for a bid to
be responsive. The Mayor shall have the power to investigate and confirm
the accuracy and adequateness of any part of a bid, notwithstanding the
appearances or statements regarding the appearances of a bid made at the
time of bid opening. No proprietary or confidential information received
from any bidder as part of his bid shall be disclosed by the Township without
affording that bidder a reasonable opportunity to contest such disclosure,
prior to the disclosure. The Township may otherwise disclose information
from the bid as it sees fit.
§ 1-267. Award may be postponed.
The Township contract need not be awarded on the date the bids are
formally received, opened and read.
15.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.03.
§ 1-263 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-268
C:191
§ 1-268. Notice of Commissioners. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
On the first business day following the receipt of any and all competitive
bids, the Mayor shall cause to be forwarded to all members of the Township
Board of Commissioners a summary of the bids received, the complete bids
shall be available to the Commissioners upon request.
§ 1-269. Withdrawal of bids.
Withdrawal of bids by any bidder shall be governed by the provisions
of Title 73 of the Pennsylvania Statutes, "Chapter 18, Public
Contracts — Withdrawal of Bids" (73 P.S. § 1601 et seq.), as amended from
time to time.
§ 1-270. Anti-bid Rigging Act.
All Township contracts shall be subject to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
"Antibid-Rigging Act" (73 P.S., Chapter 18A, § 1611 et seq.), as amended
from time to time. In addition, for all Township contracts when public
advertising and competitive bids are required, the Township shall require
that each bidder submit a certification or affidavit of noncollusion, in
accordance with § 1617 of such Act, as amended from time to time.
§ 1-271. Nonreceipt of bids; rebidding; award.
When the Township advertises for bids on an item, in accordance with the
provisions of law regarding advertising for bids, and no bids are submitted
or received, the Township shall rebid the item. If again bids are not
submitted or received, the Township may purchase or enter into contracts
for the purchase of any item included in the advertisement upon which
no bids have been received from suppliers for the item within 45 days of
the date of the second advertisement therefor, all in accordance with the
provisions of Title 73 of Pennsylvania Statutes, § 1641 et seq., as amended
from time to time.
§ 1-272. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
11 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this
Part 11 continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any knowledge of an
alleged violation of this Part 11 shall be notarized to the Township Solicitor
who shall immediately proceed to file charge with the District Justice on
behalf of the Township of Whitehall. Failure of the Township Solicitor to
so act shall force Board action to properly pursue penalty enforcement by
naming special counsel to proceed.
§ 1-268 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-272
C:192
ARTICLE XLV
Evaluation, Rejection and Award16
§ 1-273. Low bid. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
The Mayor shall accept the lowest responsible bid or bids, kind, quality and
material being equal.17
§ 1-274. Selection of certain items. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
If provided for in the contract documents, the Mayor shall have the power
to award selected quantities of individual items from any bid, provided that
the total price to the Township for the combination of items selected from
the bids is the lowest possible price for those items selected, from among
all of the bids received.18
§ 1-275. Rejection. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
The Mayor shall have the right to reject any and all bids.
§ 1-276. Bid bond; responsiveness.
No bid shall be considered unless accompanied by a bid bond, when
required, or other documents which are required as a condition of the
responsiveness of the bid.
§ 1-277. Public award.
The Township contract shall be awarded at the public meeting as
advertised; of no public meeting is specified in the advertisement, then the
contract may be awarded at any subsequent public meeting of the Board
of Commissioners. In any event, the Township contract shall be awarded
within 60 days of the bid opening or all bids shall be rejected, pursuant to
§ 1622 et seq., of Chapter 18B, "Award and Execution of Public Contracts"
of Title 73 of Pennsylvania Statues, subject to the exceptions stated therein,
as amended from time to time.
16.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.03.
17.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.02.
18.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.02.
§ 1-273 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-277
C:193

ARTICLE XLVI
Written Contracts; Execution, Form and Content19
§ 1-278. First Class Code amounts. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
All Township contracts involving sums in excess of those limits as
established by § 1802 of the First Class Township Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (53 P.S. § 56802), as amended from time to
time, shall be executed on behalf of the Township by the Mayor.20
§ 1-279. Real estate. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The Mayor shall also execute the Township contracts, regardless of amount,
for the purchase, sale, leasing or use of real estate, with approval of the
Board.21
§ 1-280. Other contracts. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The Mayor shall execute Township contracts on behalf of the Township
which do not require competitive bidding under the terms of § 1802 of the
First Class Township Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (53 Pa.
Stat. Ann. § 56802), the Home Rule Charter, this Administrative Code, any
authorizing ordinance, or otherwise, all as amended from time to time.22
§ 1-281. Written contract required.
All Township contracts shall be in writing.23
§ 1-282. Execution by bidder/contractor.
The successful bidder shall be required to execute a written agreement.
§ 1-283. Solicitor approval. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The Mayor, when executing contract not prepared by the Township or under
the Township's supervision, shall request the Township Solicitor to approve
the same as to form, at any time prior to execution by the Mayor.24
19.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.03.
20.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.01.
21.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.01.
22.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.01.
23.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.01.
24.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.01.
§ 1-278 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-284
C:195
§ 1-284. Minimum content of contracts.25
At a minimum, all Township contracts, whether or not reduced to writing,
shall provide or establish the following terms and elements of the contract
for the contract to be held enforceable against the Township:
§ 1-285. Time for execution.
All Township contracts shall be executed and a "notice to proceed" issued
within 30 days of the contract award, in accordance with the provisions of
"Chapter 18B, Award and Execution of Public Contracts" of § 1623 et seq.
of Title 73 of the Pennsylvania Statutes, as amended from time to time.
A. Identify of the contractor or vendor.
B. Brief and summary description of the goods, services or work to be
performed as part of the contract, including a description of the quality
standards where applicable. A reference to a published document
containing quality specifications shall be acceptable.
C. Approximate quantity of the contract items. If a reasonable estimate of
the quantity is not possible or feasible, then a requirements contract
("as required") shall be permitted. A "lump sum" ("L.S.") or "lot"
designation may also be used.
D. Time period of the contract, including lead time for delivery or the
duration of the performance, as appropriate.
E. Price for the contract items. The price may be stated as a fixed lump
sum; a unit price per quantity of the item; by reference to a schedule or
published list of prices or any other method which is capable of
independent and objective calculation and verification of the price to be
paid.
F. Workmen's Compensation Insurance, in accordance with § 1806 of the
First Class Township Code (53 P.S. § 56806), as amended from time to
time.
25.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.03.
§ 1-284 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-285
C:196
ARTICLE XLVII
Required Provisions26
§ 1-286. Agreement/specifications.
The Board shall, by ordinance, establish a system for the competitive
bidding of contracts and purchases, including such definitions, publication
requirements, deposit and bond requirements, conditions, terms, rules,
regulations, waivers and exceptions as it shall from time to time deem
advisable.27
§ 1-287. Generic specifications.
All specifications shall be written so as to be applicable to more than
one supplier. The principal dimensions, features and performance
characteristics which are desired by the Township shall be identified and
specified so that suppliers may ascertain whether or not their product or
service will comply with the objective specifications.28
§ 1-288. Contract term.
The term of contracts for the purchase of supplies shall not exceed one
year.29
§ 1-289. Steel Products Procurements Act.
Every contract for the construction, reconstruction, repair, improvement
or maintenance of public works shall contain a provision that any steel
products used or supplied in the performance of the contract or any
subcontracts thereunder shall be from steel made in the United States, in
accordance with the Pennsylvania "Steel Products Procurement Act" (73 P.S.
§ 1881 et seq.), as amended from time to time.
§ 1-290. Separate specifications for branches of work.
In the preparation of specifications for the erection or alteration of any
public building, the Township may, but shall not be required to, prepare
separate specifications for the plumbing, heating, ventilating and electrical
work. The Township may, but shall not be required to, receive separate bids
upon each of such branches of work, and award the contract for the same
to the lowest responsible bidder.30
26.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.03.
27.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.03.
28.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.02.
29.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.05. See also 53 P.S. § 56892(b) and § 1802(b)
of the First Class Township Code.
30.Editor's Note: Section 1805 of the First Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 56805.
§ 1-286 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-291
C:197
§ 1-291. Bid bond. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
The Mayor may request that a certified check or bid bond with approved
surety, in any amount not to exceed 10% of the total bid, accompany every
bid.31
§ 1-292. Liquid fuels fund purchases.
All Township contracts with funds from the Pennsylvania Liquid Fuels Tax
Municipal Allocation Law (72 P.S. § 102 et seq. and § 2615.1 et seq. and
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 9511 — Oil Company Franchise Tax) shall comply with the
requirements and regulations made with those funds, as found at 67 Pa.
Code § 449.1 et seq., each as amended from time to time.
§ 1-293. Minimum Wage Act.
All Township contracts which are subject to the Federal "Davis-Bacon Act"
wage rate and record keeping procedures, or the Pennsylvania Prevailing
Wage Act for Township contracts in excess of $25,000 (43 P.S. § 165 et seq.,
53 P.S. § 56808), shall comply with the requirements of each respective Act,
as amended from time to time.
§ 1-294. Motor Vehicle Procurements Act.
All Township contracts for the purchase or lease of motor vehicles shall
comply with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle
Procurements Act (73 P.S. § 1895), as amended from time to time, which
requires that a majority of the parts be manufactured in North America and
that the vehicle be assembled in North America.
§ 1-295. Retainage and final payments.
All Township contracts which provide for retainage of a portion of the
contract amount to insure proper performance of the contract, release
of the retainage, final payment and interest, etc. shall comply with the
requirements of § 1625 et seq. of Title 73, of P.S., as amended from time to
time.
31.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.03.
§ 1-291 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-295
C:198
ARTICLE XLVIII
Bonds32
§ 1-296. Bonds; performance, payment and maintenance.
All Township contracts exceeding $5,000 for the construction, erection,
installation, completion, addition, reconstruction, alteration or repair of
any public building or other public work or public improvement, including
highway work, shall comply with the requirements of the Pennsylvania
"Public Works Contractors' Bond Law of 1967" (8 P.S. § 191 et seq.), which
requires performance and labor and material payment bonds, each in the
amount of 100% of the contract amount, as amended from time to time.
Section 1804 of the First Class Township Code, which requires bonds for
protection of labor and materialmen for certain contracts in excess of
$1,500, shall not be applicable to Township contracts.33
§ 1-297. Performance bond.
If bonding is required by the Pennsylvania Public Works Contractor's Bond
Law, or if the Township contract requires competitive bidding, or if bonding
is otherwise required by the bid specifications, then the successful bidder
shall be required to furnish performance, labor and material payment and
maintenance bonds as specified, guaranteeing the performance of the
contract, in accordance with the provisions of §§ 1802(c) and 1804 of the
First Class Township Code (53 P.S. § 56802(c) and 56894), as amended from
time to time.34
§ 1-298. Surety and approval.
The performance bond and all other required bonds shall be written by
a corporate surety company with an A.M. Best company rating or the
equivalent reasonably acceptable to the Township or the Township Solicitor.
The form and execution of the bonds shall be subject to the reasonable
review and approval of the Township or the Township Solicitor.35
§ 1-299. Amount.
The amount of the performance bond and labor and material payment bonds
shall be 100% of the contract amount; except that where the duration or
term of the contract exceeds one year, then the performance bond and
payment bond amount may be reduced to the contract amount for each year
of the contract. The amount of the maintenance bond shall be determined
at the discretion of the Township.36
32.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.03.
33.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.03.
34.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.03.
35.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.03.
36.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.03.
§ 1-296 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-300
C:199
§ 1-300. Time to furnish. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The Performance Bond and Labor and Material Payment Bond shall be
furnished within 20 days after the contract has been awarded, unless the
Mayor shall prescribed a shorter period of not less than 10 days. If the
contractor fails to furnish the required Performance Bond and Labor and
Material Payment Bond within the prescribed time period, the award of the
contract to the contractor shall be void.37
37.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.03.
§ 1-300 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-300
C:200
ARTICLE XLIX
Conflicts of Interest
§ 1-301. Conflicts.
A. Interest prohibited. No elected or appointed official or employee of the
Township shall solicit, benefit by or be financially interested, directly or
indirectly, in any Township contract, or shall have any interest as a
member, officer, official, joint venturer, partner, stockholder, associate,
director, employee or consultant of any corporation, partnership,
association, joint venture or other entity which has a matter pending
before the Township, Township Board or any of its agencies or officers.
The provisions of this section shall not apply where such official or
employee is an employee of the entity (which receives any
consideration from the Township or which has the matter pending) in a
capacity with no possible influence in the transaction or matter and in
which he or she cannot be benefitted thereby, either financially or in
any other material manner.38
B. Representation prohibited. No elected or appointed official or employee
of the Township or any corporation, partnership, joint venture,
association or other entity of which he or she is a member, officer,
official, joint venturer, partner, stockholder, associate, director,
employee or consultant shall represent any person on any matter before
the Township, Township Board or any of its agencies of officers.39
38.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, §§ 12.07 and 12.08B.
39.Editor's Note: See Home Rule Charter, § 12.08A.
§ 1-301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-301
C:201

Part 12
[Adopted 3F-e1e1s- 1A9n9d1 CBhyaOrgreds. No. 1722]
ARTICLE L
Fees and Charges
§ 1-302. Determination of fees and charges. [Amended 6-14-2004
by Ord. No. 2492; 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2527; 5-9-2005 by Ord.
No. 2560; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
The Board of Commissioners hereby authorizes the Mayor to create and
maintain a system for the determination of fees and charges to be assessed
by the Township for services which the Township provides. The fees and
charges so established shall become effective upon approval thereof by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners and thereupon shall be
maintained on a Schedule of Fees and Charges which shall be readily
available to the public through the office of the Mayor or his designee.
§ 1-302 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-302
C:203

Part 13
[Adopted 9-1C8o-d1e9 7O8f EBtyhOicrsd. No. 1281]
ARTICLE LI
Code of Ethics
§ 1-303. Code of Ethics established.
A Code of Ethics is hereby established for all Township, paid or unpaid,
elected and appointed officials, employees and appointed members of
Township boards, commissions and authorities.
A. Declaration of policy. The purpose of this Code is to establish guidelines
for ethical standards of conduct for all the aforementioned public
officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are
incompatible with the best interests of Whitehall Township, and by
directing disclosure by said officials and employees, of the existence of
private financial or other interests that could affect official Township
actions or performance of duties.
(1) Impetus for passage of an ethics code has come from: great interest
in and exposure of "Watergate" at the national level, numerous
convictions of corrupt state officials, a lengthy Federal Bureau of
Investigation probe in Whitehall Township and the creation of a
Board of Inquiry to expose alleged corruption in the Township.
Upstanding officials and the public they serve can no longer
tolerate a governmental system that evidences indifference toward
corrupt behavior of public officials and employees.
(2) The public judges its government by the way public officials and
employees conduct themselves in the posts to which they are
elected or appointed. The people have a right to expect that every
public official and employee will conduct themselves in a manner
that will tend to preserve public confidence in and respect for the
government they represent. This demands treatment of all citizens
with impartiality, fairness and equality under the law and avoiding
both actual and potential conflicts between their private selfinterest
and the public interest.
(3) Above all, this Code is designed to clarify misuse of office or
employment as not only intolerable but punishable; it is designed
for governmental leadership and membership to recognize and
enforce rectitude standards; it is designed as a blueprint for the
best possible Whitehall Township government of the future; and its
major by-product should be greater recognition of an appreciation
for the many public officials and employees whose unspectacular
but dedicated and meritorious service is all too seldom recognized.
B. Scope. This Code of Ethics emanates from a vast amount of ideas
gathered from research of available related materials in the Unites
States; appropriate excerpts from the Whitehall Township Home Rule
§ 1-303 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-303
C:205
§ 1-304. Definitions.
Terms used in this Part 13 are hereby defined as follows:
BUSINESS ENTITY — Any business, proprietorship, firm, partnership,
person in representative or fiduciary capacity, association, venture, trust or
corporation.
HE — Any grammatical derivative of this third person singular, means any
person, regardless of gender; this term is used simply to allay the need for
repeating all genders — masculine, feminine, neuter or any other possible.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBERS — A public official's or employee's spouse,
minor children, those dependent on him or living in his household.
INSIGNIFICANT VALUE — A gift of little importance and estimated worth,
such as a memento, but insignificant value shall not refer to any gifts from
a person or business entity as specified in "Code Prohibitions," § 1-305B.
INTEREST — Direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a
public official or employee as a result of a contract or transaction, which is
or may be the subject of an official act or action by the Township, except
those contracts or transactions from which similar benefits accrue to all
other persons and/or property similarly situated. For the purposes of this
Code, one shall be deemed to have an interest in:
PUBLIC OFFICIAL OR EMPLOYEE — Any person, officer or employee
holding a full or part-time position by election, appointment or employment
in the service of the Township, whether paid or unpaid, including members
of boards, commissions, Township authorities and consultants.
TRANSACTION — Includes, but is not limited to, any proceeding,
application, submission, request for ruling or other determination, contract,
lease, claim, case, award, decision, judgment or legislation including
ordinances and resolutions.
§ 1-305. Code of Ethics.
The requirements herein set forth shall constitute the Code of Ethics
establishing standards and guidelines for the ethical conduct of public
officials and employees of Whitehall Township.
Charter and the Township Administrative Code and insights gained thus
far through investigative work of the Township Board of Inquiry.
A. Any person within his household or who is dependent on him or her.
Any person or business entity with whom a contractual relationship
exists with the public official or employee.
B.
Any business entity in which the public official or employee is an officer,
director or member having a financial interest in or is employed by.
C.
Any business entity in which the public official or employee has
ownership in any party.
D.
§ 1-303 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-305
C:206
A. Objectives. The Code identifies misuse of office or employment and
provides for penalties and/or removal from office or employment
thereof. The Code assures fair and equal treatment of all citizens and
stipulates what constitutes conflict of interest including, but not limited
to: contracts or transactions with the Township, incompatible
employment, disclosure of interest in legislation, representing private
interest, gifts and favors, later case interest, disclosure of confidential
personnel information, nepotism, retention of tax monies, improper
communication, improper access to the Municipal Building and/or
offices, unnecessary expenditures if officially voided, inspection
approval inconsistent with Township ordinances, misuse of office for
personal financial profit, improper issuance of permits, improper use of
Township materials or public property, retention of Township materials
after termination of official status or employment and failure to report
any knowledge of violations of this Code.
B. Prohibitions. This Code prohibits any public official or employee of the
Township of Whitehall from engaging in the following acts:
(1) Interest in contract of transactions. No elected or appointed
Township official or employee or any corporation, partnership,
association, joint venture or other entity of which he is a member,
officer, official, partner, stockholder, joint venturer, associate,
director, employee or consultant shall solicit, benefit by or be
financially interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract for the
purchase of property or services to be paid from the Township
treasury.
(a) No public official or employee shall have or thereafter acquire
an interest in such contract or transaction.
(b) No public official or employee shall have an interest in any
business entity representing, advising or appearing on behalf
of, whether paid or unpaid, any person involved in such
contract or transaction, during his term of office or
employment with the Township.
(c) No public official or employee shall have solicited or accepted
present or future employment with a person or business entity
involved in such contract or transaction.
(d) No public official or employee shall solicit, accept or grant a
present or future gift to or from any person or business entity
doing business with the Township, whether in the form of
money, thing, favor, loan or promise.
[1] This shall not apply to partaking of a meal; any occasional,
nonpecuniary gift of insignificant value or one given or
received in one's personal life, so long as such normally
human gifts do not involve any person or business entity
transacting business with the Township, wherein a
possible conflict of interest would result, an award publicly
§ 1-305 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-305
C:207
presented in recognition of public service or election
campaign contributions as permitted by higher law.
[2] This shall prohibit any public official or employee from
accepting anything whatsoever, including occasional gifts
of insignificant value, from any person or business entity
that has business pending with the Township or has
transacted business with the Township, involving the
public official or employee's service or involving imminent
business.
[3] No appointed or elected official doing Township business
with lending institutions shall obtain favors in the form of
loans at lower interest rates than are available to the
general public from said institutions.
[4] Later case interest. No public official or employee shall,
after the termination of service or employment with the
Township, appear before any board, commission,
committee or authority of the Township in relation to any
case, proceeding of application in which he personally
participated during the period of his service or
employment, or which was under his active consideration,
for a period of one year after the termination of his
employment with the Township.
[5] Special treatment. No public official or employee shall
grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to
any person or business entity beyond that which is
available to every other citizen or business entity. This
shall not be construed to mean services rendered in the
interest of public safety or welfare.
[6] No member of a board, commission or authority shall
make a commitment on behalf of his respective group to
any person or business entity transacting business with
the Township.
[7] No public official or employee shall make any appearance
on behalf of any private person other than himself, a
spouse or minor children.
[8] Improper communication. No public official or employee
shall have encouraged, made or accepted any ex parte or
unilateral application or communication where a
determination is to be made after a public hearing and
such public official or employee fails to make the contents
of the communication a part of public record.
§ 1-305 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-305
C:208
(2) 40Incompatible employment. No member of the Board of
Commissioners shall hold "any compensated appointive Township
office or employment" until one year after the expiration of the full
term for which he or she was elected to the Board.
(a) No Commissioner shall hold any other governmental or
Township office or employment "in which he or she receives
salary, compensation, or emolument."
(b) The Mayor shall hold no other employment, Township or
governmental office "during the period of the term for which
he or she was elected or appointed, even if he or she does not
complete such term." [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(3) Disclosure of interest in legislation. If a Commissioner or the Mayor
has an interest in any action before the Board of Commissioners, he
shall disqualify himself from discussion of and/or voting on that
action. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
(a) If a member of an appointed board, commission or authority
has an interest in any area of consideration before his
respective group, he shall disclose same and refrain from
participation in discussion and/or voting on such matter.
(b) A public official in a consultant capacity shall disqualify himself
from rendering advice to the Township on any matter involving
a person or business entity wherein said consultant has a
conflict of interest; that is, if the consultant also represents the
person or business entity in another capacity or if the
consultant has a personal or financial interest in the business
transaction.
(4) Disclosure of confidential personnel information. No public official
or employee shall disclose confidential personnel information
without proper legal authorization.
(5) Nepotism. No immediate family member of an appointed public
official serving on a Township board, commission or authority shall
be appointed by that respective entity, even if the related appointed
official refrains from voting on the hiring of his immediate family
member. No elected official shall hire or cause to be hired an
immediate family member as a Township employee or official.
(6) Improper access to the municipal building and/or offices. No public
official or employee shall give out or possess any key to the
Municipal Building and offices, other than authorized personnel as
designated in the Township Administrative Code, except that only
the Township Treasurer or his designate shall possess a key to the
40.Editor's Note: See, however, Whitehall Township v. Buchmiller (Leh. Co. C.P. 1985)
§ 1-305 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-305
C:209
Treasurer's Office and only the Information and Complaints Officer
shall possess a key to that respective office, when established,
although a janitor and the police are recognized as protectively in
need of keys to all building and office entrances. This provision
shall not conflict with union contract agreements or essential
access to the public works area.
(7) Unnecessary expenditures if officially avoided. The Mayor shall not
execute a purchase in excess of $1,500, even though a budgeted
item, if the Board of Commissioners, subsequent to passage of said
budget, voids the expenditure as unnecessary and/or wasteful.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(8) Inspection approval. No public official or employee shall grant
inspection approval for any project or inspected area if Township
ordinance specifications are not met by the area inspected.
(a) If the area under inspection has been sealed or is not
accessible to the inspector, he shall require that the project to
be inspected be made accessible to him.
(b) No inspection approval shall be granted without the
inspector's actual on-site inspection of said project.
(9) Misuse of Township materials or public property. No public official
or employee shall use Township facilities for personal, financial
gain. This provision shall not affect the present employee's
contractual union agreement permitting mechanics after-hour use
of facilities, but any future union contracts shall be consistent with
this section prohibiting use of Township facilities for personal,
financial gain.
(a) No public official or employee shall retain Township materials
after ceasing to hold office or employment, pursuant to § 15.05
of the Home Rule Charter. This shall not include copies of
original materials received by the Board.
(b) No public official or employee shall use materials acquired
through Township services for personal, financial gain unless
those materials, if dispensable, are first made available to the
general public.
(10) Misuses of office or employment. No public official or employee
shall use his office or employment either for the solicitation of any
sales or the receiving of any goods dispensed by a person or
business entity doing business with the Township. This shall mean
that no public official or employee shall actively engage in
promotion of any non-Township business ventures on Township
time or through Township business transactions.
(11) Improper issuance of permits. No official or employee shall issue or
cause to have issued any permit which cannot property be granted
§ 1-305 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-305
C:210
§ 1-306. Board of Ethics established. [Amended 11-1-1979 by Ord.
No. 1317]
before any necessary approvals are obtained from the Planning
Commission, Zoning Hearing Board, the Whitehall Authority and/or
the Coplay-Whitehall Sewer Authority.
(12) Reporting requirements. Reporting any offer of gifts, whether in
the form of money, thing, favor, loan or promise, or knowledge of
any possible code violations or other criminal action, any public
official or employee who is approached with an offer of a gift of a
favor, whether in the form of money, thing, favor, loan or promise,
or who has knowledge of any possible code of ethics violations, or
other criminal action, as elicited in this Part 13 shall disclose such
offer in writing to the Board of Ethics no later than seven days
thereafter. This shall also apply to any public official or employee
who is in doubt as to the legality of a gift he receives, in which case
the Board of Ethics shall return an opinion on same to the
concerned official or employee within 30 days after receipt of the
written information.
(13) Retention of tax monies. The Township Treasurer "shall receive,
collect, account for and deposit into the Township treasury all
taxes, fees, funds, assessments or charges that are levied,
established or received by the Township for general or special
purposes. Such deposits shall be made not later than the first
business day following the day in which the funds are received. . .
He or she shall deposit the funds of the Township in various
depositories as designated by the Board. All such accounts shall be
in the name of the Township."
(a) If the term of office of the Township Treasurer expires or if he
relinquishes his Treasurer's office, he shall, upon leaving that
office, turn all accounts, Township funds and Township
Treasurer's materials over to his successor, including all taxes
collected by him.
(14) Equal treatment required. All Township officials or employees shall
be afforded fair and equal treatment as officials or employees by
their supervisors or superiors.
A. The Code creates a Board of Ethics which shall be composed of not less
than three and not more than five members, to be effected by means of
a resolution, to provide for flexibility in the event of changing needs.
Majority membership of the Board shall be comprised of Township
citizens holding no other Township elected or appointed position. The
Board shall operate within the framework of the Information and
Complaints Department, if and when established.
B. Members of the Board of Ethics shall be subject to this Code. They shall
receive no salary but shall be reimbursed for their expenses actually
§ 1-305 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-306
C:211
and necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. They shall
be appointed by majority vote of the Board of Commissioners, upon
recommendations by the Board meeting as a committee of the whole.
(1) Duties and powers of the Board of Ethics.
(a) To consider questions of ethical conduct and conflict of interest
and issue advisory opinions on same.
(b) To conduct hearings on questions of ethical conduct and make
recommendations for action to the Board of Commissioners,
based on its findings.
(c) To provide a continuing program effecting implementation of
the Code of Ethics.
(d) To require that all complaints must be duly notarized and
signed by the person or persons filing any code violation
charge, prior to any public hearing of same and/or public
revelation of the charge.
(e) To accept and file any information voluntarily supplied that
exceeds the requirements of this Part 13.
(f) To render a determination on all alleged violations.
(g) If an alleged violation if found to be groundless by the Board of
Ethics, the entire matter shall be stricken from pubic record; if,
in the opinion of the Board of Ethics, the complaining party
was motivated by malice or reason contrary to the spirit of this
Part 13 in filing the complaint without just cause, the findings
shall be reported to appropriate law enforcement authorities.
(h) The Board of Ethics shall have subpoena powers and the power
to grant immunity under Township law only.
(i) They shall hold meetings open to the public at least once a year
and make an annual report of their actions and
recommendations to the Mayor and the Board of
Commissioners. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
(j) To investigate and adjudicate alleged violations of the
Ordinance Establishing Campaign Contribution Limits.41
[Added 2-13-2017 by Ord. No. 3073]
(2) The Board shall conduct its investigations in the following manner:
(a) When a complaint is filed with the Board, a copy shall promptly
be sent to the person alleged to have committed the violation.
If the Board determines the complaint does not allege facts
41.Editor's Note: See Part 17, Campaign Contributions.
§ 1-306 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-306
C:212
§ 1-307. Violations and penalties; expulsion from office or position.
sufficient to constitute a violation, the complaint shall be
dismissed and the complainant and respondent notified. If the
Board does allege facts sufficient to constitute a violation, it
shall promptly investigate the alleged violation utilizing the
resources of such other Township agencies as may be required.
If, after such preliminary investigation, the Board finds that
probable cause exists to support an alleged violation, it shall
convene a hearing on the matter within 30 days after making
such determination. All Board investigations and records
relating to the preliminary investigation shall be confidential.
(b) If a hearing is to be held, the respondent shall be allowed to
examine and make copies of all evidence in the Board's
possession relating to the charges. At the hearing, the charged
party shall be afforded appropriate due process protection
consistent with Township administrative procedures, including
the right to be represented by counsel, the right to call and
examine witnesses, the right to introduce exhibits and the right
to cross examine opposing witnesses. All hearings shall be
conducted in executive session. Upon completion of its
investigation and any hearing thereon, the Board shall, where
appropriate, recommend disciplinary and administrative action
or, in the case of an alleged criminal violation, refer the matter
to the Board of Commissioners with the recommendation that
appropriate law enforcement authorities take action. With
respect to investigations of violations of the Ordinance
Establishing Campaign Contribution Limits, the Board shall
have full power to adjudicate such violations and to impose
fines and/or penalties as set forth in the Ordinance
Establishing Campaign Contribution Limits.42 [Amended
2-13-2017 by Ord. No. 3073]
(c) Issue, upon request, and publish advisory opinions on the
requirements of this Part 13.
(3) Availability of the Code of Ethics. The Township Administration
shall make copies of the Code of Ethics available at all Municipal
offices, post a copy on Municipal Building bulletin boards and
inform all Township officials and employees of said availability of
the Code of Ethics copies.
C. Anyone who is convicted of a violation of the Ordinance Establishing
Campaign Contribution Limits shall be subject to fines and/or penalties
as set forth in the Ordinance Establishing Campaign Contribution
Limits.43 [Added 2-13-2017 by Ord. No. 3073]
42.Editor's Note: See Part 17, Campaign Contributions.
43.Editor’s Note: See Part 17, Campaign Contributions.
§ 1-306 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-307
C:213
A. Any public official or employee who is convicted of violation of any of
the provisions of this Code of Ethics shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $600 for each violation and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term if imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. He shall
make restitution and forego all pensions due him from the Township.
Each day that a violation exists may be regarded as a separate offense
and punishable as such, if such violation is a continued violation.
B. Upon conviction for any willful violation of this Part 13 of any elected
public official, such official shall be subject to recall proceedings. Upon
conviction for any willful violation of this Part 13 of any appointed
official or employee, he shall be subject to dismissal from his appointed
office or employment, consistent with any Township laws governing
personnel procedures.
§ 1-307 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-307
C:214
Part 14
[AdFoirpet eIdns8u-r8a-2n0ce0 5PrBoyceOerdds. NEsoc. r2o5w78]
ARTICLE LII
Fire Insurance Proceeds Escrow
§ 1-308. Use of fire insurance proceeds.
A. No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter "insurer")
doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim
of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the
Township where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the
structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the insurer is
furnished by the Township Treasurer with a certificate pursuant to
508(b) of the Insurance Company Law of 1921, as amended by Act 98 of
1992 and Act 93 of 1994 (collectively, the "Act") and unless there is
compliance with the procedures set forth in 508(c) and (d) of the Act.
B. Delinquent taxes or assessments.
(1) Where there are delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user
charges against the property ("municipal claims"), or there are
expenses which the Township has incurred as a cost for the
removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the
property (collectively "municipal expenses"), the Treasurer of the
Township shall immediately render a bill for such work, if he has
not already done so. Upon written request of the named insured
specifying the tax description of the property, the name and
address of the insurer and the date of receipt by the insurer of a
loss report of the claim, the Treasurer shall furnish a certificate
within 14 working days after the request, to the insurer, a
certificate (or at his discretion an oral notice confirmed in writing)
either:
(a) Stating that there are no unpaid municipal claims or municipal
expenses against the property.
(b) Specifying the nature and amount of such claims or expenses,
accompanied by a bill for such amounts.
(2) Taxes, assessments, penalties and user charges shall be deemed
delinquent for this purpose if a lien could have been filed for such
claims under applicable law. Upon receipt of a certificate and bill
pursuant to Subsection B(1)(a) of this section, the insurer shall
transfer to the Treasurer an amount from the insurance proceeds
sufficient to pay such sums prior to making payment to the named
insured, subject to the provisions of Subsection C hereof.
C. When all municipal claims and municipal expenses have been paid
pursuant to Subsection B of this section, or where the Treasurer has
issued a certificate described in Subsection B(1)(a) indicating that
§ 1-308 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-308
C:215
there are no municipal claims or municipal expenses against the
property, the insurer shall pay the claim of the named insured;
provided, however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured
and the insurer equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of
liability on all fire policies covering the building or structure, the
following procedures must be followed:
(1) The insurer shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
Treasurer, in the aggregate, $2,000 for each $15,000 of such claim
or fraction thereof.
(2) If at the time a loss report is submitted by the insured, such insured
has submitted to the insurer, with a copy to the Township, a
contractor's signed estimate of the cost of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure in an amount less than the
amount calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the
insurer shall transfer to the Treasurer from the insurance proceeds
the amount specified in the estimate. If there is more than one
insurer, the transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all
insurers insuring the building or other structure.
(3) Upon receipt of the above described portion of the insurance
proceeds, the Treasurer shall do the following:
(a) Place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely as
security against the total municipal expenses anticipated by
the Township to be required in removing, repairing or securing
the building or structure as required by this Part 14. Such costs
shall include, without limitation, any engineering, legal or
administrative costs incurred by the Township in connection
with such removal, repair or securing or any proceedings
related thereto.
(b) Mail to the named insured, at the address received from the
insurer, a notice the proceeds have been received by the
Township and that the procedures under this subsection shall
be followed.
(c) After the transfer, the named insured may submit to the
Township a contractor's signed estimate of the cost of
removing, repairing or securing the building or other
structure, in which event the Treasurer shall, if such estimate
is deemed by the Treasurer to be reasonable, return to the
insured the amount of the funds transferred to the Township in
excess of that required to pay the municipal expenses;
provided, the Township has not commenced to remove, repair
or secure the building or other structure, in which case the
Township will complete the work.
(d) Pay to the Treasurer, for reimbursement to the Township
general fund, the amount of the municipal expenses paid by the
Township.
§ 1-308 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-308
C:216
§ 1-309. Limits of liability.
Nothing in this Part 14 shall be construed to make an insurance company,
association or exchange liable for any amount in excess of proceeds payable
under its insurance policy or for any other act performed pursuant to this
Part 14 or to make this Township, any Township official, a municipality
or public official an insured under a policy of insurance or to create an
obligation to pay delinquent property taxes or unpaid removal liens or
expenses other than as provided in this Part 14.
§ 1-310. Insurance company rights reserved.
An insurance company, association or exchange making payment of policy
proceeds under this Part 14 for delinquent taxes or structure removal liens
or removal expenses incurred by the Township shall have a full benefit of
such payment including all rights of subrogation and of assignment.
§ 1-311. Construction.
This Part 14 shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to deter
the commission of arson and related crimes, to discourage the
abandonment of property and to prevent urban blight and deterioration.
§ 1-312. Notification of Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development.
The Secretary of the Township shall transmit a certified copy of this Part
14 promptly to the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development.
§ 1-313. Penalty.
Any owner of property, any named insured or insurer who violates the
provisions of this Part 14 or who shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements hereof shall be sentenced, upon conviction thereof, to a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
(e) Pay the remaining balance in the fund (without interest) to the
named insured upon receipt of a certificate issued by the
Treasurer that the repair, removal or securing of the building
or other structure has been completed in accordance with all
applicable codes and regulations of the Township.
(f) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of
the Township to recover any deficiency in the amount of
municipal claims or municipal expenses recovered pursuant to
this Part 14, or to insurance proceeds, by an action at law or in
equity to enforce the codes of the Township or to enter into an
agreement with the named insured with regard to such other
disposition of the proceeds as the Township may deem
responsible.
§ 1-308 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-313
C:217
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day on
which an offense shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 1-313 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-313
C:218
Part 15
[AdoptedO8p-e8n- 2R0e0c5orBdys OProdli.c Nyo. 2578]
ARTICLE LIII
Open Records Policy
§ 1-314. General rule.
Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the Township of Whitehall shall make all
public records as defined by the Pennsylvania Open Records Law accessible
for inspection and duplication by a requestor in accordance with 65 P.S.
§ 66.1 et seq. A public record shall be provided to a requestor in the medium
requested if the public record exists in that medium; otherwise, it shall
be provided in the medium in which it exists, except for the provision in
§ 1-324B. Public records shall be available for access during the regular
business hours of the Township. Nothing in this Part 15 shall provide for
access to a record which is not a public record.
§ 1-315. Request for access to public records.
§ 1-316. Open Records Officer. [Amended 12-8-2008 by Ord. No.
2757]
A. All requests for public records shall be in writing and shall be set forth
on the Township Request Form, a sample of which is attached hereto as
Exhibit "A" incorporated herein by reference. The form shall include,
among other things, the requestor's contact information, date received
and specific records requested. Requests may be submitted in person or
by mail or fax.
B. Requests must be specific enough for the Township to determine what
records are needed.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to assure compliance with Act 3
of 2008, the Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law, as amended, to provide
access to public records of Whitehall Township, to preserve the
integrity of Whitehall Township's records; and to minimize the financial
impact to the residents of the Township regarding the resources utilized
in the receipt of and processing of public record requests and the
retrieval and copying of public records.
B. Designated Open Records Officer. It is the policy of the Township to
require the presence of a designated employee when public records are
examined and inspected and to charge reasonable fees for duplication
of public records of the Township. Whitehall Township designates the
Deputy Mayor as the Open Records Officer, responsible for assuring
compliance with the Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law, in accordance
with the following guidelines: [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
§ 1-314 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-316
C:219
(1) The Deputy Mayor may designate certain employee(s) to process
public record requests.
(2) The Deputy Mayor is responsible for minimizing, where possible,
the financial impact to the Township regarding the resources
utilized in the receipt and processing of public record requests and
the retrieval and copying of public records.
(3) All requests for public records of the Township under this policy
shall be specific in identifying and describing each public record
requested. In no case shall the Township be required to create a
public record which does not exist or to compile, maintain, format
or organize a public record in a manner in which the Township does
not currently compile, maintain, format or organize the public
record. All requests for public records shall be submitted in writing
and include the date of the request; the requestor's name, address,
and telephone number, certification of United States residency;
signature of the requester; and, if duplication is requested,
appropriate payment.
(4) The designated employee shall make a good-faith effort to
determine whether each record requested is a public record.
(5) The Township shall facilitate a reasonable response to a request for
the Township's public records. In no case is the Township expected
to provide extraordinary staff to respond to the request, but it will
respond in a manner consistent with the Township's administrative
responsibilities and consistent with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law.
(6) The designated employee shall respond to the requester within five
business days from the date of receipt of the written request. If the
Township does not respond within five business days of receipt
thereof, the request is deemed denied.
(7) The response provided by the Township shall consist of:
(a) Approval for access to the public record;
(b) Review of the request by the designated employee; or
(c) Denial of access to the record requested.
(8) If access to the public record requested is approved, the public
record shall be available for access during the regular business
hours of the Township. The designated employee shall cooperate
fully with the requester, while also taking reasonable measures to
protect Township public records from the possibility of theft and/or
modification. The presence of a designated employee is required
when public records are examined and inspected.
(9) Fees for duplication of public records shall be as established by the
commonwealth's Office of Open Records. The Township may, at its
§ 1-316 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-316
C:220
discretion, waive fees and by ordinance set forth fees as not
otherwise established by the commonwealth's Office of Open
Records.
(10) In the event the estimated cost of fulfilling a request submitted
under this policy is expected to exceed $100, the designated
employee(s) shall obtain the expected cost in advance of fulfilling
the request to avoid unwanted expense of Township resources.
(11) Review of request.
(a) If the request is being reviewed, the notice provided by the
Township shall be in writing and include the reason for the
review and the expected response date, which shall be within
30 days of the notice of review. If the Township does not
respond within 30 days thereof, the request is deemed denied.
Review of the request is limited to situations where:
[1] The record requested contains information which is
subject to access, as well as information which is not
subject to access that must be redacted prior to a grant of
access. The redacted information is considered a denial as
to that information;
[2] The record requires retrieval from a remote location;
[3] A timely response cannot be accomplished due to staffing
limitations;
[4] A legal review is necessary to determine whether the
record requested is a public record;
[5] The requester has failed to comply with the Township's
policy and procedure requirements;
[6] The requester refuses to pay the applicable fees; or
[7] The extent or nature of the request precludes a response
within the required time period.
(b) Upon a determination that one of the factors listed above
applies, the Township shall send written notice to the
requester within five business days of receipt of the request for
access. The notice shall include a statement notifying the
requester that the request for access is being reviewed, the
reason for the review, a reasonable date that a response is
expected to be provided, and an estimate of applicable fees
owed when the record becomes available. If the date that a
response is expected to be provided is in excess of 30 days,
following the five business days allowed for, the request for
access shall be deemed denied unless the requester has agreed
in writing to an extension to the date specified in the notice. If
the requester agrees to the extension, the request shall be
§ 1-316 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-316
C:221
§ 1-317. Redaction.
If the Township determines that a public record contains information which
is subject to access, as well as information which is not subject to access,
the Township's response shall grant access to the information which is
subject to access and deny access to the information which is not subject to
access. If the information which is not subject to access is an integral part of
the public record and cannot be separated, the Township shall redact from
the public record the information which is not subject to access and the
response shall grant access to the information which is subject to access.
The Township may not deny access to the public record if the information
which is not subject to public access is able to be redacted. Information
which the Township redacts in accordance with this section shall be deemed
a denial under § 1-316C of this Part 15.
§ 1-318. Final Township determination. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
deemed denied on the day following the date specified in the
notice if the agency has not provided a response by that date.
(12) If access to the record requested is denied, the notice provided by
the Township shall be in writing as indicated on the form attached
hereto entitled "Denial of Request to Review and/or Duplicate the
Township of Whitehall Records.44"
(13) If the request is denied or deemed denied, the requester may file an
appeal with the commonwealth's Office of Open Records within 15
business days of the mailing date of the Township's notice of denial,
or within 15 days of a deemed denial. The appeal shall state the
grounds upon which the requester asserts that the record is a
public record and shall address any grounds stated by the agency
for delaying or denying the request.
(14)Within 30 days of the mailing date of the final determination of the
appeals officer, the requester or Township may file a petition for
review or other document as required by rule of court with the
Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County. The decision of the court
shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law based upon the
evidence as a whole. The decision shall clearly and concisely
explain the rationale for the decision. A petition for review under
this section shall stay the release of documents until a decision is
issued.
(15) This policy shall be available for review at the Township office.
A. Filing of exceptions. If a written request for access is denied or deemed
denied, the requestor may file exceptions with the Mayor of the
Township within 15 business days of the mailing date of the Township's
44.Editor's Note: Said form is on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-316 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-318
C:222
§ 1-319. Judicial appeal.
§ 1-320. Fees.
response or within 15 days of a deemed denial. The exceptions shall
state grounds upon which the requestor asserts that the record is a
public record and shall address any grounds stated by the Township for
delaying or denying the request.
B. Determination. Unless the requestor agrees otherwise, the Mayor of
the Township or his/her designee, shall make a final determination
regarding the exceptions within 30 days of the mailing date of the
exceptions. Prior to issuing the final determination regarding the
exceptions, the Mayor or his/her designee may conduct a hearing. The
determination shall be the final order of the Township. If the Mayor or
his/her designee determines that the Township correctly denied the
request for access, the Mayor or his/her designee shall provide a
written explanation to the requestor of the reason for the denial.
A. Within 30 days of the denial by the Township pursuant to § 1-316C of
this Part 15, or of the mailing date of a final determination of the
Township affirming the denial of access, a requestor may file a petition
for review or other document as might be required by Rule of Court
with the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, or
bring an action in the local magisterial district. A requestor is entitled
to a reasoned decision containing findings of fact and conclusions of law
based upon the evidence as a whole which clearly and concisely states
and explains the rationale for the decisions so that all can determine
why and how a particular result was reached.
B. Notice. The Township shall be served notice of actions commenced in
accordance with Subsection A of this section and shall have an
opportunity to respond in accordance with applicable court rules.
A. The Township may charge the following fees for requests made for
access to public records:
(1) Postage. Fees for postage shall be the actual cost of mailing.
(2) Copying. Fees for duplication by photocopying, printing from
electronic media or microfilm, copying onto electronic media,
transmission by facsimile or other electronic means and other
means of duplication shall be the same as the per copy fee set forth
in the Township's fee schedule, as amended, from time to time, by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
(3) Certification. The fee for official certification of copies, if an official
certification is requested by the requestor for the purpose of legally
verifying the public record, shall be in an amount as established,
from time to time, by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 1-318 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-320
C:223
§ 1-321. Township contact. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
The person at the Township to whom all record requests should be
addressed shall be:
Jack D. Myers
Deputy Mayor
Township of Whitehall
3219 MacArthur Road
Whitehall, PA 18052-2900
(610) 437-5524
§ 1-322. Regular business hours.
The regular business hours of the Township shall be 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
§ 1-323. Person designated to accept exceptions filed when a record
is denied. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
The individual at the Township who shall receive and respond to exceptions
filed when a record is denied and the requestor disagrees with the denial
shall be the Mayor.
(4) Conversion to paper. If a public record is only maintained
electronically or in other non-paper media, duplication fees shall be
those imposed by Subsection A(2) of this section.
B. The Township may waive the fees for duplication of a public record
including, but not limited to, when:
(1) The requestor duplicates the public record.
(2) The Township deems it is in the public interest to do so.
C. Prepayment. Prior to granting a request for access in accordance with
this Part 15, the Township may require a requestor to prepay an
estimate of the fees authorized under this section if the fees required to
fulfill the request are expected to exceed $100.
D. Limitations. Except as otherwise provided by statute, no other fees may
be imposed unless the Township necessarily incurs costs for complying
with the request and such fees must be reasonable. No fee may be
imposed for the Township's review of a record to determine whether the
record is a public record subject to access in accordance with 65 P.S.
§ 66.1 et seq.
§ 1-320 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-324
C:224
§ 1-324. Miscellaneous.
A. The Township shall not ask for or require a purpose or motive for
requesting a particular record and shall not limit the number of public
records that may be requested.
B. If the record is only kept in electronic form, the Township shall make it
available in paper on request.
C. The Township will not create a record that does not exist or put a
document into a format that does not exist, except for Subsection B
above.
D. This Part 15 shall be posted prominently at the Township municipal
building.
§ 1-324 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-324
C:225

Part 16
[UAdnoppatided M1u-9n-i2ci0p1a7l CBlyaiOmrds .A Nnod. L3i0e6n7s]
ARTICLE LIV
Collection; Fees
§ 1-325. Fee schedule.
The Township hereby approves the following fee schedule for the collection
of the unpaid claims, which fees shall be added to the unpaid claims.
A. Notice of fee shifting expense. A charge of $35 plus applicable postage
shall be added to the unpaid claims for providing notice of fee shifting
pursuant to § 7106 of the Act.45 The Township may hire a private
company to perform this service and add the amount of this charge to
the unpaid claims.
B. Legal fees.
Legal Service Fee
Initial review and sending first demand
letter
$160
File lien and prepare satisfaction $175
Prepare writ of scire facias $175
Obtain reissued writ $30
Prepare and mail letter under Pa R.C.P.
237.1
$30
Prepare motion for alternate service $175
Obtain vehicle identification number
(VIN) for mobile home
$35
Prepare discovery in preparation for
trial
$100
Prepare pre-trial memorandum $150
Prepare motion for judgment for want
of sufficient affidavit of defense
pursuant to 53 P.S. § 7271
$150
Prepare default judgment $175
Prepare writ of execution $800
Attendance at sale; review schedule of
distribution and resolve distribution
issues
$400
Continue Sheriff sale $25
45.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 1-325 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-325
C:227
§ 1-326. Addition of costs.
In addition to the fees set forth in § 1-325 above, the reasonable and
necessary out-of-pocket charges, costs, expenses, commissions and fees
incurred in collection, including, but not limited to, postage, title searches,
VIN searches, prothonotary fees and charges, and Sheriff fees, shall be
added to the unpaid claims.
§ 1-327. Use of credit cards and debit cards; charges.
The Township authorizes any attorney or private collector collecting the
unpaid claims on behalf of the Township to accept payment of the unpaid
claims by credit card or debit card. Where payment is made by credit
card or debit card, any fees charged by the credit card or debit card
company and/or the credit card or debit card servicing agent shall be
charged immediately to the credit card or debit card used to make payment.
Legal Service Fee
Prepare petition to assess damages $50
Prepare position for free and clear sale $400
Services not covered above At an hourly rate between
$60 and $225 per hour
C. Collection fees.
Service Fee
Bookkeeping fee for payment plan of 3
months or less
$25
Bookkeeping fee for payment of more
than 3 months
$50
Guaranteed payoff fee $25
Handling fee for returned check $25
Handling fee to issue refund check $20
D. Notice of delinquent claim and fee shifting. [Added 6-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 3166]
(1) A charge of $40 per notice plus applicable postage shall be added
to the unpaid claims for providing notice of delinquent claim and
fee shifting. The Township may hire a private company to perform
this service and add the amount of this charge to the unpaid claims.
(2) This provision shall be retroactive to January 10, 2017.
(3) All fees for notice of delinquent claim and fee shifting in the amount
of $40 plus applicable postage assessed and added to unpaid claims
on or after January 10, 2017, are hereby ratified.
§ 1-325 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-327
C:228
This applies to credit card or debit card payments made by mail, telephone,
over the Internet, or in person.
§ 1-328. Interest.
Interest will be assessed upon the unpaid claims at a rate of 10% per annum
and added to the unpaid claims.
§ 1-329. Collection procedures.
The following collection procedures are hereby established in accordance
with the Act:
§ 1-330. Additional action.
The proper officials of the Township are hereby authorized and empowered
to take such additional action as they may deem necessary or appropriate
to implement this Part.
A. At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney fees in
connection with the collection of an unpaid claim account, the Township
or its designee shall mail or cause to be mailed, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a notice of such intention to the property owner or
other entity liable for the account (the "property owner").
B. If the certified mail notice is undelivered, then, at least 10 days prior to
assessing or imposing such attorney fees, the Township or its designee
shall mail or cause to be mailed, by first class mail, a second notice to
the property owner.
C. All notices required by this Part shall be mailed to the property owner's
last known post office address as recorded in the records or other
information of the Township or such other address obtained by the
Township from the County Tax Assessment office.
D. Each notice as described above shall include the following:
(1) The type of tax, municipal claim or other charge, the year that it
became due and the amount owed, including penalty and interest;
(2) A statement of the Township's intent to impose or assess attorney
fees no earlier than 30 days after receipt of the first notice, or no
earlier than 10 days after receipt of the second notice;
(3) The manner in which the assessment or imposition of attorney fees
may be avoided by payment of the account; and
(4) The place of payment for accounts and the name and telephone
number of the Township's representative designated as responsible
for collection matters.
§ 1-327 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-331
C:229
§ 1-331. Appointment of solicitor.
The Township appoints Michelle R. Portnoff, Esquire, as Solicitor for the
limited purpose of collecting the unpaid claims and herby authorizes her,
and attorneys under her supervision, to sign any and all documents,
including municipal claims and liens, on behalf of the Township.
§ 1-331 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-331
C:230
Part 17
[AdopteCdam2-p1a3i-g2n0 1C7onBtyriObrudti.o Nnos. 3073]
ARTICLE LV
Limits
§ 1-332. Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of the Board of Commissioners of the Township
of Whitehall, in enacting this Part, to:
§ 1-333. Definitions.
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CANDIDATE — Any individual who seeks nomination or election to a
Township elected office, whether or not such individual is nominated or
elected. Any person shall be deemed to be seeking nomination or election
to such office if he or she has:
CANDIDATE COMMITTEE — The political committee, any money or assets
associated with it, and any associated bank account into which all
A. Eliminate the possibility of corruption or the appearance of corruption
in local elections arising as a result of disproportionately large political
contributions by adopting limits on the amount of political contributions
that any person may contribute or otherwise cause to be made available
to candidates for positions within Whitehall Township and those who
support or oppose such candidates;
B. Place realistic and enforceable limits on the amount individuals may
contribute to political campaigns in municipal elections and to provide
full and fair enforcement of all the provisions of this Part;
C. Ensure that all individuals and interest groups in Whitehall Township
have a fair opportunity to participate in elective and governmental
processes;
D. Limit contributions to candidates and candidate committees to
eliminate or reduce the appearance or reality that large contributors
may exert undue influence over elected officials; and
E. Help restore public trust in electoral and governmental institutions.
Received a contribution or made an expenditure, or given his or her
consent for any other person or committee to receive a contribution
or make an expenditure, for the purpose of influencing his or her
nomination or election to office, whether or not the individual has
announced the specific office to be sought at the time the contribution
is received or the expenditure is made; or
A.
B. Filed nomination papers or petitions for a Township elected office.
§ 1-332 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-333
C:231
contributions in support of a campaign for Township elected office shall be
made and out of which all expenditures for that office shall be made.
COORDINATED EXPENDITURE — Any expenditure made by any person
(other than a candidate or candidate committee) in support of a candidate's
campaign that is made in cooperation, consultation, or in concert with, or at
the direction of a candidate, candidate committee, or agent thereof.
COVERED ELECTION — Every primary election, general election, or
special election for a Township elected office.
ELECTION CYCLE — Begins on the day after a covered election for the
Township elected office which the candidate seeks and ends on the day of
the next covered election for that same Township elected office. For the
purposes of the contribution limits set forth in § 1-334, primary and general
elections shall be considered separate elections.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, sole proprietorship, or
other form of organization permitted under the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania to make political contributions. For the purposes of this
Part, person shall not include a political committee.
POLITICAL COMMITTEE — Any committee, association, political party, or
other group of persons, including a candidate committee as required by
§ 1-335 of this Part, operating with the purpose of influencing the outcome
of an election, including, but not limited to, covered elections.
POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION — Money, gifts, forgiveness of debts, loans,
or things having a monetary value incurred or received by a candidate
for a Township elected office or a political committee with which he or
she is associated for use in advocating or influencing the election of the
candidate for Township elected office. For the purposes of this Part, political
contribution shall include all coordinated expenditures.
TOWNSHIP ELECTED OFFICE — The offices of Township Mayor, Township
Treasurer, and Board of Commissioners.
§ 1-334. Contribution limitations.
A. No person, except the candidate, shall make political contributions to a
candidate or candidate committee per covered election for the office
that the committee has been established to seek, that exceeds the
following limitations:
Candidate Limit
For Mayor $2,000
For Treasurer $1,000
For Board of Commissioners $1,000
B. No political committee shall make political contributions to a candidate
or candidate committee per covered election that exceeds the following
limitations:
§ 1-333 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-334
C:232
§ 1-335. Candidate committees and accounts.
§ 1-336. Filing of reports required. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
3117]
Candidate Limit
For Mayor $2,000
For Treasurer $1,000
For Board of Commissioners $1,000
C. The limitations imposed by this section shall not apply to volunteer
labor hours.
D. No candidate for Township elected office and no political committee
shall accept any political contribution which exceeds the contribution
limits set forth in this Part. If a candidate receives a political
contribution in excess of the contribution limits set forth herein, the
candidate must fully refund the portion of the political contribution in
excess of the contribution limit within 15 days of receipt of the political
contribution.
E. For reporting purposes, the date of a political contribution shall be the
date that the contribution is received by the campaign. The act of
pledging a political contribution or depositing a political contribution
into the bank account associated with a candidate committee, or
expending campaign funds that a political contribution may have been
earmarked or otherwise planned for, shall not be a sufficient act to
indicate the date of a contribution. Similarly, stacking contributions,
whereby a candidate accepts a contribution for the primary election
and the general election at the same time or during the same election
cycle, is prohibited.
A. A candidate for Township elected office shall have no more than one
candidate committee and one associated bank account for each
Township elected office being sought, into which all political
contributions in support of a campaign for said office shall be made and
out of which all expenditures in support of a campaign for said office
shall be made.
B. Candidates are prohibited from donating or transferring funds from one
candidate committee or any other political committee to another
candidate committee at an amount above the campaign finance limits
set forth in this Part in any and all circumstances.
C. Candidates are prohibited from amending an existing candidate
committee and assigning it and the funds associated with it for the use
in support of a different campaign for Township elected office than it
was originally intended.
§ 1-334 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-336
C:233
§ 1-337. Recusal from certain matters required.
§ 1-338. Investigations; violations and penalties.
A. All Pennsylvania State Ethics Commission statements of financial
interest filed by candidates with the Township shall be time and date
stamped upon receipt and a date-stamped copy shall be returned to the
candidate together with a copy of this Exhibit A to Ordinance 307346 as
set forth herein or as codified.
B. Copies of all campaign finance reports and any other reports related to
campaign contributions filed with Lehigh County must also be filed with
the Township of Whitehall. Candidates must file such campaign finance
reports with the Township no later than the deadline for filing those
reports with Lehigh County.
A. No person serving in a Township elected office may be involved with
any matter before the Township involving a person who has made a
political contribution to such elected official and must recuse him or
herself from any such matter. Whenever a person serving in a Township
elected office is required to recuse him or herself hereunder, such
elected official shall:
(1) Immediately refrain from participating in the matter;
(2) Promptly inform his or her superior, if any; and
(3) Promptly file a signed affidavit with the Whitehall Township Board
of Ethics disclosing the reason for recusal.
B. The provisions of this § 1-337 shall apply to all political contributions
made to an elected official in connection with the Township elected
office in which he or she serves and shall apply during such elected
official's entire term of office.
A. The Whitehall Township Board of Ethics shall be empowered to hear
complaints from any person residing in Whitehall Township regarding
violations of this Part and may use all of its powers to investigate and
adjudicate these alleged violations in accordance with its normal
administrative procedures and powers.
B. If the Whitehall Township Board of Ethics levies a fine on a candidate
for violations of this Part, the fine shall be equal to $1,000 per instance
of a violation of this Part by a candidate for the office of Board of
Commissioners, $1,000 per instance of a violation of this Part by a
candidate for the office of Township Treasurer, and $2,000 per instance
of a violation of this Part by a candidate for the office of Township
Mayor. Candidates shall also be required to refund the entirety of any
donations received above the campaign finance limits set forth in this
46.Editor's Note: See Part 17, Campaign Contributions, Art. LV, Limits, of this chapter.
§ 1-336 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-338
C:234
Part. Each political contribution in violation of this Part shall be
considered a separate violation.
C. The Whitehall Township Board of Ethics may levy a fine of $10 per day
for the late filing of any report required under § 1-336 of this Part.
D. No person elected to a Township elected office may take office or
assume the duties of that Township elected office unless he or she has
filed all reports required under § 1-336 of this Part and paid all
outstanding fines owed to Whitehall Township related to penalties
levied by the Whitehall Township Board of Ethics, and completed all
actions required by the Whitehall Township Board of Ethics related to a
penalty levied or issued by the Whitehall Township Board of Ethics.
§ 1-338 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-338
C:235
Chapter 2
ANIMALS
§ 1-338 WHITEHALL CODE § 1-338
2:236
ARTICLE I
Excessive Noise
[Adopted 3-11-1985 by Ord. No. 1494]
§ 2-1. Prohibited acts.
The following acts are hereby prohibited: owning, possessing, harboring or
controlling any animal or bird which barks, bays, cries, squawks or makes
any other noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 20 minutes
or makes such noise intermittently for one hour or more to the disturbance
of any person at any time of the day or night regardless of whether the
animal or bird is physically situated in or upon private property: provided,
however, that at the time the animal or bird is making such noise no person
is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon
which the animal or bird is situated or for any other legitimate cause
which teased or provoked the animal or bird. For purposes of this article
intermittent shall be defined as a minimum of three 10 minute intervals
during any one hour period.
§ 2-2. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended 8-8-2005 by
Ord. No. 2578]
A. Abatement process. The Township shall issue one warning notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested, when a complaint is registered
and verified. If the Township receives a second verified complaint
concerning the same violation within 15 days of the first complaint, the
Township shall issue an appropriate citation.
B. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 2-1 ANIMALS § 2-2
2:237

ARTICLE II
Dogs Running at Large
[Adopted 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 1775]
§ 2-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms have the meaning indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
LEASH — A line, collar, chain or other device of sufficient strength for
leading or restraining an animal not exceeding 10 feet in length.
OWNER — Any person having a right of property in any dog or having
custody of any dog, (this includes a "keeper" or a "handler"), or any person
who harbors or permits a dog to remain on or around his or her property.
RUNNING AT LARGE — Being upon any public highway, street, alley, park
or any other public land, or upon property of another person other than the
owner, and not being accompanied by or under the control of the owner or
any other person having custody of said dog.
§ 2-4. Unlawful to allow dogs to run at large.
It shall be unlawful to the owner of any dog or dogs to allow or permit such
dog or dogs to run at large in the Township, abandon or intend to abandon
any dog. While such dogs are at large, the owner is responsible for any
damages caused by said animal(s). All dogs are required to be on a leash
when not on the owner's property.
§ 2-5. Seizing of dogs.
Any police officer or dog warden may seize any dog found at large in the
Township. Such dogs are to be impounded at a licensed kennel.
§ 2-6. Licensed dogs.
Owners of licensed dogs are to be notified by registered or certified mail,
with return receipt, that the dog is impounded and will be disposed of in five
days if not claimed. Five days after the return receipt has been received,
and the dog has not been claimed, the dog may be sold or destroyed in
accordance with the Pennsylvania State Dog Laws.
§ 2-7. Unlicensed dogs.
Unlicensed dogs that are seized are to be held in such kennel for 48 hours
and if not claimed may be destroyed in accordance with the Pennsylvania
State Dog Laws.
§ 2-3 ANIMALS § 2-8
2:239
§ 2-8. Threatening dogs.
Dogs that, in the opinion of any police officer or dog warden, constitute
a threat to public health and welfare may be killed by the police or dog
warden, pursuant to the Pennsylvania State Dog Laws.
§ 2-9. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Whitehall Township Police Department or any
Township appointed dog warden to enforce the provisions of this Code.
§ 2-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
Penalties for violation of the provisions of this article shall be in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Dog Law, 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq. The first two times
the dog is seized the owners shall pay a reasonable kennel fee (minimum of
$5). Subsequent to those first two occurrences, the owners shall pay a fine
of $25 to the Township as well as reasonable kennel fees for keeping the
animal (minimum of $5). In addition, for third and subsequent violations of
this article, upon conviction thereof, the owner or owners of said dog shall
be sentenced to a fine not to exceed $600 plus costs and reasonable kennel
fees and, in default of payment of said fine, costs and reasonable kennel
fees, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 2-8 WHITEHALL CODE § 2-10
2:240
ARTICLE III
Control of Animal Defecation
[Adopted 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 1775]
§ 2-11. Defecation by animals on property restricted.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal or any person having the
care, custody and control of any animal to permit the same to discharge or
deposit any fecal matter upon the property of another or upon the property
of the Township of Whitehall without immediately removing said matter and
disposing of it in a sanitary manner.
§ 2-12. Accumulations of fecal matter on property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or possessor of real property to permit
animal fecal matter to accumulate on said property, and it shall be the
said owner's or possessor's responsibility to remove such matter with a
reasonable time to prevent any such accumulation from becoming a danger
to the public health.
§ 2-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $5 nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day
that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 2-11 ANIMALS § 2-13
2:241
Chapter 3
BICYCLES
§ 3-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — One operated by human power.
§ 3-2. Registration and tagging required. [Amended 4-12-1971 by
Ord. No. 1003]
It shall be unlawful for any resident of the Township of Whitehall to ride or
operate a bicycle upon the street or public place, within the said Township,
unless such bicycle shall first have been properly registered and tagged as
hereinafter provided.
§ 3-3. Registration procedure. [Amended 4-12-1971 by Ord. No.
1003; 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 1252]
Every owner or operator of any bicycle within the Township shall, within
10 days after the passage and publication of this chapter, file with the
Bureau of Police of the Township a complete description of such bicycle
upon a blank form to be provided for such bicycle. Such registration shall
be serially numbered and be kept on file by the Township Secretary in the
Township Office as a public record.
§ 3-4. Fees. [Amended 9-14-1959 by Ord. No. 643; 4-12-1971 by
Ord. No. 1003; 1-16-1976 by Ord. No. 1188; 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
A fee shall be charged as established from time to time by resolution of the
Board.
§ 3-5. Biennial reregistration. [Amended 9-14-1959 by Ord. No. 643;
4-12-1971 by Ord. No. 1003]
Bicycles registered under the provisions hereof shall be inspected every two
years.
§ 3-6. Inspection of bicycles. [Amended 4-12-1971 by Ord. No. 1003;
10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 1252]
The Bureau of Police shall inspect each bicycle presented to them for
registration and shall have authority to refuse to register any bicycle found
by them to be in unsafe mechanical condition.
§ 2-13 WHITEHALL CODE § 3-7
2:242
§ 3-7. Suspension of registration. [Amended 4-12-1971 by Ord. No.
1003; 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 1252]
The Bureau of Police of the Township shall have the authority to suspend
the registration of and remove the identification tag from any bicycle being
operated upon any street or public place in the Township in an unsafe
manner, or in violation of State law or Township ordinance, and such
suspension of registration and removal of tag shall be in addition to other
penalties provided hereunder. Provided: where such suspension shall be for
any bicycle that shall be improperly equipped or in an unsafe condition,
such suspension shall continue until the condition for which such
suspension was made shall have been corrected; where such suspension
shall be for operation of the bicycle in an unsafe manner or in violation of
any provision of the laws of the Commonwealth or of this chapter pertaining
to the manner of operation of a bicycle, such suspension shall be for no
longer than 14 days.
§ 3-8. Change of ownership or dismantling to be reported.
[Amended 4-12-1971 by Ord. No. 1003; 10-10-1977 by Ord. No.
1252]
Within 48 hours after any bicycle registered hereunder shall have changed
ownership or been dismantled and taken out of operation, such information
shall be reported to the Bureau of Police by the person in whose name the
bicycle has been registered.
§ 3-9. Unlawful to operate unregistered or untagged bicycle.
Any person who shall operate any bicycle not properly registered or
carrying a proper identification tag, as required herein, upon any street or
public place in the Township, or who shall operate such bicycle in an unsafe
manner, shall upon conviction thereof be subject to the penalty provided in
§ 3-10 hereof.
§ 3-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 4
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 3-7 ANIMALS § 4-1
2:243
§ 4-1. Definitions. [Added 2-12-1968 by Ord. No. 883; amended
5-13-1976 by Ord. No. 1187; 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 1252]
The following words or phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
BASIC STREET NUMBER — The last one, two or three digits in all presently
existing Township street numbers.
STREET — Any road, highway, avenue, street, parkway, lane or other way,
public or private, set aside and commonly used by the public for street
purposes and shown upon the official Township map of Whitehall Township.
TOWNSHIP — The First Class Township of Whitehall, Lehigh County,
Pennsylvania.
WARD OR WARDS — The former, originally existing five wards47 of
Whitehall Township, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, as set forth and
delineated on the official Whitehall Township map on file in the office of the
Mayor at the Whitehall Township Municipal Building, which wards are more
commonly known and designated as:
§ 4-2. Street names. [Added 2-12-1968 by Ord. No. 883; amended
10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 1252]
All designated street names in all five original Whitehall Township wards
shall be and continue to remain the same.
A. First Ward or Fullerton Ward.
B. Second Ward or West Catasauqua Ward.
C. Third Ward or Hokendauqua-Stiles Ward.
D. Fourth Ward or Egypt Ward.
E. Fifth Ward or Cementon Ward.48
47.Editor's Note: After enactment of Ord. No. 883, the ward divisions of the Township were
changed, with the Township at present having nine wards; the master street numbering
system prescribed by Ord. No. 883 correlated with the prior ward divisions, remains in
effect.
48.Editor's Note: The preamble to this ordinance stated that one centralized Township-wide
U.S. Post office and mail distribution system had been established for Whitehall, PA, in
accordance with the directives of the U.S. Postmaster General; that instead of five
separate village post offices with 11 separate mail delivery routes, the Postmaster
General's directives provided for the establishment of one centralized Post Office to be
known as Whitehall, PA, with mail delivery service from that central office being extended
to all residents of the Township where post office requirements were or could be met; that
the ordinance was enacted in order to help effectuate and implement those directives and
in accordance with the First Class Township Code.
§ 4-1 WHITEHALL CODE § 4-3
2:244
§ 4-3. Master street numbering system. [Added 2-12-1968 by Ord.
No. 883; amended 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 1252]
On and after the effective date of this chapter, subject only to the exceptions
and qualifications hereinafter set forth, all houses, buildings, structures and
places of business in Whitehall Township shall be numbered and identified
in accordance with the following Whitehall Township master street
numbering system:
A. The First Ward (Fullerton).
(1) All existing street numbers in the original First Ward shall keep and
retain their present one, two or three digit basic street number
identity.
(2) No four digit street number in the original First Ward shall be of a
series higher than number 1999.
(3) All original First Ward street numbers shall therefore be in the
series from number 0001 to number 1999.
B. The Original Second Ward (West Catasauqua).
(1) All original Second Ward street numbers shall be of four digits and
be in the series from number 2000 to number 2999.
(2) All original Second Ward street numbers shall keep their present
basic one, two or three digit identity and shall conform to the new
four digit number 2000 to number 2999 series by appropriately
adding sufficient digits to the basic street number.
C. The Original Third Ward (Hokendauqua-Stiles).
(1) All original Third Ward street numbers shall keep their present
basic one, two or three digit number 3000 to number 3999 series
by appropriately adding sufficient digits to the basic street number.
D. The Original Fourth Ward (Egypt).
(1) All original Fourth Ward street numbers shall be of four digits and
be in the series from number 4000 to number 4999.
(2) All original Fourth Ward street numbers shall keep their present
basic one, two or three digit identity and shall conform to the new
four digit number 4000 to number 4999 series by appropriately
adding sufficient digits to the basic street number.
E. The Original Fifth Ward (Cementon).
(1) All original Fifth Ward street numbers shall be four digits and be in
the series from number 5000 to number 5999.
(2) All original Fifth Ward street numbers shall keep their present
basic one, two or three digit identity and shall conform to the new
§ 4-3 ANIMALS § 4-3
2:245
§ 4-4. Street numbers on houses. [Added 2-12-1968 by Ord. No.
883; amended 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3087]
It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of every house, building,
structure or place of business in the Township to have placed thereon, in
a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting
the property, approved numbers at least four inches high with a minimum
stroke width of one-half inch showing the street number of the house,
building, structure or place of business as hereinbefore described (§ 4-3 of
this chapter). Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters
and shall contrast with their background.
§ 4-5. Violations and penalties. [Added 2-12-1968 by Ord. No. 883;
amended 4-12-1971 by Ord. No. 1015; 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 4-6. Numbering plan adopted for Village of West Catasauqua.
The owners of properties in the Village of West Catasauqua, Whitehall
Township, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, are hereby authorized and directed
to number all their houses in said village as the same are located on the
streets as indicated on the blueprint hereto attached marked "Consolidated
Plan formerly the property of the heirs of Joshua Miller, C.D. Fuller &
Catasauqua Real Estate Ass'n, also Trone's, Whitehall Twp., Lehigh Co., PA,"
as follows:
four digit number 5000 to 5999 series by appropriately adding
sufficient digits to the basic street number.
F. Exceptions. The foregoing master street number system includes all
street numbering in Whitehall Township except:
(1) The street numbering system presently in existence for MacArthur
Road (LR 555) from the southern Township boundary line to the
northern Township boundary shall not be in any way changed or
affected.
(2) On any boundary street of an originally existing ward, both sides of
such boundary street shall be considered for street numbering as
being in the lower-numbered ward.
(3) The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed at the request of the
Post Office Department to make further exceptions to the aforesaid
master street numbering system in order to make the system
workable.
§ 4-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 4-6
2:246
§ 4-7. Frequency of numbers in West Catasauqua; supervision of
numbering.
There shall be a number for every lot of 30 feet or less, for every street as
the same are located on said plan, (§ 4-6 of this chapter) and the numbering
of said houses and lots shall be under the supervision and direction of the
Township Engineer and all such numbering shall be as he directs.
§ 4-8. Numbering plan adopted for portion of MacArthur Road.
[Added 3-8-1965 by Ord. No. 773]
§ 4-9. Numbering plan adopted for Mickleys Gardens. [Added
3-8-1965 by Ord. No. 776]
A. The Main Street on said plan shall be the dividing line between streets
running north and south on said plan and such streets shall be
numbered beginning with said Main Street, the odd numbers to be on
the east side thereof and the even numbers on the west side thereof.
B. The dividing line between the streets running east and west shall be
Lehigh Avenue, and such streets shall be numbered beginning with
Lehigh Avenue, the odd numbers being on the north side thereof and
the even numbers on the south side thereof.
A. The thoroughfare known as MacArthur Road in the Township of
Whitehall, County of Lehigh and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, from
Sumner Avenue on the south, being the dividing line between the City
of Allentown and the Township of Whitehall, to Columbia Street on the
north, shall be numbered in accordance with the plans identified as
"Exhibit A" of Ord. 773. Said Exhibit A is a numbering plan for
MacArthur Road as prepared by A.L. Wiesenberger Associates, Inc.,
Consulting Engineers, for the Township of Whitehall and dated
November 9, 1964, and February 5, 1965 (W-1648).
B. All buildings located along said MacArthur Road shall be numbered in
accordance with said numbering plan as identified in Exhibit "A", pages
1, 2, and 3 inclusive.49
A. A numbering plan for a subdivision plan known as Mickleys Gardens in
the Third Ward of the Township of Whitehall, County of Lehigh and
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as designated upon the plan identified
as Exhibit A50 is hereby adopted. Said numbering plan for Mickleys
Gardens was prepared by A.L. Wiesenberger Associates, Inc.,
Consulting Engineers and dated November 9, 1964 (W-1648).
B. All lots or buildings located within the subdivision plan of Mickleys
Gardens shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering plan as
indicated upon Exhibit A.
49.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file at the Township offices.
50.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file at the Township offices.
§ 4-6 ANIMALS § 4-9
2:247
Chapter 5
CODE ENFORCEMENT
§ 4-9 WHITEHALL CODE § 4-9
2:248
ARTICLE I
Building Code
[Adopted 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2440]
§ 5-1. Adoption of Building Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Bureau of Planning, Zoning and Development, Department of Operations,
Township of Whitehall, being marked and designated as the "International
Building Code, 2000," (hereinafter referred to as the "International Building
Code"); as published in cooperation with the International Conference of
Building Officials and the Southern Building Code Congress International,
Inc.; as hereinafter amended by and is hereby adopted as the "Whitehall
Township Building Code," in the County of Lehigh, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided;
and each and all of the regulations, provision, penalties, conditions and
terms of said International Building Code, as hereinafter amended, are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part of hereof as if fully set
out in this article. The International Building Code and this article shall
collectively be considered and referred therein as in the International Code
as the "code."
§ 5-2. Inconsistent ordinances.
All other building ordinances or codes inconsistent herewith, whether in
whole or in part, are hereby repealed, except as hereinafter specifically
adopted, continued, or included by reference. In the event that this article,
code or part thereof is in conflict with any other non-building ordinance
or code or part thereof, the more restrictive provisions shall be deemed
applicable.
§ 5-3. Additions, amendments, changes, deletions and insertions.
[Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
A. The International Building Code is hereby revised and amended,
pursuant to the following additions, amendments, as:
(1) Subsection 101.1, Title (second line), shall be amended to insert
"Township of Whitehall" for "(Name of Jurisdiction)."
(2) Section 101.4, Referenced Codes, shall be amended to include the
following subsections:
§ 5-1 ANIMALS § 5-3
2:249
101.4.8 Requirements of Department of Labor and Industry
of Pennsylvania: Whenever any provision or requirement of the
regulations of the Department of Labor and Industry of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania is more stringent or stricter than
a provision or requirement of the code, then the applicable
provision or requirement of the regulations of the said Department
of Labor and Industry shall supersede any such provision or
requirement of the code.
101.4.9 Access by Physically Handicapped: All buildings and
building sites which are subject to federal or state laws, rules, or
orders relative to making the same accessible to and usable by
person with disabilities (i.e., the Americans With Disabilities Act)
shall comply with all such standards, specifications, and principles
of those legislative enactments including, but not limited to, areas
of refuge.
(3) Chapter 1, Administration, Section 102, Applicability, Subsection
102.1, General: the last sentence thereof shall be amended to read
as follows:
Except as is required by any applicable state or federal law,
statute, rule, regulation, or order relative to making buildings
accessible to disabled persons, the construction, addition,
alteration, repair, or removal of or to any structures shall conform
to that required of a new structure without requiring the existing
structure to comply with all of the requirements of this code,
except that no owner of any commercial or industrial structure
shall affix any addition, enlargement or extension thereto unless
the original structure or building has a foundation which complies
with the requirements set forth in this code.
(4) Section 102, Applicability, Subsection 102.7, Repairs, shall be
amended to read:
102.7 Repairs: Ordinary repairs to single-family residential
dwelling units shall be construed to include interior alterations,
additions or modifications of non-bearing walls or supports that do
not involve the relocation or extension of water supply, sanitary
sewer, gas service, electrical service or mechanical conveyance
systems. Where these utility systems are relocated or extended,
the jurisdiction of this code is limited to the specific system(s)
relocation(s) and not the entire project.
(5) Section 103, Department of Building Safety, Subsections 103.1
through 103.3, are hereby deleted and shall be replaced with the
following:
§ 5-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-3
2:250
103.1 Administration: This code shall be administered by the
Department of Operations, Bureau of Planning, Zoning and
Development. The Township zoning officer shall receive all
requests and applications for building permits and zoning permits,
issue building permits and zoning permits, and keep a record of
all applications for permits and permits issued, with notation of all
special conditions involved.
103.2 Effective Administration and Reports: Responsibility
for effective administration of this code and for periodic reports
relating to enforcement hereof is that of the chief of the Bureau of
Planning, Zoning and Development.
103.3 Appointment: The Building Inspector or Inspectors shall
be appointed by the Mayor. Building Inspectors shall conduct
inspections of all work accomplished in the Township and shall
maintain detailed records of all such activities. Building Inspectors
shall not be engaged in the Township, directly or indirectly, with
the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the
construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, or in the
preparation of plans or specifications therefor, unless such
Inspector is the owner of such building. [Amended 6-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(6) Section 104, Duties and Powers of the Building Official,
Subsections 104.1 and 104.4, are hereby deleted and replaced with
the following:
§ 5-3 ANIMALS § 5-3
2:251
104.1 General: This code may be enforced by the Director of
the Department of Operations. All individuals charged with the
enforcement are hereby deemed, individually, as the Code
Enforcement Officer and collectively as the Code Enforcement
Officers. Building Inspectors are hereby expressly granted
enforcement authority. The Building Official is hereby authorized
and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The building
official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this
code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the
application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and
procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of
this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of
waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code.
104.4 Inspections: All required building code inspections shall
be made by the Building Inspector or by such other personnel
as are designated by the Bureau Chief of Planning, Zoning and
Development or by the Mayor. All inspections shall be reported
in writing to the Chief of the Bureau of Planning, Zoning and
Development or to his or her designee. Each Building Inspector
shall have the power and duty, in the interest of public safety,
health and general welfare, to designate reasonable requirements
in addition to those found herein, applicable because of the local
climactic or other conditions, provided that such additional
requirements do not waive any provision hereof. The building
official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed
necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise,
subject to the approval of the appointing authority. [Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(7) Section 105, Permits, Subsection 105.1, Required, shall be
amended to read as follows:
105.1 Required: Any owner or authorized agent who intends to
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the
occupancy of a building or structure or to erect, install, enlarge,
alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas,
mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is
regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done
shall first make application to the building official and obtain the
required permit. Application for a permit shall be made by the
contractor or his agent. If no contractor is involved, then and only
then may the owner or lessee apply for a building permit. If work
is commenced by any contractor or his agent without first applying
for a permit, said contractor's Township business license shall be
subject to revocation.
(8) Subsection 105.3.1, Action on Application, shall be amended to
include the following:
§ 5-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-3
2:252
For the purposes of this section, the phrase "reasonable time" shall
mean 90 days after a fully completed application is submitted.
Notice of the disapproval of an application shall include a brief
explanation setting forth the reasons for the disapproval and the
manner in which the application can be corrected and/or modified
to obtain approval. Where plans, specifications, plot plans and
engineering details are not required, or where plans and plot plans
are required for standard residential construction, action on the
application shall be taken no later than 10 working days after
the application is submitted. Notwithstanding any term, condition
or provision of this subsection, no permit shall be issued until
such time as the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
has either issued a letter that no approval is necessary or has
approved all commercial and/or multifamily plans and/or that the
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture has approved all food
service establishment plans.
(9) Subsection 105.3.2, Time Limitation of Application, shall be
amended to read as follows:
105.3.2 Time Limitation of Application. An application for
a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been
abandoned 90 days after the date of filing, unless such application
has been diligently prosecuted or a permit shall have been issued;
except that the code official shall grant one or more extensions of
time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each if there is
reasonable cause.
(10) Subsection 105.6, Suspension or Revocation, shall be amended to
read as follows:
105.6. Suspension or Revocation. The building official is
authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the
provision of this code wherever the permit is issued in error or on
the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in
violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provision of
this code. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized
work is not commenced within six months after issuance of the
permit or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for
a period of one year after the date of the commencement of the
work. Notwithstanding any term, condition or provision of this
code to the contrary, each and every building permit shall expire
within one year of the date that the said permit is issued.
(11) Subsection 106.1, Submittal Documents, shall be amended to read
as follows:
§ 5-3 ANIMALS § 5-3
2:253
106.1 Submittal documents. Construction documents, special
inspection and structural observation programs, and other data
shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application
for a permit. For the construction, alteration, repairs, expansion,
addition or modification of all nonresidential buildings and all
multifamily apartment buildings, the code official shall require to
be filed adequate details of structural, mechanical and electrical
work, including computations, stress diagrams and other essential
technical data. All engineering plans and computations shall bear
the signature and seal of the engineer or architect responsible
for the design. Where special conditions exist, the building official
is authorized to require additional construction documents to be
prepared by a registered design professional. When construction
documents are required by this code for a building permit
application, the same shall be prepared by a registered design
professional consistent with the professional registration laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Such construction documents
shall include the name an address of a registered design
professional and shall be signed, sealed, and dated by the
registered design professional. All such plans shall first be
submitted for plan review by Building Officials and Code
Administrators (BOCA) International for mechanical, building, and
energy conservation, electrical and plumbing review.
(12) Subsection 106.2, Site Plan, shall be amended to add the following
subsections:
106.2.1 All new work shall be located strictly in accordance with
the approved plot plan. No changes shall be permitted, except for
changes which do not violate the provisions of this code or any
other Township codes.
106.2.2 Changes in Site Plan. Changes in site plans are
governed by Chapter 27, Zoning, and Chapter 22, Subdivision and
Land Development.
(13) Subsection 108.2, Schedule of Permit Fees, shall be amended to
read:
108.2 Schedule of Permit Fees. On buildings, structures,
electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations
requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required
in Appendix M of the Code of Whitehall Township.51 The permit fee
for the demolition of a building or structure is also listed in this
appendix. No permit for demolition of any structure shall be issued
until such time as all required permits have been secured from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(14) Subsection 108.6, Refunds, shall be deleted in its entirety.
51.Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 5-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-3
2:254
(15) Subsection 109.4, Inspection Agencies, shall be amended to read
as follows:
109.4 Inspection Agencies. The Building Inspector may accept
reports of accredited/licensed inspection services which satisfy
Township Code requirements as to qualifications and reliability,
excepting final inspections, which shall be conducted by
appropriate Township personnel.
(16) Subsection 109.3, Required Inspections, shall be amended to
include the following subsections:
109.3.1.1 After foundation construction, and prior to backfilling
and prior to the commencement of framing or above grade
construction.
109.3.5.1 After completion of plastering, flooring and trim, but
prior to interior finishing or decoration.
109.3.11 Twenty-Four-Hour Prior Notice. The applicant or his
duly authorized agent or contractor shall be responsible for
notifying the Building Inspector at least 24 hours prior to each of
the above construction milestones.
109.3.12 Applicant Responsibility. The absence of full-time
enforcement availability by the Building Inspector shall not relieve
the applicant form the requirement and responsibility for full
compliance with all applicable provisions of this code.
(17) Section 110, Certificate of Occupancy, Subsection 110.1, Use and
Occupancy, shall be revised to read:
110.1 Use and Occupancy. No building or structure shall be
used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy
classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall
be made until the building official has issued a certificate of
occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of
occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of
the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the Township.
A certificate of occupancy shall only be issued upon full
compliance with all applicable Whitehall Township ordinances,
including but not limited to the Whitehall Township Zoning,
Building, Electrical, Mechanical, Fire Prevention and Plumbing
Code Ordinances.
(18) Subsection 110.3, Certificate Issued, shall be amended to read as
follows:
§ 5-3 ANIMALS § 5-3
2:255
Subsection 110.3 Certificate Issued. When a building or
structure is entitled thereto, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a certificate of use and occupancy within 10 days after
written application therefor. The certificate of use and occupancy
shall certify compliance with the provisions of this code and the
purposes for which the building or structure will be used in its
several parts. The certificate of use and occupancy shall specify
the use group in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3
hereto, the type of construction as defined in Chapter 6, and any
special stipulations and conditions of the construction permits
(building, plumbing electrical, etc.).
(19) Subsection 113.4, Violation Penalties, shall be amended to read:
113.4. Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair
mechanical equipment or systems in violation of the approved
construction documents, a directive of the code official, of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall be
guilty of a criminal offense, punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues
after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense. Upon judgment against any person by summary
conviction or by proceeding by summons, on default of the
payment of the fine or penalty imposed by said judgment and
the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the
Township lockup for a period not exceeding five days or to the
county jail or workhouse for a period not exceeding 30 days.
(20) Subsection 114.3, Unlawful Continuance, shall be amended to read
as follows:
114.3 Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue
any work after having been served with a stop-work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $100 or more than $1,000, plus costs of the action, including
reasonable attorneys' fees for each day of such violation.
(21) Section 112, Board of Appeals, Subsection 112.1, General, shall be
amended to read:
§ 5-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-3
2:256
112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders,
decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative
to application and interpretation of this code, there shall be, and
is hereby created, a Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall
be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at is
pleasure. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting
its business. The Board of Appeals shall consist of five Whitehall
Township residents appointed to five- year terms respectively by
resolution of the Township Board of Commissioners, except that
the initial appointments shall be staggered for one- , two- , three-
, four- and five-year terms, respectively, and thereafter each new
member or reappointed member shall serve a five-year term. In
addition, the Board of Commissioners may appoint by resolution
at least one, but not more than three, residents of the Township
to serve as alternate members of the Board. The term of office
of an alternate member shall be three years. The Township shall
designate and provide a secretary to the Board of Appeals. The
Secretary shall keep minutes and a detailed record of all
proceedings held before the Board for the files of the Building
Inspector.
(22) Subsection 112.3, Qualifications, shall be amended to read as
follows:
112.3 Qualifications. The Board of Appeals shall consist of
members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on
matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees
of the jurisdiction. Each member shall have either training,
education, or experience in either reengineering, architecture,
or construction supervision. At least one of the members shall
be either a structural engineer, civil engineer, professional land
surveyor or architect who is currently licensed by and practicing
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(23) Section 112, Board of Appeals, shall be amended further by the
addition of the following subsections:
112.4 Compensation of Members. Compensation for all Board
members shall be determined by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
112.5 Postponed Hearings. When three qualified members of
the Board of Appeals are not present to consider a particular
appeal, either the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer,
or the appellant or his/her respective representative shall have the
right to request an immediate continuation of the hearing.
§ 5-3 ANIMALS § 5-3
2:257
112.6 Board Decision. The Board of Appeals shall modify or
reverse the decision of the Building Inspector by a concurring vote
of a majority of the members present at the hearing. However,
if all members are not present, the Board may only modify or
reverse the decision of the Building Inspector by a concurring
vote of at least two members of the Board. Failure to secure two
concurring votes (if less than all members are present) shall be
deemed a confirmation of the decision of the Building Inspector. If
the hearing is held before less than all members of the Board, the
Appellant shall be entitled to a further hearing before a full Board
upon request therefor.
112.7 Court Review. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the
Board of Appeals, whether or not a previous party of the decision,
or any officer or official board of the Township may, pursuant
to the Pennsylvania Local Agency Law, appeal to the Court of
Common Pleas of Lehigh County within 30 days after due notice of
the filing of the Board of Appeals' decision with the Bureau Chief
of Planning, Zoning and Development.
(24) Section 202.0, General Definitions, shall be amended as set forth
hereinafter:
REVISED DEFINITIONS:
BOARDING HOUSE — A building arranged or used for lodging
for compensation, with or without meals, and not occupied as a
single-family unit. A boarding house shall also include rooming
houses or units.
BUILDING LINE — The setback line established by ordinance or
indicated upon a duly accepted or recorded lot plan or deed,
beyond which a building shall not extend.
NEW DEFINITIONS:
AGGREGATE — Inert material which is mixed with cement and
water to produce concrete, consisting in general of sand,
pebbles, gravel, cinders, crushed stone, blast furnace slag, burnt
shale, slay, or similar materials. Fine aggregate shall mean
aggregate consisting of particles one-fourth-inch or less in size.
ALLEY — A secondary way, less than 24 feet in width, utilized as
a public or private thoroughfare for pedestrians or vehicles.
BEAM — A principal horizontal structural member used to
support a load over an opening, or form post-to-post, over the
floor of the building.
BEAM, GRADE — A beam, at or below grade, which supports a
wall.
BEAM, HEADER — A beam into which the common beams frame
around an opening.
BEAM, TRIMMER — A beam into which a header beam frames.
§ 5-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-3
2:258
CAISSON PILE (FOUNDATION PIER) — A large diameter shaft
from which the inside material has been excavated and replaced
with concrete, plain or reinforced.
CANTILEVER — A projecting structural member supported on
one end and overhanging the second support.
CARPORT — A motor vehicle parking or storage structure, which
is accessory to a private dwelling, not more than one story in
height, without enclosure on at least two sides, roofed over, and
whose floor rests on or about ground level.
CEILING — The overhead lining of a room suspended from or
attached to the underside of floor or roofs, that is not a structural
part of a floor or roof or the underside of exposed floor or roof
joists or other members.
CRAWL SPACE — An unfinished accessible space below the first
floor, usually less than full story or basement height.
DRAFT CURTAIN — A curtain or baffle, that extends downward
form a roof or ceiling to stop drafts or bank up heat from a fire.
FENCE — A vertical structure not a part of a building or any
other structure that forms a barrier between lots, between a lot
and a street or an alley, or between portions of a lot or lots.
FUEL OIL — A hydrocarbon oil, refined for use in heating
equipment, free from grit and fibrous or other foreign matter,
and with a flash point not less than 100° F. when tested in
accordance with ASTM Designation D92, titled "Cleveland Open
Cup Test Method."
GLUED LAMINATED TIMBER CONSTRUCTION — Assemblies of
specially selected and prepared wood laminations approximately
parallel longitudinally.
GYPSUM BLOCK OR TILE — The term "gypsum block" or
"gypsum tile" shall mean a solid or hollow building unit of
gypsum or of suitable aggregate with a gypsum binder.
GYPSUM CONCRETE — Gypsum concrete shall consist of a
mixture of gypsum and water, with or without chips, shavings,
fiber or other approved aggregate. The gypsum and wood chips,
shavings, or fiber may be premixed, requiring only the addition
of water at the building site.
GYPSUM WALLBOARD — A sheet having a noncombustible core,
essentially gypsum.
HANGAR — A building or part of a building designed or used for
the shelter, storage, or servicing of one or more aircraft.
HANGAR BUILDING GROUP — A building or group of buildings
containing several separated storage or servicing areas, each of
which may be used for one or more aircraft at any one time.
§ 5-3 ANIMALS § 5-3
2:259
LAITANCE —Extremely fine material of little or no hardness
which may collect on the surface of freshly-placed concrete and
resulting form the use of excess mixing water.
LOAD, DESIGN — Total load which a structure is designed to
sustain including dead load, live load, and impact load.
LOAD, RACKING — A concentrated or resultant load
eccentrically applied, parallel to a plane of an assembly, so as
to simultaneously produce longitudinal and transverse
deformations in that plane. Also, this term applies to the test load
as described in ASTM Designation E72 applied in a horizontal
direction to floor, wall, and roof assemblies.
MAINTENANCE — Of a building, structure, appliance,
apparatus, or equipment shall mean the way or manner any
building, structure, appliance or equipment is serviced, repaired
or altered to perpetuate the use or purpose for which such
building, structure, appliances, apparatus or equipment was
originally intended.
MEAN GRADE — Mean grade shall be considered to be an
average elevation of the ground area which is contiguous to, and
within 20 feet of, the building or within the lot line where it is
closer than 20 feet from the building. Such grade shall in no case
be permitted to exceed a ratio of one foot vertical to two feet
horizontal.
MEMBER (PRIMARY) — Any member of the structural frame of
a building or structure used as a column, grillage beam, or to
support masonry walls and partitions, including trusses, isolated
lintels spanning an opening of eight feet or more, and any other
member required to brace a column or truss. To be considered
a primary member, steel joists must be constructed of hot-rolled
structural sections and top and bottom chords. Likewise, they be
properly braced laterally.
MEMBER (SECONDARY) — Any member of the structural
framework, other than a primary member, including filled-in
beams or steel joists of floor systems.
MOBILE UNIT — Any vehicle or structure used or occupied for
dwelling purposes or any commercial use which utilizes wheels
and axles for its transportation or is designed to be moved from
one site to another and to be used with or without a permanent
foundation.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING —A single building or group of
attached dwelling units intended and designed to contain three
or more dwelling units, including row houses and townhouses.
PARKING LOT — An open space, other than a public or private
street or way, used exclusively for other parking or motor
vehicles.
§ 5-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-3
2:260
ROOMING HOUSE — Any building, or that part thereof,
containing one or more rooming units in which space is let to
three or more persons.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping
but not for cooking or eating purposes.
SHEATHING — That element of a wall or roof construction, such
as thin boards, plywood, or sheets of cemented materials directly
a attached to the wall studs and roof rafters, to which the outer
finished surface is attached or applied.
SINGULAR HANGAR BUILDING — A building in which there is a
single storage or servicing area for one or more aircraft.
SKELETON CONSTRUCTION — A type of building construction
in which all loads are transmitted to the foundations by
connected framework of suitable material.
SOFFIT — The underside of a member of subordinate structure.
SOIL — Any inorganic material except water in a geologic
formation in its natural state and location.
SPIRE — The high tapering roof of a steeple or tower, including
the space under such roof.
STRUCTURAL DAMAGE — Loosening, twisting, warping,
cracking, distortion, or breaking of any piece, or of any fastening
or joint, in a structural assembly with loss of sustaining capacity
of the assembly. The following shall not be deemed to constitute
structural damage: small cracks in reinforced concrete
perpendicular to the reinforcing bars, and deformation of sheet
material when a structural assembly is under applied load which
increases as such load increases but which disappears when such
load is removed.
STUCCO — A material used in a plastic form which can be
trowled to form a hard covering for exterior walls or other
exterior surfaces of any building or structure.
TON OF REFRIGERATION — The unit of capacity of
refrigeration equivalent to the removal of heat at the rate of
12,000 B.T.U. per hour.
UNDERPINNING — The masonry or concrete construction
required to extend a wall, footing of a wall, or any part thereof to
a lower level.
WRITTEN NOTICE — A notification in writing delivered, in
person to the individual or the parties intended, or delivered
or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last
residential or business address known to the party giving notice.
(25) Section 406.1, Private Garages and Carports, shall be amended to
include the following subsection:
§ 5-3 ANIMALS § 5-3
2:261
406.1.4 Private Garages. Notwithstanding any term, condition
or provision hereof, all garages which attach to or adjoin a
residence or accessory structures shall have five-eighths-inch type
"X" drywall on the warm wall side and the ceiling, and one-halfinch
drywall on the other walls.
(26) Section 406.3, Open Parking Garages, shall be amended to include
the following subsections:
406.3.14 Protective Guard Rails: All walls shafts and other
open exposed spaces throughout, except first floor, shall be
enclosed and protected within continuous walls or protective
guard rails at least three feet, six inches in height and of sufficient
strength and design to restrain the vehicles. In those structures
wherein vehicles are hoisted to the desired level and placed in the
parking space entirely by approved mechanical means, the three
feet, six-inch-high, continuous wall or protective guard rail may
be omitted on the side of the parking levels adjacent to the space
occupied by the hoisting and placing equipment.
406.3.15 Wheel Guards: Wheel guards not less than six inches
in height shall be located so as to prevent any vehicle from striking
the wall or guard rail.
(27) Section 415, Use Groups H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5, shall be
amended to include the following subsections:
415.7.2.11 New Installations: All underground tanks of volatile
flammables, liquefied petroleum gases, and fuel oil shall be set as
required by an applicable federal or state law and, in the absence
thereof, shall be set on a bed of at least six inches of limestone
screenings, well-tamped and compacted. Backfill around and over
tank shall be limestone screening with at least 12 additional
inches of cover. In floodprone areas, as determined by the
Township Engineer, or where soil or rock conditions are such that
a concrete base is deemed desirable by the Township Engineer, a
concrete pad shall be so place according to accepted engineering
design and practice. Tanks in flood areas shall be held down with
steel cable anchored to the concrete base. Concrete pads shall be
a minimum of nine inches thick and shall be placed as directed by
the Township Engineer after consultation with the Fire Chief.
415.7.2.12 Inspection Plug: A direct inspection pipe, three
inches or larger, shall be installed to the underground tank and
extend directly to the surface with no bends. A removable plug
shall be installed at ground level or as directed by the Fire
Marshal, Inspector, or Chief for inspection purposes. The
inspection plug is to be encased by a concrete pad with a minimum
dimension of 12 inches by 12 inches by six inches; said pipe is to
be so insulated as to prevent bonding to the concrete pad.
§ 5-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-3
2:262
415.7.2.13 Removal: Prior to removal of tanks, all flammable
or combustible liquids shall be removed from the tank and
connecting lines. All fill, gauge, suction and/or other connecting
lines shall be disconnected, inlets, outlets and leaks shall be
capped or plugged and said tank shall be rendered gas free on the
premises.
415.7.2.14 Disposal: If tank is to be removed and discarded, it
shall have a sufficient number of holes or openings in it to render
it unfit for further use.
415.7.2.15 Abandonment in Place. All flammable or
combustible liquid shall be removed from tank and connecting
lines. Suction, inlet, gauge and vent lines shall be disconnected.
Tank and all pipe lines connected thereto shall be completely filled
with liquid concrete; and all exposed tank inlets and outlets shall
be capped tightly.
415.7.2.6 Rendering Tanks Temporarily Out of Service. Tanks
shall be considered temporarily out of service only when it is
planned that they will be returned to active service at the same
location within one year or pending removal within one year.
The Fire Chief of the Whitehall Township Fire Department or
his designee may extend or shorten the aforesaid time period or
prohibit said temporary abandonment.
415.7.2.17 Disposal of Contaminated Soil. Any and all
contaminated soil may be stock piled on the site for no more than
60 days after the same is determined to be contaminated, provided
that the stockpile is enclosed by appropriately installed rip-rap,
fenced, and entirely covered.
(28) Subsection 716.2.2, Concealed Wall Spaces, shall be amended to
read as follows:
716.2.2 Concealed Wall Spaces. Fireblocking shall be provided
in concealed spaces of stud walls and partitions, including furred
or studded-off spaces of masonry or concrete walls. Fire stops
and draft stops shall be provided at the ceiling and floor or roof
levels and at maximum intervals of eight feet, both vertically and
horizontally.
(29) Subsection 1003.3.3.3, Stair Treads and Risers, shall be amended
to read as follows:
§ 5-3 ANIMALS § 5-3
2:263
1003.3.3.3 Stair Treads and Risers.
Exception #5. In occupancies in Group R-3, as applicable in
Section 101.2; within dwelling units in occupancies in Group R-2,
as applicable in Section 101.2; and in occupancies in Group U,
which are accessory to an occupancy in Group R-3, as applicable
in Section 101.2, the maximum riser height shall be 8 1/4 inches,
and the minimum tread depth shall be nine inches. A nosing of not
less than one inch shall be provided on stairways with solid risers
where the tread depth is less than 11 inches.
(30) Subsection 1003.2.10, Exit Signs, Subsection 1003.2.10.2,
Graphics, shall be amended to read as follows:
1003.2.10.2 Graphics. Every exit sign and directional exit sign
shall have plainly-legible, red letters on a white background, not
less than six inches (152 mm) high with the principal strokes of the
letters not less than 0.075 inch (19.1 mm) wide. The word "EXIT"
shall have letters having a width of not less than two inches (51
mm) wide, except the letter "I," and the minimum spacing between
letters shall not be less than 0.375 inch (9.5 mm). Sings larger
than the minimum established in this section shall have the letter
widths, strokes and spacing in proportion to their height.
The word "EXIT" shall be red letters and in high contrast with
the white background and shall be clearly discernible both when
the exit sign illumination means is and is not energized. When
necessary, these exit signs shall be supplemented by directional
signs in the access corridors indicating the direction and way
of egress. If an arrow is provided as part of the exit sign, the
construction shall be such that the arrow direction cannot be
readily changed.
(31) Subsection 1003.2.10.5, Power Source, shall be amended to
include the following:
Notwithstanding any term, condition, or provision hereof to the
contrary, "Exit" signs shall not be powered or otherwise
illuminated with any hazardous substance (as defined by any
federal, state or local law, rule, ordinance, order, directive or
promulgation), whether or not such hazardous substance is fully
contained.
(32) Section 1005, Exits, Subsection 1005.3.6, Exterior Exit Stairways,
shall be amended to include the following subsection:
1005.3.6.6 Construction. In buildings three stories or higher,
stair towers shall be constructed entirely of steel or other
approved, noncombustible materials with handrails on both sides
of stairways and platforms.
§ 5-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-3
2:264
(33) Chapter 16, Structural Design, Section 1602, Definitions,
Subsection 1602.1, Impact Load, shall be amended to read as
follows:
Impact Load. The increased design load resulting from moving
machinery, elevators, crane ways, vehicles, and other similar
forces and kinetic loads, pressure and possible surcharge from
fixed or moving loads.
(34) Table 1607.1, Minimum Uniformly Distributed Live Loads and
Minimum Concentrated Live Loads, is hereby amended to include
the following table entry:
Open Parking Structures, Passenger Cars Only. The minimum
uniformly distributed live loads will be 60 pounds per square foot,
except where snow loads are to be applied; the minimum shall be
75 pounds per square foot.
(35) Section 1607.5, Partition Loads, shall be amended to read as
follows:
1607.5 Partition Loads. In office buildings and in other buildings
where partition locations are subject to change, provision for
partition weight shall be made, whether or not partitions are
shown on the construction documents, unless the specified live
load exceeds 80 pounds per square foot (3.83kN/m2). Such
partition load shall not be less than a uniformly distributed live
load of 30 pounds per square foot.
(36) Chapter 18, Soils and Foundations, Section 1802, Foundation and
Soils Investigations, shall be amended to include the following
subsections:
1802.7 Presence of Rock. When rock is present at or near a
foundation, additional reinforcement may be necessary.
1802.8 On-Grade Slabs. On-grade slabs shall have 1 1/2 inch
thick R-7.5 insulation value and 24 inch rigid board depth on
perimeter insulation on all occupied buildings.
(37) Subsection 1805.2.1, Frost Protection, shall be amended to read:
§ 5-3 ANIMALS § 5-3
2:265
1805.2.1 Frost Protection. Except where erected on solid rock
or otherwise protected from frost, foundation walls, piers and
other permanent supports of buildings and structures larger than
400 square feet (37m2) in area or 10 feet (3048 mm) in height shall
extend below the frost line, and spread footings of adequate size
shall be provided where necessary to properly distribute the load
within the allowable load-bearing value of the soil. Alternatively,
such structures shall be supported on piles where solid earth
or rock is not available. Footings shall not bear on frozen soils
unless such frozen condition is of a permanent character. The frost
line referenced herein shall be considered to be at a depth of 36
inches below the ground surface. The top of all footings shall be a
minimum of 27 inches below the exterior grade.
(38) Section 1805.4, Footings, shall be amended to read:
1805.4 Footings. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections
1805.4.1 through 1805.4.6 hereof, footings shall not be less than
nine inches thick. The width of footings shall be 18 inches for
eight-inch foundation walls and 20 inches for ten-inch foundation
walls.
(39) Section 1805.5, Foundation Walls, shall be amended to include the
following sentence:
Foundation walls in residential structures shall be poured at such
height to allow a clearance of seven feet six inches from the top
of the foundation wall to the top of the basement floor to allow for
the future finishing of basement areas.
(40) Section 1805.5.1, Foundation Wall Thickness, shall be amended to
read as follows:
1805.5.1 Foundation Wall Thickness.
A. The thickness of foundation walls shall be: eight-inch
poured concrete walls for one-story buildings; ten-inch
poured concrete walls for buildings having two or more
stories; ten-inch concrete masonry units for one-story
buildings; and twelve-inch concrete masonry units for
buildings having two or more stories. All walls having
standard brick veneer shall have either a minimum of teninch
poured concrete walls or ten-inch concrete masonry
units. All walls having stone veneer shall have either a
minimum of twelve-inch poured concrete walls or twelveinch
concrete masonry units.
B. In frame construction, plates must be anchored to
foundation walls at corners and at intervals of six feet (12
inches from corners and 12 inches from plate ends) with 1/
2 inches bolts embedded not less than 16 inches in masonry
walls. There must be a minimum of two bolts per plate.
§ 5-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-3
2:266
(41) Section 1916, Concrete Filled Pipe Columns, Subsection 1916.1,
General, shall be amended to read as follows:
1916.1 General. Concrete-filled pipe columns shall be
manufactured from standard, extra-strong or double-extra-strong
steel pipe or seamless steel tubing of a minimum three-sixteenthinch
thickness, filled with concrete, placed and manipulated so as
to secure maximum density and to insure complete filling of the
pipe without voids.
(42) Chapter 23, Wood, Section 2301, General, shall be amended to
include the following subsection:
2301.4 Standards. Notwithstanding any term, condition or
provision of this code, all sill plates shall be treated lumber; studs,
joists and rafters shall be spaced 16 inches on center with a
minimum of four-inch bearings; all headers six feet or larger must
be packed with one-half-inch thick plywood and supported with
double 2x4 jack studs at both ends. Three-quarter-inch tongue
and groove sturdy floor can be used in lieu of the 1 1/2 inch
sub-floor and one-half-inch underlayment combined. All framing
lumber shall be number two or better and/or be properly graded.
Supports under main beams shall be four-inch steel pipe with steel
plates fastened at both ends.
(43) Section 2303, Minimum Standards and Quality, Subsection 2303.6,
Nails and Staples, shall be amended to read:
2303.6 Nails and Staples. Nails and staples shall conform to
requirements of ASTM F 1667. Nails used for framing and
sheathing connections shall have minimum average bending yield
strengths as follows: 80 ksi (551 Mpa) for shank diameters larger
than 0.177 inch (4.50 mm) but not larger than 0.254 inch (6.45
mm), 90 ksi (620Mpa) for shank diameters larger than 0.142 inch
(3.61 mm) but not larger than 0.177 inch (4.50 mm); and 100 ksi
(689 Mpa) for shank diameters of 0.142 inch (3.61 mm) or less. All
exposed or exterior nailing on building sand accessory structures
shall be made with corrosion resistant nails.
(44) Chapter 27, Electrical, Section 2702, Emergency and Standby
Power Systems, shall be amended to include the following
subsection:
§ 5-3 ANIMALS § 5-3
2:267
2702.2.20 Outdoor Emergency Notification Lights. All new
residential construction shall include outdoor emergency
notification lights on or at the front of the dwelling. In the event
that the dwelling includes a front port, then the outdoor
emergency notification light shall be on or at the front porch. If
there is no front porch, then the outdoor emergency notification
light shall be located so as to be visible from the public street
from either side property line and shall be operable from the
interior of the dwelling by an emergency notification switch.
Notwithstanding any provisions of Chapter 27, Zoning, the
outdoor emergency notification lights may flash or blink
intermittently in order to notify emergency management services
of the location of the dwelling.
(45) Chapter 32, Encroachments Into the Public Right-of-Way,
Subsection 3202.2.3, Awnings, shall be amended to include the
following subsection:
3202.2.3.1 Retractable Awnings. Retractable awnings shall be
securely fastened to the building. They shall be equipped with
a mechanism or device for raising and holding the awning in a
retracted or closed position against the face of the building.
(46) Chapter 33, Safeguards During Construction, Section 3301,
General, shall be amended to add the following subsections:
3301.3 Whenever a building or structure is erected, altered,
repaired, removed or demolished, the operation shall be
conducted in a safe manner, and suitable protection for the
general public shall be provided including continued flow of
stormwater runoff (through appropriate conduits).
3301.4 Dumpster. At such time as any new construction is
commenced on a lot and prior to the time that any lumber is
delivered to the site, the owner of the lot or the developer shall
have a dumpster on site in which all refuse shall be deposited. The
dumpster shall remain on site until such time as the construction
is complete. The dumpster shall be emptied within 72 hours of
being filled to capacity. A separate "dumpster permit" shall be
required for any dumpster proposed to placed within the public
right-of-way.
§ 5-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-3
2:268
3301.5 Erosion and Sedimentation Control. Prior to any
disturbance of any soil on a lot for construction of improvements
or lot grading or lot stripping, all required erosion and
sedimentation control devices shall be properly installed and
maintained until the soil is covered with stabilized vegetation, i.e.,
grass. The provision of this section shall apply to construction
of individual residential units as well as other construction. For
the purposes of this section, the phrase "required erosion and
sedimentation control devices" shall include the Erosion Control
Guidelines for Single Residential Lots as drafted by the Lehigh
County Conservation District and as amended and updated.
(47) Chapter 33, Section 3303, Demolition, shall be amended to add the
following subsection:
3303.7 In conditions where a structure is demolished when there
is a common wall with another structure, it shall be the
responsibility of the property owner of the structure to be
demolished to assure the stability and safety of the adjoining
structure as well as to weather proof the remaining open wall.
(48) Section 3401.3, Compliance With Other Codes, shall be amended to
include the following sentence:
Furthermore, a building or structure shall not be moved until
a permit has been secured therefor. The permit fee for the
movement of a building or structure into or within the Township
can be found in Appendix M52 of the Whitehall Township Code, as
amended from time to time.
(49) Section 3402, Additions, Alterations or Repairs, Subsection
3402.2.1, Existing Live Load, shall be amended to read as follows:
3402.2.1 Existing Live Load. Where an existing structure
heretofore is altered or repaired, the minimum design loads for
the structure shall be the loads applicable at the time of erection,
provided that the public safety is not endangered thereby. The
unit live loads specified in Section 1607.0 shall not be assumed to
include allowance for ordinary impact conditions. Provision shall
be made in the structural design for special uses and loads which
involve vibration and impact loads.
(50) Chapter 34, Existing Structures, Subsection 3402, Additions,
Alterations or Repairs, shall be amended by adding the following
subsection:
52.Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 5-3 ANIMALS § 5-3
2:269
3402.5 Exposed Party Walls. Exposed party walls not intended
to be used again as a party wall shall be made structurally sound
and shall be made permanently waterproofed by the application
of stucco, brickote, gunite, or other approved, noncombustible
material.
(51) Section 3403, Fire Escapes, Subsection 3403.4, Dimensions, shall
be amended to read as follows:
3403.4 Dimensions. Stairs shall be at least 24 inches wide with
risers not more than, and treads not less than, eight inches and
landings at the foot of stairs not less than 40 inches wide by 36
inches long, located not more than eight inches below the door.
(52) Subsection 3409.2, Applicability, the first phrase shall be amended
to read as follows:
Structures existing prior to the date of enactment of this article. .
. .
(53) Chapter 36, Miscellaneous, shall be added to the code and have the
following sections and subsections:
3601 General. Notwithstanding any terms, conditions, or
provisions hereof to the contrary:
3601.1.1 Studs, joints, and rafters shall be spaced 16 inches on
center and a minimum of two inches bearing.
3601.1.2 Collar ties are required at every third rafter.
3601.1.3 All gable ends must have framing 16 inches on center.
3601.1.4 Roof ridge shall have a minimum of 3T ridge pole
supports.
3601.1.5 Roof and exterior corners must be a minimum of
1/2 inch thick approved-grade exterior plywood or approved
bracing.
3601.1.6 All openings in the upper or lower plates of interior
walls must be sealed tight with approved fire-rated sealant.
3601.1.7 An approved smoke detector must be installed on
every floor level, including the basement and bedroom, and
hard wired with battery back up.
3601.1.8 All commercial self storage units must be constructed
with a minimum one-hour, fire-rated wall between units.
3601.1.9 On all trussed roofs, mechanical fasteners must be
used (i.e., hurricane clips) instead of the simple "toenail"
method.
§ 5-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-4
2:270
§ 5-4. Continuation of existing provisions.
Notwithstanding any term, condition, or provision hereof to the contrary,
the code hereby adopted shall not be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding now pending in any court, or any right acquired, accrued, or
liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action accrued or exiting, under
any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in § 5-2 of this article, nor
shall any just or legal right or remedy of any individual or entity of any
character be lost, impaired, or affected by this article or the code.
§ 5-4 ANIMALS § 5-4
2:271

ARTICLE II
Plumbing Code
[Adopted 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 2127; amended in its entirety
5-13-2002 by Ord. No. 2371]
§ 5-5. Adoption of Plumbing Code.
The International Plumbing Code/2000 is hereby adopted as the Plumbing
Code of the Township of Whitehall, Lehigh County, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania (hereinafter referred to with this article as the "code"); the
code shall control the plumbing within, at or near buildings and structures
as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the code are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions,
amendments, changes, deletions and insertions, if any, as prescribed herein.
Three copies of the code shall be filed in the Township offices at the
Municipal Building for inspection, review and reference during regular
business hours.
§ 5-6. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All prior Township ordinances or parts of ordinances or codes in conflict
herewith are hereby expressly repealed.
§ 5-7. Additions, amendments, changes, deletions and insertions.
[Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578; 4-9-2007 by Ord. No. 2670;
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009; 10-14-2019 by Ord.
No. 3176]
A. The sections of said BOCA International Plumbing Code/2000 are
hereby amended as set forth below:
(1) Subsection 101.1, Title, shall be amended in that the phrase
"Township of Whitehall" shall replace the following language,
"Name of Jurisdiction."
(2) Subsection 103.1, General, shall be deleted, and said provisions
shall instead be as written in the 2015 International Plumbing Code
and the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
(3) Subsection 104.2, Rule Making Authority, shall be deleted, and said
provisions shall instead be as written in the 2015 International
Plumbing Code and the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
(4) Subsection 104.0, Duties and Powers of the Code Official, shall be
amended to include the following subsections:
§ 5-5 ANIMALS § 5-7
2:273
104.8 Annual Report. At least annually, the Code Official shall
submit to the Mayor a written statement of operations in the form
and content as shall be prescribed by the Mayor. At least monthly,
the Code Official shall submit to the Mayor a written statement
regarding sanitary sewers and a summary of all actions taken
pursuant to the code.
104.9 Qualification of Plumbing Inspector. To be eligible for
appointment to the position of Plumbing Inspector, the applicant
shall possess, at minimum, certification in the following
Construction Code:
Plumbing Inspector
Plumbing Plans Examiner
Mechanical Inspector
Mechanical Plans Examiner
(5) Subsection 106.1, When Required, shall be deleted, and said
provisions shall instead be as written in the 2015 International
Plumbing Code and the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
(6) Subsection 106.3.1, Construction Documents, shall be deleted, and
said provisions shall instead be as written in the 2015 International
Plumbing Code and the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
(7) Subsection 106.4, By Whom Application is Made, shall be amended
to read as follows:
The application for a permit to install all or any part of any
plumbing system or any plumbing work shall only be made by a
homeowner plumber or master plumber. The applicant shall meet
all applicable qualifications, licensing or bonding requirements
established by this code, or any other ordinance or statute. The
full names and addresses of the owner, lessee, applicant and of
the responsible officer, if the owner or lessee is a corporate body,
shall be stated in the application. For the purposes of this code,
the phrase "homeowner plumber" shall mean that person who
performs plumbing work in property owned or that is leased by
such person and is used as a principal residence by that individual.
A permit issued to such a homeowner plumber shall be valid only
for work actually performed by such person in the homeowner's
principal residence. At the time of issuance of all permits, the
applicant shall furnish a certificate evidencing proof of worker's
compensation, pursuant to relevant Pennsylvania law.
(8) Subsection 106.6.2, Fee Schedule, shall be amended to read as
follows:
§ 5-7 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-7
2:274
The fees for all plumbing work, including permits, shall be as
indicated in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule (Chapter A29 of
the Whitehall Township Code), as amended from time to time.
A reinspection fee, may be charged per visit for failure to have
access to the job site, requesting an inspection on incomplete work
and repeat violation visits. These fees must be paid in full prior to
final inspection.
(9) Subsection 106.6.3, Fee Refunds, shall be deleted in its entirety.
(10) (Reserved)
(11) Subsection 108.4, Violation Penalties, shall be amended to read as
follows:
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect,
install, alter, modify or repair plumbing work in violation of this
ordinance, the approved construction documents or directive of
the code official, or of a permit, license or certificate issued under
the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a criminal offense,
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment
not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each
day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense.
(12) Subsection 108.5, Stop Work Orders, shall be revised to insert the
amounts of $500 and $1,000, respectively in the last sentence of
the paragraph.
(13) Subsection 109.1, Application for Appeal, shall be deleted and
instead shall reflect the provisions of the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code.
(14) Subsections 109.2 to 109.7, inclusive, shall be deleted in their
entireties and instead shall reflect the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
(15) Chapter 1, Administration, shall be amended to include the
following subsections:
111.0 Demolition of Structures.
111.1 Service connections. Before a structure is demolished
or removed, the owner or agent shall notify all utilities having
service connections within the structure, such as water, electric,
gas, sewer and other connections. A permit to demolish or remove
a structure shall not be issued until a release is obtained from
the utilities, stating that their respective service connection sand
appurtenant equipment, such as meters and regulators, have been
removed or sealed and plugged in an approved manner.
§ 5-7 ANIMALS § 5-7
2:275
111.2 Abandoned piping. Where laterals have been abandoned,
the house trap shall be removed, and the pipe hermetically sealed
by a cap or plug.
112.0 Supervision.
112.1 General. All plumbing work shall be conducted, installed
and completed in a workmanlike and approved manner to secure
the results intended by this code.
112.2 Supervision. Every person engaged in the business of
plumbing in the Township of Whitehall shall have a licensed
master or journeyman plumber on the job site for the entire period
of the plumbing installation. No laborers or apprentices shall be
permitted to perform plumbing work in the Township of Whitehall
without the supervision of a master or journeyman plumber on the
job site.
113.0 Licensing.
113.1 When license is required. It shall be unlawful for any
person, except a homeowner plumber as defined herein, to engage
in the practice or business of plumbing work within the Township
of Whitehall without first filing an application with the Township
and obtaining the required license therefor from the Department
of Operations, Bureau of Planning, Zoning and Development.
113.2 Form of application. The application for a license shall
be submitted on a form prepared and provided by the Township
and shall be accompanied by the required fee as established by
the Comprehensive Fee Schedule (Chapter A29) of the Township
Code.
113.3 Action on application. The Plumbers Examining Board
shall examine, or cause to be examined, all applications for
licenses within a reasonable time after filing. If the applicant
is deemed competent and qualified pursuant to the within
regulations and has successfully passed the examination given
by the Plumbers Examining Board, the Township shall issue a
license as soon as practicable. Any person who fails to pass the
examination required by this section may apply for re-examination
for the next examination period. Any individual whose license
has been revoked and is applying for a new license shall be reexamined
and shall pay all required fees.
113.4 Plumbers Examining Board; qualifications and
examination of applicants.
§ 5-7 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-7
2:276
113.4.1 The Plumbers Examining Board shall consist of three
individuals appointed by the Whitehall Township Board of
Commissioners. One member shall be appointed for one year
and one member shall be appointed for two years and one
member shall be appointed for three years. Thereafter, as the
terms of appointment of each of the original members of the
Board expires, their successors shall be appointed by the
Township Board of Commissioners for a term of three years.
Each member of the Examining Board shall, at a minimum,
possess a master plumber's license from either Whitehall
Township or another equivalent, tested municipality in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
113.4.2 Members of the Plumbers Examining Board shall,
within 30 days form the date of their appointment, meet
specially and organize, and shall elect from the members a
Chairman. The Board also shall elect a Secretary who need not
be a member of the Board. The Board shall meet as frequently
as is necessary for the proper and efficient discharge of its
business. Meetings shall be held upon 48 hours' written notice
to each member of the Board, setting the purpose of such
special meeting. Three members of the Board shall constitute
a quorum for the transaction for all business.
113.4.3 The Plumbers Examining Board shall formulate its
own rules and regulations for all examinations. Such rules
and regulations shall become effective immediately upon the
adoption by the Board and the approval of the Whitehall
Township Board of Commissioners.
113.4.4 The Plumbers Examining Board shall investigate all
applications for licenses and shall report to the Department of
Operations, Bureau Chief of the Bureau of Planning, Zoning
and Development, the results of all examinations which it shall
administer to applicants. The Board shall investigate and hear
all written complaints against holders of licenses and report
to the Bureau Chief its findings and recommendations. The
Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and hearings and
records of all its investigations and examinations of applicants
for licenses.
§ 5-7 ANIMALS § 5-7
2:277
113.4.5 Any applicant for a journeyman or master plumber
license shall be over the age of 21 years. At the time of
application, every applicant for a journeyman plumbers license
shall have had at least four years of practical experience in
the installation of drainage, waste, vent and water systems
with a registered master plumber or its equivalent. At the time
of application, every applicant for a master plumber's license
shall have had at least five years of practical experience in the
installation of drainage, water and vent and water systems with
registered master plumbers or its equivalent. In addition, every
applicant for a master plumber's license shall have had at least
one year of experience as a journey plumber.
113.4.6 Every application for a license shall be made in
writing on such form and shall furnish such information as the
Plumbers Examining Board may, from time to time, require.
Applications must be filed at least 45 days prior to the date of
examinations as hereafter provided.
113.4.7 Written or written and practical examinations shall
be prepared by the Board and administered by the Board to
applicants to test each applicant's knowledge of the provisions
of this code, this article and the work covered thereby, and no
license shall be issued unless the applicant obtains a passing
mark of at least 75% on his examination to entitle him to
a certificate or license. The same tests as referenced
hereinabove shall be administered to master plumbers.
113.5 Expiration; renewal. Every license issued hereunder shall
expire on the 31st day of January of the following year in which
the same was so issued. Every license issued hereunder may
be renewed by the licensee without further application or
examination, provided that the licensee tenders the required
renewal fee on or before the day the license is due to expire.
Renewal fees shall be established by the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule (Chapter A29 of Township Code), as amended from time
to time.
113.6 Change of Name or Address. The licensee shall notify
the Code Inspector and the Bureau of Planning, Zoning and
Development, in writing, of any change in the licensee's name
or business address. Any such changes shall be noted on the
licensee's license as well as upon the official records maintained
by the Code Inspector and the Bureau of Planning, Zoning and
Development.
§ 5-7 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-7
2:278
113.7 Reciprocity. The Township may, after the payment of the
required fee, issue a temporary license to a holder of a
substantially equivalent license from another jurisdiction within
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania without examination, provided
that the Township is satisfied that the standards and qualifications
of the other Pennsylvania jurisdiction are substantially equivalent
to those of Whitehall Township, in that the issuing municipality
must be a township of the First Class or greater in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All such temporary licenses are
subject to review by the Whitehall Township Plumbers
Examination Board.
113.8 Temporary license. The Township may issue a temporary
license to an individual who possesses a similar license from
another jurisdiction. The temporary license, once so issued, shall
be subject to the approval of the Plumbers Examination Board, and
shall be valid only for the calendar-year in which it was granted.
113.9 Transferability. No license or temporary license issued
hereunder shall be transferable. Any license or temporary license
so transferred shall be revoked.
113.10 Violations. No person not the holder of an appropriate
Whitehall Township plumbing license, nor a proprietorship,
partnership or corporation not employing a holder of an
appropriate license shall install, alter or repair any plumbing
system in or on any building. No person, partnership or
corporation shall cause any such work to be done by any person
not the holder of such license, nor by any proprietorship,
partnership or corporation not employing a holder of such license
shall also represent that he or it holds such Whitehall Township
plumbing license or shall use in any advertisement the word
"Whitehall Township master plumber," "Whitehall Township
journeyman plumber" or "Whitehall Township registered plumber"
or any words of similar meaning or imprint on any sign, card,
letterhead or in any manner.
113.11 Suspension or revocation. The Township, upon
recommendation by the Plumbers Examination Board, shall be
permitted to suspend for any length of time or revoke, for cause,
any license issued hereunder after a hearing has been held on the
same. The licensee or his agent shall be served at least five days
prior to the hearing and the reasons for the proposed suspension
or revocation. At such hearing, the licensee shall have the right
to present written or oral testimony, as well as cross-examine any
witnesses. All testimony shall be given under oath. The decision of
the Plumbers Examination Board shall be based upon the evidence
produced at the hearing and shall be made a part of the record
thereof. Any decision of the Examination Board shall be appealed
directly to the Lehigh County Court of Common Pleas.
§ 5-7 ANIMALS § 5-7
2:279
113.12 Voluntary suspension. The holder of any valid plumbers
license, as herein defined, may, upon written request to the
Plumbers Examination Board, surrender and have the Bureau
Chief of Planning, Zoning and Development hold said plumber's
license in voluntary suspension for a period of up to five years,
during which time the licensee may not perform any work which
would, under the provisions of this code, require the issuance
of a license. Upon proper application for return of the license
being held in voluntary suspension, the license shall be returned
to the licensee without examination, provided that the Plumbers
Examination Board is satisfied as to the licensee's continuing
fitness to engage in the work covered by said license.
(16) (Reserved)
(17) Subsection 305.4.1, Sewer Depth, insert "42 inches" for sewer
depth.
(18) Subsection 306.3, Backfilling, shall be deleted and instead the
provisions of the 2015 International Plumbing Code shall apply.
(19) Subsection 312.9, Inspection and Testing of Backflow Prevention
Assemblies, shall be deleted and the current provisions of the 2015
International Plumbing Code followed.
(20) Subsection 419.3, Surrounding Material, shall be deleted and
instead the provisions of the 2015 International Plumbing Code
shall be followed.
(21) Subsection 603, Water Service, shall be amended to include the
following subsections:
Subsection 603, Water Service, shall be amended to include the
following subsections:
603.3 Separate trench. All water service laterals shall be
installed in a different trench from any trench for building sewer
pipes, notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection 603.2.
603.4 Minimum depth and width. All water service lateral
pipes shall be installed at a minimum depth of 42 inches below
finished grade, and the trenches shall have a minimum width of 24
inches.
603.5 Undisturbed ground. All water service lateral pipes shall
be installed in a solid base of undisturbed ground, not on any fill
or compacted earth.
603.6 Type K, One Length/Minimum Couplings. When Type
K soft copper tubing is installed, it shall be in one continuous
length from the curbline to the building (or house) with no joints
or couplings, for all lengths up to 100 feet, the lengths of the
individual pieces of tubing shall be arranged to utilize the
minimum number of couplings.
§ 5-7 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-7
2:280
(22) Subsection 608.13, Backflow Protection, shall be amended to
include the following subsection:
608.13.11 Thermal expansion device required. Where
backflow preventers, check valves, water meters with check valves
or pressure-reducing valves are installed, approved thermal
expansion devices shall be required. The thermal expansion device
shall be installed in the cold-water line which supplies any water
heater between the backflow preventer, check valve, water meter
with check valves or pressure-reducing valve and the water
heater. Thermal expansion devices shall be installed as close to the
water heater as practical. The thermal expansion device shall be a
type, design or model acceptable to the Code Inspector.
(23) Subsection 608.16.5, Connections to Lawn Irrigation Systems,
shall be amended to include the following:
The terms, conditions and provisions of this code and this article
(except as set forth in the immediately preceding three sentences)
shall not be applicable to lawn irrigation systems. Lawn irrigation
systems are not considered to be plumbing systems, plumbing
fixtures, water supply and distribution systems or individual water
supply systems. For purposes of this section, the phrase "lawn
irrigation" shall mean any water distribution used exclusively for
the watering of plants (of all types) and flowers or systems to
supply water to ornamental landscaping fixtures (such as water
fountains or pools, including lawn or plant watering devices, but
not swimming pools). The terms, conditions and provisions of
this code and this article shall be followed with respect to those
portions of the lawn irrigation system that extend from the interior
of a structure through the walls of such structure and immediately
to the other side thereof. It is the intent of this subsection that the
terms, conditions and provisions of this code and article for lawn
irrigation systems shall be complied with for all fixtures or devices
needed to provide water to the outside of the structure.
(24) Subsection 701.1, Scope, shall be amended to include the following
subsections:
701.1.1. Except as otherwise set forth in this chapter, the water
distribution and drainage system of any structure in which
plumbing fixtures are installed shall be connected to a public
water main and sewer, respectively, where available. Where a
public water main is not available, a private sewage disposal
system that conforms to the International Private Sewage Disposal
Code shall be provided.
(25) Subsection 701.2, Sewer Required, shall be amended to include the
following subsections:
§ 5-7 ANIMALS § 5-7
2:281
701.9 Installation of sewer laterals. All sewer laterals from the
curb to the house shall consist of not less than four-inch PVC or
ABS Schedule 40 plastic pipe or four-inch service weight cast-iron
pipe and shall be installed on a six-inch base of 2A modified stone
and covered with 12 inches of modified stone before backfilling.
701.10 Drainage. Whenever a consulting engineer and/or the
Township Engineer determines that an underground sanitary
sewer line shall be installed on the outside of a structure or
building, and the same shall either be eight inches in diameter or
larger, or manholes are required by this code, or whenever the
same is required by this code, the plumber shall obtain a permit
from the Township, and shall install such line in compliance with
the applicable rules and regulations as promulgated by the Coplay
Whitehall Sewer Authority (hereinafter referred to as "Authority")
and then in effect. The owner shall, as and when required by the
Authority, enter into improvements agreements with the Authority
to ensure proper construction of the line. Whenever this is
applicable, the owner shall permit the Authority to inspect all
labor work or materials performed or used and the site to ensure
compliance with the Authority's rules and regulations.
(26) Table 702.1, Above Ground Drainage and Vent Pipe, shall be
deleted and instead the provisions of the 2015 International
Plumbing Code shall apply.
(27) Subsection 702.2, Underground Building Sanitary Drainage and
Vent Pipe, shall be amended to include the following sentence:
"No-Hub pipe shall not be used for any underground installation."
(28) Table 702.2, Underground Building Drainage and Vent Pipe, shall
be deleted and instead the provisions of the 2015 International
Plumbing Code shall apply.
(29) Subsection 702.3, Building Sewer Pipe, shall be amended to
include the following sentence:
"No-Hub pipe shall not be used for any underground installation."
(30) Table 702.3, Building Sewer Pipe, shall be deleted and instead the
provisions of the 2015 International Plumbing Code shall apply.
(31) Subsection 708.3.1, Horizontal Drains Within Buildings, shall be
deleted and instead the provisions of the 2015 International
Plumbing Code shall apply.
(32) Subsection 708.3.2, Building Sewers, shall be deleted and instead
the provisions of the 2015 International Plumbing Code shall apply.
§ 5-7 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-7
2:282
(33) Subsection 708.8, Pipes Eight Inches (203mm) and Larger Nominal
Size, shall be deleted and instead the provisions of the 2015
International Plumbing Code shall apply.
(34) Subsection 712, Sumps and Ejectors, shall be deleted in its entirety
and be replaced with the following:
712.1 Application. The pressure sewer system shall be
considered an alternative means for the collection of wastewaters
from residential, commercial and industrial establishments within
the Township. Pressure sewers shall not be considered a
replacement for a conventional gravity sewer, except where
gravity sewers are not feasible. A pressure sewer system may
be approved by the Township for construction and use under the
following conditions:
712.1.1. Where the proposed building cannot be served by a
conventional gravity sewer lateral to an existing gravity system
due to the topography, unsuitable subsurface conditions or other
conditions.
712.1.2. If the first floor(s) of a building and/or a substantial
portion (30%+) of a building can be served by gravity flow to
the sanitary sewerage conveyance system, that portion of the
building shall be sewered by gravity to minimize the use of
pressure sewer systems and pumping flows. Rock excavation
and/or additional plumbing/piping costs are not considered
enough reason to waive or exempt the partial building gravity
sewer service requirement.
712.2. Design Criteria. Criteria for the design of a pressure
sewer system, including grinder pump units, or centrifugal pump
units, shall be in accord with current standards of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and
recommendations of the pump manufacturer. The following
requirements shall also apply to the design of pressure sewers:
712.2.1, Piping.
712.2.1.1. Sizing of piping for low-pressure sewers shall be
determined according to the projected peak flow and have
two-inch minimum diameter for the pressure lateral.
712.2.1.2. Pressure sewer pipe inside diameter shall be sized
in accordance with Subsection 712.2 hereof. Minimum
required pipe size shall be determined to maintain low
frictional losses and a minimum scouring velocity of two feet
per second at all points in the piping network. A "C" value
of 140 shall be used in the Hazen Williams formula for
calculating frictional losses in plastic pipe pressure sewer
systems. All piping in pressure sewer systems shall be
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) Schedule 40 with solvent weld joints.
The pipe shall be pressure rated at 280 psi.
§ 5-7 ANIMALS § 5-7
2:283
712.2.1.3. Layout and configuration of pressure sewer
laterals shall avoid abrupt changes in horizontal alignment;
all bends shall be 45° or less and the use of 90° bends is
prohibited.
712.2.1.4. A plan view of the entire pressure sewer system
shall be prepared to indicate the location and direction of
flow for each lateral and the point of discharge to the nearest
gravity sewer. Profile drawings shall be provided to show the
elevation of all mains and pumps and sufficient information
shall be provided to demonstrate the adequacy of the grander
and/or centrifugal pumps under design flow and pressure
conditions within the system.
712.2.1.5. Cleanouts (details referenced hereinafter) shall
be provided at distances not to exceed 400 feet and at the
pressure to gravity lateral connection point.
712.2.1.6. Lateral shut off valves shall be provided at
distances not to exceed 400 feet. Lateral shut off valves shall
be true-union ball valves as specified by the Code Inspector.
712.2.1.7. Combination air and vacuum release valves shall
be provided at appropriate locations to prevent formation of
air pockets and a vacuum from developing within the system.
Combination air and vacuum release valves shall be APCO
Series 400 Sewage Air and Vacuum Valves or approved equal.
Pressure sewers shall be constructed on a gradual slope
approximately parallel with the slope of the ground surface to
prevent air binding and flow restrictions.
712.2.1.8. A reducer fitting shall be provided in the pressure
sewer lateral for connection of the pressure lateral to the
gravity lateral and a four-inch diameter cleanout provided on
the gravity lateral at this connection point as indicated on the
Typical Pressure Sewer Lateral and House Drain Connection
Detail. The length of pressure sewer lateral shall be
minimized as much as possible by continuing the four-inch to
six-inch gravity lateral into the lot until it cannot meet the
minimum forty-two-inch cover requirement. In no case shall
the pressure lateral extend beyond the curbline or edge of a
Coplay Whitehall Sewer Authority easement.
712.2.2, Grinder pump units.
§ 5-7 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-7
2:284
712.2.2.1. The minimum net storage capacity of the sewage
collection tank containing the grinder pump shall be 100
gallons for each equivalent dwelling unit. The collection tank
shall be adequately sized to accommodate normal peak
sewage flows and emergency storage from the volume during
an eight-hour power failure. In multi-unit dwellings,
commercial and industrial establishments, where the sewage
volume generated is substantially larger than for a singlefamily
residence, an emergency drain from the collection tank
to a holding tank shall be required for use during an extended
power failure longer than eight hours. Duplex pump units
shall be provided in all facilities with an estimated average
sewage volume greater than 1,000 gallons per day.
712.2.2.2. Check and shutoff valves shall be provided to
isolate the grinder pump from the pressurized house drain,
lateral and main sewer. Where duplex grinder pumps are
installed, separate check and shutoff valves are required for
each pump. Check valves shall be approved swing or flapper
type. A duplicate check valve shall be installed in the grinder
pump discharge piping or in the pressurized house drain at
an approved location.
712.2.2.3. A high-level detection device with visual and
audible alarms shall be furnished on each wastewater
collection tank unit.
712.2.2.4. Grinder pumps shall be capable of reducing the
wastewater solid material to such size that the material will
pass through the pump, pressurized house drain, lateral and
main sewer without clogging or causing a blockage.
712.2.2.5. Grinder pumps and sewage collection tanks shall
be installed outside the building and shall be accessible from
above ground to permit maintenance and repair and must be
designed to allow removal of the pumps without de-watering
the collection tank. An exemption to this outside installation
requirement may be permitted in the case of an ancillary
bathroom facility that requires pumping (such as a second
bathroom in a home basement) where the main building
facilities have gravity sewage flow service.
712.2.2.6. Grinder pumps shall be free from electrical and
fire hazards; evidence of compliance with this requirement
shall be indicated by the completely assembled pump being
listed by the Underwriters' Laboratories or another national
testing service.
§ 5-7 ANIMALS § 5-7
2:285
712.2.2.7. Grinder pump installations shall meet accepted
standards for plumbing equipment, shall be free from noise,
odors or health hazards and the pumps shall have been tested
by an independent laboratory to certify the capabilities of the
equipment to function in pressure sewer system applications.
The grinder pump and collection tank, when furnished
together as a unit, shall bear the seal of approval of the
National Sanitation Foundation as evidence of compliance
with this requirement. The manufacturer of the grinder pump
unit shall be experienced in the design and manufacture of
equipment for specific use in pressure sewer systems.
Detailed information published by the grinder pump
manufacturer shall be submitted to verify compliance with
this requirement.
712.2.3, Centrifugal pumps.
712.2.3.1. As an alternative to using the grinder pump, a
centrifugal pump may be approved for use in conjunction with
a collection tank of sufficient size to accommodate projected
normal peak flows.
712.2.3.1. All conditions applicable to grinder pump units as
stated in Subsection 712.2.2 shall also apply to centrifugal
pumps.
712.3. Testing of lower-pressure sewer pipe. For normal
working pressure of 35 psi or less, the piping shall be tested using
static pressure test of 60 psi for two hours.
712.4, Ownership, operation and maintenance. Grinder
pumps or centrifugal pumps, including the collection tank, valves,
piping and appurtenances, and the pressurized or gravity house
drain to the curb, curbline or an easement shall be owned,
maintained and operated by the individual, private concern or
owner of the property served by the public sewer system. The
gravity lateral and mains within the street's cartway up to the
curbline or easement shall be owned, operated and maintained by
the Township or the Authority unless otherwise determined by the
Township or the Authority.
712.5, Construction specification and details. Pressure sewer
systems shall be constructed in accordance with the approved
specifications and detail drawings of the Township as attached
hereto as Drawings 712.5.1, 712.5.2 and 712.5.3. All applicable
sections of these specifications for construction of sanitary sewer
shall be considered a part hereof.
(35) Subsection 802.1.2, Floor Drains in Food Storage Areas, shall be
deleted in its entirety.
(36) Subsection 901.2.1, Venting Required, shall be amended to read as
follows:
§ 5-7 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-7
2:286
§ 5-8. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of this article hereby adopted, insofar as they are the same
as those ordinances and/or codes in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this article, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and codes, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this article or in the
Plumbing Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability
incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any
act or ordinance repealed hereby, nor shall any just or legal right of remedy
of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
Every trap and trapped fixture shall be provided with an individual
vent located not more than two feet from said trap, except as
otherwise provided for in this chapter. Wet vents will be permitted
in Whitehall Township only when approved by the Township.
(37) Subsection 903.1, Roof Extension, insert six inches for "number."
(38) Subsection 1002.6, Building Traps, shall be deleted and instead the
provisions of the 2015 International Plumbing Code shall apply.
(39) Subsection 1003.1.1, Grease Traps and Grease Interceptors
Required, shall be amended to read as follows:
Grease interceptors shall be required in all restaurants, hotel
kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias, clubs and other similar
establishments. Food waste grinders shall not discharge into the
building drainage system through a grease interceptor.
(40) Subsection 1102.4, Building Storm Sewer Pipe, shall be amended
to include the following sentence:
"No-Hub pipe shall not be used for any underground installation."
(41) Table 1102.4, Building Storm Sewer Pipe, shall be deleted and
instead the provisions of the 2015 International Plumbing Code
shall apply.
(42) Subsection 1102.5, Subsoil Drain Pipe, shall be amended to include
the following sentence:
"No-Hub pipe shall not be used for any underground installation."
(43) Table 1102.4, Subsoil Drain Pipe, shall be deleted and instead the
provisions of the 2015 International Plumbing Code shall apply.
(44) Table 1102.7, Pipe Fittings, shall be deleted and instead the
provisions of the 2015 International Plumbing Code shall apply.
§ 5-7 ANIMALS § 5-8
2:287

ARTICLE III
ICC Electrical Code
[Adopted 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2441]
§ 5-9. Adoption of the 2000 International Construction Code —
Electrical Code/Administrative Provisions. [Amended 6-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
The 2000 International Construction Code — Electrical Code,
Administrative Provision, is hereby adopted, incorporated by reference,
and enacted as an ordinance of the Township of Whitehall, as set forth
herein with the following deletions, additions, and/or changes, and shall be
referred to as the "code." Copies of the code and of this article are filed in
and available for inspection at the Offices of the Mayor and the Department
of Planning, Zoning and Development during normal business hours.
§ 5-10. Amendments, revisions and deletions.
The ICC Electrical Code 2000, Administrative Provisions, shall be amended
as follows:
A. The following sections and subsections shall be added to Chapter 1,
Scope, as set forth herein.
(1) Section 101, Subsection 101.1, Title, "Whitehall Township" shall be
inserted in [Name of Jurisdiction].
(2) Section 102.6, Referenced Codes and Standards, shall be amended
to include the following subsection:
102.6.1. Department of labor and industry. Whenever any
provision or requirement of the regulations of the Department
of Labor and Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania are
more stringent or strict than a provision or requirement of this
code, the applicable provision or requirement of the regulations of
the Department of Labor and Industry shall supersede this code.
(3) Section 102.1.3, Additions, Alterations and Repairs, shall be
amended to include the following subsection:
102.9. Responsibility. The owner of any building or structure
shall be responsible for the safety and maintenance of the
electrical system and/or equipment of said building or structure at
all times. Any electrician, electrical contractor or installer shall be
jointly and severally responsible with the owner for the safety and
maintenance of any electrical installation or modification.
(4) Chapter 2, Definitions, Subsection 202, General Definitions: the
definition of "Code Official" shall be amended to read as follows:
§ 5-9 ANIMALS § 5-10
2:289
CODE OFFICIAL — The officer or other designated authority
charged by the Township of Whitehall with the administration
and enforcement of this code, or a duly authorized representative
of the Township of Whitehall. code official, for the provisions
contained herein, shall include the "Electrical Inspector" and
"Code Enforcement Officer," and all references herein to "Code
Official", "Electrical Inspector" or "Code Enforcement Officer"
shall mean the same individual or entity.
(5) Chapter 3, Organization and Enforcement, Subsection 301.1,
Creation of Enforcement Agency, shall be amended to read as
follows:
301.1. The position of Electrical Inspector is hereby created,
and such individual is hereby designated a Code Enforcement
Officer for the purposes hereof. The Electrical Inspector is hereby
empowered to issue citations to enforce the provisions of this
code.
(6) Subsection 301.2, Appointment, shall be amended to read as
follows:
301.2. Appointment. The Electrical Inspector shall be appointed
by the Mayor. The conditions of said appointment and the
compensation to be paid shall be established from time to time by
the Township Board of Commissioners by Resolution. [Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(7) Section 302.4, Notices and Orders, shall be amended to read as
follows:
302.4. Notices and orders. The Code Official is authorized to
issue all necessary notices or orders in accordance with Chapter
10 as are required to effect compliance with this code. The
Electrical Inspector shall issue all necessary notices or orders
to: remove illegal or unsafe conditions; require the necessary
safeguards during construction; ensure compliance with all the
code requirements for the safety, health and general welfare of
the public; and issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure
compliance with this code.
(8) Section 302.5 Inspections, shall be amended to read as follows:
§ 5-10 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-10
2:290
302.5. Inspections. The Code Official shall make all of the
inspections necessary to determine compliance with the
provisions of this code in accordance with Chapter 7. The
Electrical Inspector shall make all required inspections or, subject
to approval by the Mayor, accept reports of inspection of approved
agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be
in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such approved
agencies or by the responsible individuals. The Electrical
Inspector is authorized to engage such experts as may be deemed
necessary to report upon unusual technical issues which may
arise, subject to the approval of the Mayor. [Amended 6-8-2009
by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(9) Section 302.8, Department Records, shall be amended to read as
follows:
302.8. Department records. The Code Official shall keep official
records of applications received, permits and certificates issued,
fees collected, reports of inspections notices and orders issued,
and, as required by this code, such records shall be retained in
the official records of the Township of Whitehall for the period
required for retention of public records. Such records shall be
retained in the offices of the Bureau of Planning, Zoning and
Development.
(10) Subsection 302.8.4 shall be added to read as follows:
302.8.4. Annual report. At least annually, the Electrical
Inspector shall submit to the Mayor a written statement of
operations in form and content as shall be prescribed by the
Mayor. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
(11) Chapter 4, Permits and Fees, Subsection 401.1, Permits Required,
shall be amended as follows:
401.1.1. Permits required. A permit shall be required for all
new or altered services, new construction, additions, alterations,
repairs, or all other work, except that no permit shall be required
where the fair market value of the proposed work, as estimated
by the Electrical Inspector, is less than $100. Electrical work
requiring the issuance of a permit shall not be commenced until a
permit for such work has been issued by the Electrical Inspector.
(12) Subsection 401.2.1 shall be added, to read as follows:
§ 5-10 ANIMALS § 5-10
2:291
401.2.1. Annual electrical permit. The annual electrical permit
is required of commercial and industrial manufacturing facilities
only. For the scheduled fee, the property owner may secure an
annual electrical permit to cover necessary maintenance related
electrical work. A log must be kept of all work done and must
be available for regular inspection and review by the Electrical
Inspector. The Electrical Inspector reserves the right to determine
what is considered "minor" electrical maintenance work, and may
require additional permits as necessary if, in his determination,
the work exceeds the scope of the annual permit. Said log shall
include the date of the work, the location of the work, the name of
the installer, and a general description of the work.
(13) Section 402, Application, shall be amended by adding the following
subsections:
402.2.1. Form of application. Application for a permit for
electrical work shall be made on forms prepared and provided by
the Township, shall be accompanied by an adequate description of
the proposed electrical work, and the required fee.
402.2.2. By whom application is made. Application for a permit
shall be made by the contractor or his agent. If no contractor
is involved, then and only then may the owner or lessee apply
for an electrical permit. If work is commenced by a contractor
or his agent without first applying for a permit, said contractor's
Township business license shall be subject to revocation.
402.2.3. Description of work. The applicant shall provide, in
writing, the location of the work, the use and occupancy of the
building in which the work is proposed, and any additional
information as may required by the Electrical Inspector.
402.2.4. Plans and specifications. The Electrical Inspector may
require the submission and approval of plans and specifications
in duplicate showing the nature and extent of the proposed work
before a permit is issued. If, in the course of the work, it is
necessary to make any changes in the approved plans and
specifications for which a permit has been issued, amended plans
and specifications shall be submitted, and if approved, a
supplementary permit (detailing the changes) shall be issued upon
payment of the appropriate fees.
402.2.5. Engineering details. The Electrical Inspector may
require adequate details of the proposed work, including
computations and other technical data, to be filed.
402.2.6. Amendments. Subject to the limitations of Subsection
402.2.4 hereof, amendments of a plan, application, or other
records accompanying the same shall be filed at any time before
the completion of the work for which the permit is issued; and
such amendments shall be deemed part of the original application
and shall be filed therewith.
§ 5-10 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-10
2:292
402.2.7. Time limit. An application for a permit for any proposed
work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 90 days after
the date of filing, unless such application has been diligently
prosecuted or a permit shall have been issued; except that for
reasonable cause, the Electrical Inspector may grant one or more
extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days
each.
(14) Section 402.3, Action on Application, shall be amended to read as
follows:
402.3. Action on application. The Electrical Inspector shall
examine or cause to be examined all applications for permits and
amendments thereto within four working days after filing. If the
application or the plans do not conform to the requirements of
all pertinent statutes, ordinances and regulations, the Electrical
Inspector shall reject the application and, in writing, state the
reasons therefor. If the Electrical Inspector is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and
all laws and regulations applicable thereto, a permit shall be
issued therefor as soon as practicable. An electrical permit is not
transferable.
(15) Chapter 11, Means of Appeal, shall be deleted in its entirety, and
shall be replaced by the following section:
1101. Appeals. Any appeal from any decision or action by the
Electrical Inspector shall be heard by the Whitehall Township
Building Code Board of Appeals in accordance with the
procedures now or hereafter established by the Township under
the provisions of the Whitehall Township Building Code. The
Building Code Board of Appeals shall determine whether this code
or the rules promulgated hereunder, if any, have been correctly
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an
equivalent method of construction or materials is to be used.
(16) Section 404, fees, Subsection 404.2, shall be amended to read as
follows:
404.2. Schedule of permit fees. A fee for each permit shall be
paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established
by the Township. The fees for electrical work shall be as indicated
in Appendix M53 of the Code of Whitehall Township.
(17) Subsection 702.1.6, Final Inspection, shall be amended to read as
follows:
53.Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 5-10 ANIMALS § 5-10
2:293
702.1.6. Final inspection. The final inspection by the Electrical
Inspector shall be made after all work required by the permit
is completed. Upon the request of the holder of a permit, the
Electrical Inspector may issue a temporary authorization to
occupy a premises before the entire work covered by the permit
shall have been completed, provided such portion or portions may
be put into service safely prior to full completion of the building or
structure without endangering health or public welfare.
(18) Subsection 1003.1, Penalties, shall be amended to read as follows:
1003.1. Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of
this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair equipment
or systems in violation of the approved construction documents, a
directive of the Code Official (Electrical Inspector) of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall be guilty
of a criminal offense, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000,
or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. Upon
judgment against any person by summary conviction or by
proceedings by summons, on default of the payment of the fine
or penalty imposed by said judgment and the costs, the defendant
may be sentenced and committed to the Township lockup for a
period not exceeding five days or to the County jail or workhouse
for a period not exceeding 30 days.
(19) Chapter 12, Electrical Provisions, Section 1203, Existing Electrical
Facilities, shall be amended to include the following subsections:
[Amended 6-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2904]
1203.2. Update requirements. The following will be required
when updating/moving or repairing an electrical service:
a. A minimum of two receptacles per room. All unapproved
receptacles in the floor shall be removed.
b. A minimum of one 20 amp receptacle will be required in the
laundry room.
c. A minimum of two 20 amp branch circuits will be required in
the kitchen for receptacles.
d. A minimum of one switch able light or receptacle per room.
e. Exposed basement wiring shall be updated to conform to
minimum standards as prescribed in the code, if, in the
opinion of the Electrical Inspector, an unsafe condition exists.
This includes the removal of "knob and tube" wiring that is
taped or spliced located in the basement through or below
joists.
f. (Reserved)
§ 5-10 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-10
2:294
§ 5-11. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of this article and of the code hereby adopted, insofar as
they are the same as those ordinances and/or codes in force immediately
prior to the enactment of this article, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and codes and not as new enactments. Any code or ordinance
or part of any code or ordinance in conflict with this code and this article
is hereby repealed. The provisions of this article and of the Code hereby
adopted shall not be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in
any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause or causes
of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed;
nor shall any just or legal right or remedy or any character be lost, impaired
or affected by this code or this article.
g. All other wiring must be corrected to meet wiring
specifications contained in this code.
1203.3. General (commercial). Upon update, repair or moving
of electrical service in any commercial (not industrial) facility,
the entire electrical system of the facility shall satisfy all of the
provisions of this code and article.
(20) Chapter 12, Electrical Provisions, Section 1202 Provisions, shall be
amended to include the following subsections:
1202.15. Exit and emergency lighting. All exit and emergency
lighting shall be dual voltage or be backed up by an emergency
generator.
1202.16. Grounding electrode conductor material. The
material for grounding conductors shall be copper; Aluminum
or copper-clad aluminum grounding conductors shall not be
permitted.
1202.17. Metal underground water pipe. A metal underground
water pipe shall be supplemented by an additional electrode of a
type specified in Section 3508.2 and shall have a protective cap
installed on the above ground end.
§ 5-10 ANIMALS § 5-11
2:295

ARTICLE IV
Mechanical Code
[Adopted 10-14-1996 by Ord. No. 2001; amended in its entirety
2-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2358]
§ 5-12. Adoption of Mechanical Code. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
The Township of Whitehall hereby adopts the International Mechanical
Code, 2000 (hereafter referred to as "code"), with certain additions,
amendments, deletions and insertions as hereinafter set forth. Copies of
the code and of this article are filed in the office of the Mayor and the
Department of Operations. The code and this article shall collectively be
considered and referred to as the "code" both herein and in the code.
§ 5-13. Insertion.
Subsection 101.1, Title, second line, insert at space indicated for "name of
jurisdiction," the following: Township of Whitehall.
§ 5-14. Additions, amendments and changes. [Amended 8-8-2005 by
Ord. No. 2578]
A. The following additions, amendments and changes shall be made as
indicated:
(1) Subsection 106.5.2, Fee Schedule, shall be amended to read as
follows:
The fees for all mechanical work, including permits and periodic
inspections shall be as indicated in the comprehensive fee
schedule,54 as found in the Whitehall Township Code, as amended
from time to time.
(2) Subsection 106.5.3, Fee Refunds, shall be deleted in its entirety.
(3) Subsection 108.4, Violation Penalties, shall be amended to read as
follows:
54.Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 5-12 ANIMALS § 5-14
2:297
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall
fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, construct, alter or repair mechanical equipment or systems
in violation of the approved construction documents or directive
of the Code Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under
the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a criminal offense,
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment
not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Upon judgment against any person by summary conviction or by
proceedings by summons, on default of the payment of the fine
or penalty imposed by said judgment and the costs, the defendant
may be sentenced and committed to the Township lockup for a
period not exceeding five days or to the County jail or workhouse
for a period not exceeding 30 days.
(4) Subsection 108.5, Unlawful Continuance, the last sentence thereof,
shall be amended to read as follows:
Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure
after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work
as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than $500 or
more than $1,000. Each day that a violation continues after notice
has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(5) Subsection 109.1, Application for Appeal, shall be amended to
read:
109.1. Appeal Procedure. Any appeal from any decision of
the Mechanical Code Official shall be heard by the Whitehall
Township Building Code Board of Appeals pursuant to and
consistent with the practices and procedures established for or
by such Board. An application for appeal shall be based on the
claim that the true intent of this code or ordinance or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted,
the provisions of this code or ordinance do not fully apply or
an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The
application for appeal shall be filed on a form obtained from
the Department of Operations Bureau of Development within 20
days after the decision of the Mechanical Code official or within
20 days after the notice was served.
§ 5-14 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-14
2:298
ARTICLE V
Property Maintenance Code
[Adopted 10-14-1996 by Ord. No. 2002; amended in its entirety
2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2852]
§ 5-15. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code.
The Township of Whitehall hereby adopts the International Property
Maintenance Code/2009 (hereinafter referred to as "code"), with certain
additions, amendments, deletions and insertions as hereinafter set forth.
Copies of the code and of this article are filed in the Office of the Township.
The code and this article shall collectively be considered and referred to as
the "code" both herein and in the code.
§ 5-16. Insertions, additions and deletions.
A. The following insertions shall be made in the code at the places
hereinafter indicated:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, shall be amended to read:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Property
Maintenance Code of Whitehall Township," hereinafter referred to
as "this code."
(2) Section 103.5, Fees, and Section 112.4, Failure to comply, shall be
amended to read:
103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the
Department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code
shall be as indicated in the Whitehall Township Fee Schedule,55 as
amended from time to time.
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any
work after having been served with a stop-work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $300 or
more than $1,000.
112.4.1 Placard Removal. Only the Code Official, or his
designee, may remove any placard which has been posted under
authority of this code, whenever the defect or defects upon which
the placarding action was based have been eliminated. Any person
who conceals, covers, hides, defaces or removes a placard without
the approval of the Code Official shall be subject to the penalties
provided by this code.
(3) Section 111, Means of Appeal, shall be amended to read as follows:
55.Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 5-15 ANIMALS § 5-16
2:299
111. Means of Appeal.
111.1 Application for appeal. Any person affected by a decision
of the Code Official by notice or order issued under this code shall
have the right to appeal to the Whitehall Township Building Code
Board of Appeals pursuant to and consistent with the practices
and procedures established for or by such Board. An application
for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
code or ordinance or the rules legally adopted thereunder have
been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code or
ordinance do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code
or ordinance are adequately satisfied by other means. The
application shall be filed on a form obtained from the Department
of Operations within 20 days after the decision of the Code Official
or 20 days after the notice was served.
(4) Sections 111.2 and 112.3 shall be deleted in their entireties.
(5) Section 106.4, Violation penalties, shall be amended to read:
106.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any
of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a criminal offense,
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment
not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each
day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense. Furthermore, pursuant to
Pennsylvania Act 70 of 1998, after the fourth or subsequent
violation of this code for the same subsection for the same
property, and this violation has been continual and uncorrected;
and the violation poses a threat to the public's health, safety
or property; and no reasonable attempt has been made by the
person to correct the violation, would, upon conviction, result in a
misdemeanor of the second degree and may result in fines of up to
$5,000 and/or imprisonment of up to two years. Five or more such
convictions would constitute a misdemeanor of the first degree
and, upon conviction, may result in fines of up to $10,000 and/
or imprisonment of up to five years. In addition, all provisions of
Pennsylvania Act 90 of 2010 will be enforced, (Exhibit C56).
(6) Section 302.4, Weeds, shall be amended to read:
56.Editor's Note: Exhibit C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 5-16 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-16
2:300
302.4 Weeds.
302.4.1 Definition. The term "weeds," as used in this part, shall
be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, and any
uncultivated plant or vegetable growth which is injurious to
health, diffuses obnoxious or commonly offensive odors, diffuses
pollen in such amount as is unhealthful to persons with serious
allergies, is a threat to agriculture, is recognized as an invasive
species (exotic or native), or is otherwise offensive to the health,
safety, or welfare of the community. It shall include any vegetation
that conceals or creates any unsanitary condition.
(1) It also includes, but is not limited to, plants listed under
Section 3(b) of the Pennsylvania Noxious Weed Control Law [3
P.S. § 255.3(b)]:
Scientific Name Common Name
Cannabis sativa Marijuana
Lythrum salicaria
Complex
Any nonnative Lythrum including,
Lythrum salicaria and Lythrum
virgatum, their cultivars and any
combination thereof
Cirsium arvense Canadian thistle
Rosa multiflora Multiflora rose
Sorghum halepense Johnson grass
Carduus nutans Musk thistle
Cirsium vulgare Bull thistle
Datura stramonium Jimson weed
Polygonum perfoliatum Mile-a-minute
Puerria lobate Kudzuvine
Sorghum bicolor cv.
drummondii
Shattercane
Heracleum
mantegazzianum
Giant hogweed
Galega officinalis Goatsrue
(2) It also includes, but is not limited to, plants considered
serious threats in Pennsylvania by the Pennsylvania
Department of Conservation and Natural Resources (DCNR):
Scientific Name Common Name
Alliaria petiolata Garlic mustard
Carduus nutans Musk thistle
Cirsium arvense Canada thistle
Cirsium vulgare Bull thistle
§ 5-16 ANIMALS § 5-16
2:301
Scientific Name Common Name
Datum stramonium Jimsonweed
Galega officinalis Goatsrue
Heracleum
mantegazzianum
Giant hogweed
Lythrum salicaria, L.
virgatum
Purple loosestrife
Microstegium vimineum Japanese stilt grass
Phragmites australis Common reed
Polygonum (Falopia)
cuspidatum
Japanese knotweed
Sorghum bicolor spp.
drummondii
Shattercane
Sorghum halepense Johnson grass
Elaeagnus umbellata Autumn olive
Lonicera maackii Amur honeysuckle
Lonicera morrowii Morrow's honeysuckle
Lonicera standishii Standish honeysuckle
Lonicera tartarica Tartarian honeysuckle
Rosa multiflora Multiflora rose
Acer platanoides Norway maple
Ailanthus altissima Tree-of-heaven
Celastrus orbiculatus Oriental bittersweet
Lonicera japonica Japanese honeysuckle
Polygonum perfoliatum Mile-a-minute vine
Pueraria lobate Kudzu
(Source: http://www.dcnr.state.pa.us/forestry/wildplant/
serious.aspx)
(3) This term "weeds" shall not include:
(a) Any cultivated flowers and gardens, including, but not
limited to, native plantings used for aesthetic and/or
wildlife promotion, to attract and aid wildlife, and/or to
offset and control any soil loss problems, either occurring
or predicted.
(b) Any growth naturally occurring within the limits of an
identified floodplain (as delineated on the FEMA Flood
Maps) and not listed above.
§ 5-16 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-16
2:302
(c) Wetlands or other riparian area, which will be defined
as any area of trees, shrubs, or other vegetation along
rivers, streams, lakes, or other water bodies that form a
transition between land and water environments (also as
officially designated).
(d) Any areas designated and recognized officially by the
Township as recreation or conservation areas.
(e) Any areas designated and officially recognized by the
Township as "woodland."
302.4.2 Weeds unlawful and a nuisance under certain
conditions. No person owning or holding any real estate within
the Township shall permit noxious weeds or other undesirable
vegetation as defined in this code to grow thereon to a height in
excess of 15 inches or to mature their seed thereon, or fail to
cut such growth when notified by the Township to do so. Such
growth of weeds or other undesirable vegetation is declared to be
a nuisance injurious to the public health, safety and welfare. In
such cases where real estate exists within the Township which is
undeveloped, or is subject to growth of weeds, and is in an area
greater than 217,000 square feet (five acres), weeds on such real
estate shall be cut or destroyed within an area no less than 100
feet from all boundaries of such property, where such property
abuts developed parcels. In addition, such growth shall be cut or
destroyed within an area no less than 50 feet from all boundaries
of such property, where such property abuts a public right-of-way.
302.4.2.1 All weeds and noxious growth, as defined herein,
shall not encroach into the right of way. All such growth shall
be maintained pursuant to this section up to the edge of the
paved road surface, whether curbed or not. In addition, no
shrubbery or similar growth shall encroach into the right of
way, which includes sidewalk area.
302.4.3 Township to cut or destroy weeds at expense of
defaulting property owner. Should any person refuse, neglect
or fail to comply with any of the terms or provisions and
requirements of this article or with any notice given in conformity
with or pursuant to the provisions hereof, the Township of
Whitehall shall, through its own agents, contractors and/or
employees cause said weeds or other undesirable vegetation to be
cut or destroyed, together with any clean up work to be required.
The cost and expense thereof including, but not limited to:
—Administrations and supervision,
—Transportation and equipment,
—Equipment rental,
—Equipment operator,
—Incidental labor,
§ 5-16 ANIMALS § 5-16
2:303
—Filing fees and associated costs,
shall be certified to the Township Solicitor, who shall enter the
same as a lien against the property in the Lehigh County
Prothonotary's Office and shall proceed to collect the same in like
manner as other municipal claims are by law collectible. An action
of assumpsit may be brought to recover the same in the name of
the Township from the owner.
(7) Section 302.8, Motor Vehicles, shall be amended to read:
[Amended 10-9-2017 by Ord. No. 3095]
302.8 Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other
regulations, not more than one currently unregistered or
uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any
premises, provided that said vehicle shall be completely covered
with an opaque tarpaulin, and no vehicle shall at any time be in
a state of major disassembly, disrepair or in the process of being
stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless
conducted inside an approved spray booth. No vehicle shall be
stored in the grass area of any lawn or parked on an unimproved
surface for a period exceeding 48 hours.
(8) The following section shall be added to the code:
302.10 Vector control.
302.10.1 Definitions. The following terms shall have the
following definitions when used in conjunction with the
enforcement of this section:
BREEDING AREA — Any condition that provides the necessary
environment for the birth or hatching of vectors.
COLLECTION of WATER — Contained in ditches, pools (all
types), ponds (ornamental or otherwise), detention or
retention ponds, streams, excavations, holes, depressions,
open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks,
shallow wells, barrels, troughs, urns, cans, boxes, bottles,
tubs, buckets, roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, reservoirs,
vessels, tires, junk or receptacles of any kind or other
containers or devices which may hold water.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of vectors
by eliminating their harborage place; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating, fogging, larviciding, trapping
or by any other recognized and legal vector control
elimination methods approved by the local or state authority
having such administrative authority.
HARBORAGE — Any place where vectors can live, nest or seek
shelter.
§ 5-16 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-16
2:304
OCCUPANT — Any person over one year of age, living,
sleeping, cooking or eating in or actually having possession of
a dwelling unit or a rooming unit; except that in dwelling units
a guest will not be considered an occupant.
OWNER — Any person who alone or jointly or severally with
others: (1) shall have legal title to any premises, dwelling or
dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession
thereof; or (2) shall have charge, care or control of any
premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of
the owner, manager or an executor, administrator, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus
representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with
the provisions of this article and of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if they were
the owner.
VECTOR — A rodent, arthropod or insect capable of
transmitting a disease or infection. Vectors shall include, but
not be limited to, rats, mosquitoes, cockroaches, flies, etc.
VECTOR PROOFING — A form of constructing to prevent
the ingress or egress of vectors to or from a given space or
building or gaining access to food, water or harborage. This
term shall include, but not be limited to, rat proofing, fly
proofing, mosquito proofing, etc.
302.10.2 Forbidden acts. It shall be unlawful:
(1) For any person, firm or corporation to deposit or permit to
accumulate in or upon any premises, improved or vacant or
any open lot, any boxes, barrels, bottles, cans, glass, scrap
iron, wire, metal articles, pipe, broken stone or cement,
broken crockery, broken plaster, automotive or other
machine parts, tire or rubbish of any kind so that the same
shall or may afford food, harborage or breeding areas for
mosquitoes, flies, rats or other vectors and thereby create
a public health threat; provided, however, that the same
may be kept in approved covered receptacles or disposed
of as may be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
(2) To store refuse outdoors in containers other than plastic
bags and containers made of durable, watertight, rust
resistant material having a tight fitting lid which is kept on
the container at all times.
(3) To have, keep, maintain or cause or permit any collection
of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed
or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is
treated or maintained so as to effectually prevent such
breeding.
§ 5-16 ANIMALS § 5-16
2:305
302.10.3 Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
Owners and occupants shall have the following
responsibilities:
(1) Every owner of a structure containing two or more rental
units shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the
shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises
thereof, including all exterior property areas.
(2) Every occupant of a structure shall maintain same in a
clean and sanitary condition that part or those parts of the
structure, both interior and exterior premises thereof, that
is occupied and controlled.
(3) Every occupant of a dwelling or commercial structure
containing either a single dwelling or commercial unit shall
be responsible for the extermination of insects and/or
rodents on the premises, responsible for such
extermination whenever the unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the
occupant to maintain a structure or property in a vectorproof
condition, extermination shall be the joint
responsibility of the owner and occupant(s) of the
structure, or public parts of any dwelling containing two
or more dwelling units or commercial structure containing
more than one tenant space, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
302.10.4 Vector proofing. A program plan and specifications
for private vector control will be required to be submitted as
deemed necessary by the Township. Said program plan shall
be submitted by the owner or agent of the property or in
which said vector control program is or will be conducted. The
program plans shall state the type of vectors to be controlled,
the name of the company contracted to carry out the program
and any and all work to be conducted in an effort to control
said vectors. If, after review of the program plan by the
Township, it is found to be inadequate or incomplete,
additional information may be required as well as additional
control methods.
302.10.5 Mosquito control. In an attempt to eliminate
potential breeding sites for mosquitoes and to effectuate
additional controls for the spread of mosquito-borne disease,
all owners of property whereon stormwater detention ponds
or other stormwater facilities, ornamental ponds or any other
stagnant bodies of water may be required, at the discretion of
the Township, subsequent to the effective date of this article,
to annually file with the Township a vector control plan, which
specifically eliminates potential mosquito breeding sites, by
any of the following approved methods:
§ 5-16 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-16
2:306
(1) Screen collections of water with corrosion-resistant
netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way; or with
other material which will effectually prevent the ingress or
egress of mosquitoes.
(2) Empty collection of water weekly.
(3) Larvicide collections of water.
(4) Stock collections of water with larvae-eating fish.
(5) Eliminate collections of water by filling or draining
containers to the satisfaction of the Township.
(6) Such other methods which may be determined acceptable
by the Township or the State Department of Environmental
Protection for specific situations not covered above.
Said plan shall be submitted to the Township no later than
April 30 of each calendar year, and treatment or action shall
commence no later than May 15 and be in effect until the first
hard frost of the season or December 1 of that same year,
whichever comes first.
302.10.6. Special corrective action. Due to the possibility
of the serious impacts of any mosquito-borne illness, should
any person, occupant or owner violate the provisions of this
section, and fail, within three days of notification, to take
corrective action as noted herein, the Township shall perform
the necessary corrective action such as noted in this same
section and shall charge all costs of same plus any
administrative fees against the property owner, or file a lien
against said property owner for such costs. Additional
enforcement action shall also be commenced.
(9) Sections 302.1, Exterior Property Areas – Sanitation, and 304.14,
Insect Screens, shall be amended to read:
§ 5-16 ANIMALS § 5-16
2:307
302.1 Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be
maintained in a clean, safe, sanitary condition. This includes the
regular removal of debris, dirt and litter, as well as the regular,
routine maintenance of all structures in the exterior area, such as
parking lot lights on commercial property and the containment of
all carts. It shall be the joint responsibility of both the occupant
and the owner to keep that part of the exterior property which
the occupant occupies, controls, or allows parking in a clean and
sanitary condition.
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from April 1 to October
30, every door, window and other outside opening required for
ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food
service areas, or any areas where products to be included or
utilized in food for human consumption areas or any are
processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied
with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per
inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging door shall have a
self-closing device in good working condition. (All other provisions
of this section to remain unchanged.)
(10) Section 602.3, Heat Supply, shall be amended to read:
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building
who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units, rooming unit,
dormitory or guest room on terms, either expressed or implied,
to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during
the period from October 1 to April 30 to maintain a temperature
of not less than 65° F. (18° C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms
and toilet rooms. (All other provisions of this section to remain
unchanged.)
(11) Section 602.4, Occupiable Work Spaces, shall be amended to read:
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces
shall be supplied with heat during the period from October 1 to
April 30 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65° F. (18° C.)
during the period the spaces are occupied. (All other provisions of
this section remain unchanged.)
(12) The following chapter shall be added to the code:
Chapter 9, Privately Owned Stormwater Management
Facilities.
901 General. All privately owned stormwater management
facilities shall be maintained in the manner in which they were
originally approved, and such facilities shall be continuously
operable and able to meet the purpose for which they were
originally designed.
§ 5-16 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-16
2:308
902 Types of facilities. All private detention basins, whether
above- or in-ground, as well as any piping, outlets or other
structures required to be constructed as part of the overall
development and to serve the purpose of detaining or channeling
stormwater into the overall Township system shall be regulated by
this chapter.
903 Vegetation. All vegetation shall be kept at a level not to
exceed 15 inches in height, and where vegetation was required
within the basin, it shall not be allowed to be overrun with weeds,
and other vegetation not conducive to the operation of the system.
This shall include trees, bushes and other growth which would
hamper the operation of the system.
904 Fencing. All detention basins shall be fenced with a minimum
six-foot-high fence, and such fencing shall be maintained in good
repair so as to preclude access to the interior. Any damaged,
falling or otherwise deteriorated fencing shall be replaced.
905 Interior liner. The required interior lining of all detention
basins must be maintained pursuant to original design to provide
maximum effectiveness of the operation of the system.
906 Inspections. All stormwater management facilities will be
subject to an annual inspection by the Township Engineer, and any
violations noted shall be required to be corrected within 30 days
of written notification of same, or within a time frame acceptable
to the Township Engineer.
(13) The following chapter, Chapter 10, Inspections and Certificates of
Occupancy, shall be added to the code:
§ 5-16 ANIMALS § 5-16
2:309
Chapter 10, Inspections and Certificates of Occupancy —
Existing Structures
1001 General. Prior to the change in ownership or tenancy of
any single-family attached, detached, semidetached or multifamily
residential dwelling unit or structure, or of any nonresidential
structure, including individual lease areas thereof, (collectively
referred to hereinafter as the "premises"), the Township shall
inspect the premises for compliance with safety and fire hazard
provisions of applicable Township building, plumbing, property
maintenance and fire codes (hereinafter referred to collectively as
the "Township codes"). No structure may be reused or reoccupied
unless and until said inspection has been performed and a new
certificate of occupancy issued. It shall be the responsibility of
both the current owner and the tenant or the new occupant or
owner to have said inspection performed and subsequent
certificate issued. Residential property transactions which include
the addition or deletion of a party from a deed (i.e., marriage/
divorce/death) but not total transfer of the property to a new
individual will not be subject to said inspection. A change in
ownership of more than 50% of a business entity owning a
premises shall also constitute a change in ownership, as used
herein. [Amended 10-14-2019 by Ord. No. 3177]
1001.1 The inspections required hereby shall be conducted
after a request therefor has been submitted, in writing, to
the Whitehall Township Bureau of Planning, Zoning and
Development, and shall be under the direction of this Bureau.
1001.2 The cost of conducting the inspection shall be paid
in advance and shall be the sole responsibility of the current
owner or landlord. The inspection charges shall be in
accordance with the Whitehall Comprehensive Fee Schedule,
as found in the codified ordinances of Whitehall Township, as
amended from time to time.57
1002 Points of inspection.
1002.1 Single-family residences. The following items, in
addition to the provisions of the applicable Township codes,
will be checked when inspecting an existing single-family
residential structure offered for sale or lease: [Amended
7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3019; 10-9-2017 by Ord. No.
3095; 10-14-2019 by Ord. No. 3177]
(1) Smoke detectors must exist on every floor level and in
each bedroom, including basement, and must be
operational. Where required, detectors must be
interconnected and have battery backup, if the house
was constructed after 1993.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. A29, Fees.
§ 5-16 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-16
2:310
(2) Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more
than four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the
stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony,
porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is
more than 30 inches above the floor or grade below shall
have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches
high or more than 42 inches high measured vertically
above the nosing of the trad or above the finished floor
of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards, unless
otherwise exempted under the PA UCC, shall not be
less than 30 inches high above the floor of the landing,
balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface.
(3) Visible structural damage on chimneys, exterior roofs,
decks, fences, windows or any other areas must be
corrected. Any such visible damage or suspected
structural damage will result in the recommendation to
consult with a structural engineer for professional
review. Broken or cracked windows must be replaced.
(4) Proper firewalls must exist on attached units between
the units. These firewalls must extend from the ground
to the roof.
(5) If the garage is attached to the house, both the wall and
the ceiling next to a living area must have a minimum of
one-half-inch thick gypsum wall board or plaster. When
no wall or ceiling protection is provided, then a minimum
five-eighths-inch thick Type X gypsum wall board must
be used. The door leading from the garage to the living
area must be a minimum of one-and-three-eighths-inch
solid core door or steel with no windows or other
openings. This includes the doors from the garage to a
basement area.
(6) There must be a minim of two wall outlets per room,
preferably located on opposite walls. Floor receptacles
are not permitted, unless they are compliant with the
current version of the International Building Code.
(7) Any bathroom receptacles which are part of a fixture
must be disconnected. Every bathroom shall contain at
least one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle
outlet(s) shall have ground fault circuit interrupter
protection.
(8) Outdoor receptacles shall have GFIC protection and
weather-resistant covers.
§ 5-16 ANIMALS § 5-16
2:311
(9) Visible electrical violations will be noted and must be
corrected, such as missing wall cover plates, open
junction boxes and open splices. Any unused openings in
electrical box shall be closed, and panel will be checked
for proper grounding and visible electrical violations,
which must be corrected. The status of the service line
to the meter will be checked and must be in acceptable
condition.
(10) Outside electrical service must not have worn or
damaged service cable.
(11) Dryer venting must be to exterior of home or other
approved method.
(12) Sewer, well or septic service is not inspected. However,
if an outhouse is observed, it will not be permitted to
remain. Cisterns may not be connected to the domestic
water supply and, if unused, must be secured or
abandoned and secured. If property lies within a public
sanitary sewer area and previous septic issues are
identified, connection to the public system may be
required.
(13) Closet lights which are less than 12 inches from an
overhead shelf must either be disconnected or replaced
with a surface-mounted or recessed incandescent fixture
with a completely enclosed lamp, or a recessed
fluorescent or LED fixture.
(14) An oil burner shut-off switch will be required at the top
of basement steps; or on single-level structures, outside
the room containing the oil burner unit.
(15) A minimum 100-amp electrical service will be required.
(16) Chimney venting must be provided for high-efficiency
heaters in unlined chimneys for condensation.
(17) The street address must be properly displayed on the
exterior of the house and be visible from the street,
with minimum four-inch high Arabic numerals with a
minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch.
(18) Windows in all sleeping areas must be operational.
(19) Bathrooms and toilet rooms must have at least one
operational window or exhaust fan, vented to the
exterior.
(20) Basement areas must have a concrete floor. Dirt floors
are not acceptable.
(21) Hot water heater temperature and pressure valve must
be piped to within six inches of the floor.
§ 5-16 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-16
2:312
(22) The kitchen must have at least one GFIC receptacle, and
all receptacles within a six-foot radius of the sink must
be GFIC protected.
(23) No multiflue usage will be permitted.
(24) Unoccupied exterior structures less than 1,200 square
feet and facilities will not be inspected, but if hazardous
conditions are noted they will be required to be
addressed. However, swimming pools must be made
secure or removed. This includes the provision of
required fencing, self-latching gates and approved
ladders, and door and/or window alarms, where
required.
(25) All interior and exterior property areas shall be in a
clean and sanitary condition, and all areas must be made
available for inspection. Prior to any certificate of
occupancy being issued, all waste, debris and similar
material shall be disposed of appropriately.
(26) All non-owner-occupied housing must comply with all
applicable provisions of Chapter 11, Housing, of the
Codified Ordinances with respect to landlord licensing
and registration, including, but not limited to, the
designation of a responsible party for the maintenance
and upkeep of the property. This responsible party must
reside or have offices within 10 miles of the geographical
boundaries of Whitehall Township and be authorized to
accept service on behalf of the legal owner of said
property and be authorized to discharge alarms in case
of emergency and assume control of the property. Post
office boxes are not acceptable.
(27) Any inappropriate connections to the sanitary sewer
system shall be eliminated, including but not limited to
sump pumps and roof leaders. Points of inspection for
such connections shall be as noted on the CWSA Clear
Water Home Inspection guidelines.
(28) Each dwelling which uses a fossil-fuel-burning heater or
appliance, fireplace or an attached garage, must have
an operational, centrally located and approved carbon
monoxide alarm installed near the bedrooms and fossilfuel-
burning heater or fireplace, pursuant to
Pennsylvania Act 121 of 2013, with respect to carbon
monoxide detectors.
(29) Every laundry area shall contain at least one groundingtype
receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault
circuit interrupter.
§ 5-16 ANIMALS § 5-16
2:313
(30) All growth must be appropriately maintained on
property, and no encroachments may exist into the public
rights-of-way. All street trees must be trimmed so that
they do not obstruct the light from any streetlight or
obstruct other traffic control devices and so that there
shall be a clear height of 14 feet above the surface of the
street and eight feet over the sidewalk.
1002.2 Multifamily units. [Amended 12-8-2014 by Ord.
No. 2989; 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3019; 10-14-2019 by
Ord. No. 3177]
1002.2.1 Units for lease. The following items, in addition to
applicable Township codes, will be checked when inspecting
an existing multifamily unit offered for lease:
(1) Smoke detectors must exist on every floor level and in
each bedroom, including basement, and must be
operational. Where required, detectors must be
interconnected and have battery backup, if the house
was constructed after 1993.
(2) Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more
than four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the
stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony,
porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is
more than 30 inches above the floor or grade below shall
have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches
high or more than 42 inches high measured vertically
above the nosing of the trad or above the finished floor
of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards, unless
otherwise exempted under the PA UCC, shall not be
less than 30 inches high above the floor of the landing,
balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface.
(3) Visible structural damage on chimneys, windows or any
other areas must be corrected. Any such visible damage
or suspected structural damage will result in the
recommendation to consult with a structural engineer
for professional review. Broken or cracked windows must
be replaced.
(4) Proper firewalls must exist on attached units between
the units. These firewalls must extend from the ground to
the roof. Existing apartment complexes with more than
20 units with on-site, full-time maintenance personnel
may be excepted from this requirement.
(5) There must be a minim of two wall outlets per room,
preferably located on opposite walls. Floor receptacles
are not permitted, unless they are compliant with the
current version of the International Building Code.
§ 5-16 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-16
2:314
(6) Any bathroom receptacles which are part of a fixture
must be disconnected, and at least one GFIC receptacle
must be provided.
(7) Visible electrical violations will be noted and must be
corrected, such as missing wall cover plates, open
junction boxes and open splices. Any unused openings in
electrical box shall be closed.
(8) There must be tenant access to the electrical panel box.
(9) Dryer venting must be to the exterior of the structure or
other approved method.
(10) Sewer, well or septic service is not inspected. However,
if an outhouse is observed, it will not be permitted to
remain. Cisterns may not be connected to the domestic
water supply and, if unused, must be secured or
abandoned and secured. If property lies within a public
sanitary sewer area and previous septic issues are
identified, connection to the public system may be
required.
(11) Windows in sleeping areas must be operational.
(12) Street address or unit address must be properly
displayed on the exterior of the unit with a minimum of
four-inch high Arabic numerals with a minimum stroke
width of 0.5 inch.
(13) Bathrooms and toilet rooms must have at least one
operational window or exhaust fan, vented to the
exterior.
(14) Hot water heater temperature and pressure valve must
be piped to within six inches of the floor.
(15) Basement areas must have a concrete floor. Dirt floors
are not acceptable.
(16) An oil burner shut-off switch will be required at the top
of basement steps; or on single-level structures, outside
the room containing the oil burner unit.
(17) Outside electrical service must not have worn or
damaged service cable. Inside electrical panel will be
checked for proper grounding and visible electrical
violations, which must be corrected. Outdoor receptacles
shall have GFIC protection and weather-resistant covers.
(18) Chimney venting must be provided for high-efficiency
heaters in unlined chimneys for condensation.
(19) The kitchen must have at least one GFIC receptacle, and
all receptacles within a six-foot radius of the sink must
be GFIC protected.
(20) No multiflue usage will be permitted.
§ 5-16 ANIMALS § 5-16
2:315
(21) Unoccupied exterior structures less than 1,200 square
feet and facilities will not be inspected but if hazardous
conditions are noted they will be required to be
addressed. However, swimming pools must be made
secure or removed. This includes the provision of
required fencing, self-latching gates and approved
ladders, and door and/or window alarms, where
required.
(22) Closet lights which are less than 12 inches from an
overhead shelf must either be disconnected or replaced
with a surface-mounted or recessed incandescent fixture
with a completely enclosed lamp, or a recessed
fluorescent or LED fixture.
(23) If the garage is attached to the house, both the wall and
the ceiling next to a living area must have a minimum of
one-half-inch thick gypsum wall board or plaster. When
no wall or ceiling protection is provided, then a minimum
five-eighths-inch thick Type X gypsum wall board must
be used. The door leading from the garage to the living
area must be a minimum of one-and-three-eighths-inch
solid core door or steel with no windows or other
openings. This includes the doors from the garage to a
basement area.
(24) All interior and exterior property areas shall be in a
clean and sanitary condition, and all areas must be made
available for inspection. Prior to any certificate of
occupancy being issued, all waste, debris and similar
material shall be disposed of appropriately.
(25) All non-owner-occupied housing must comply with all
applicable provisions of Chapter 11, Housing, of the
Codified Ordinances with respect to landlord licensing
and registration, including, but not limited to, the
designation of a responsible party for the maintenance
and upkeep of the property. This responsible party must
reside or have offices within 10 miles of the geographical
boundaries of Whitehall Township and be authorized to
accept service on behalf of the legal owner of said
property and be authorized to discharge alarms in case
of emergency and assume control of the property. Post
office boxes are not acceptable.
(26) Any inappropriate connections to the sanitary sewer
system shall be eliminated, including but not limited to
sump pumps and roof leaders. Points of inspection for
such connections shall be as noted on the CWSA Clear
Water Home Inspection guidelines.
§ 5-16 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-16
2:316
(27) Compliance with all provisions of Pennsylvania Act 121
of 2013, with respect to carbon monoxide detectors, is
required. Pursuant to this Act, "Each apartment in a
multifamily dwelling, which uses a fossil fuel-burning
heater or appliance, fireplace or an attached garage,
must have an operational, centrally located and
approved carbon monoxide alarm installed in the vicinity
of the bedrooms and fossil fuel-burning heater or
fireplace."
(28) Every laundry area shall contain at least one groundingtype
receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault
circuit interrupter.
(29) All growth must be appropriately maintained on
property, and no encroachments may exist into the public
rights-of-way. All street trees must be trimmed so that
they do not obstruct the light from any streetlight or
obstruct other traffic control devices and so that there
shall be a clear height of 14 feet above the surface of the
street and eight feet over the sidewalk.
1002.2.2 Multifamily residential units/structures for
sale. In addition to those items listed in § 1002.2.1, (units
listed for lease), when the unit and/or structure is offered for
sale, in addition to applicable Township codes, the following
items will be required to be corrected:
(1) Proper firewalls must exist on attached units between
the units. These firewalls must extend from the ground to
the roof. Existing apartment complexes with more than
20 units with on-site, full-time maintenance personnel
may be excepted from this requirement.
(2) Exterior of the building must be free of rubbish, and
there may be no obstructions of outside stairs.
(3) Addresses of buildings and units must be clearly posted
with minimum four-inch Arabic numerals with a
minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch.
(4) Door locks must be per codes and operational. All
interior door locks must open without the need for any
prior knowledge and without the use of a key for ease of
egress in emergency situations.
(5) All doors must swing in the direction of egress where
serving an occupant load of 50 or more persons and must
open easily and may not be wedged open.
(6) Doors must have proper hardware, and passageways
must be unobstructed. All doors must be operational and
in good working order and condition.
§ 5-16 ANIMALS § 5-16
2:317
(7) Exit and emergency lighting must be adequate,
operational, and in good working order. Alarm bells or
other devices must be undamaged.
(8) Appropriate number and type of smoke detectors must
be provided in all required areas.
(9) Where required, doors must have self-closures, and there
may not be any openings in the ceiling or walls.
(10) Elevator doors must be tight, and elevators must be
operational and possess required Pennsylvania Labor
and Industry certification.
(11) All storage areas must be neat, and any storage of
flammable or combustible liquids should be no more than
five gallons and must be per Code.
(12) All boiler and heating rooms must be clean with proper
separations and adequate ventilation.
(13) Fire extinguishers must be properly inspected, and there
must be the proper number of extinguishers and they
must be sized properly for the area, and accessible for
use.
(14) Where applicable, the documentation that the sprinkler
system is operable, as well as fire alarms system, will be
required.
(15) All interior and exterior property areas shall be in a
clean and sanitary condition, and all areas must be made
available for inspection. Prior to any certificate of
occupancy being issued, all waste, debris and similar
material shall be disposed of appropriately.
(16) Any inappropriate connections to the sanitary sewer
system shall be eliminated, including but not limited to
sump pumps and roof leaders. Points of inspection for
such connections shall be as noted on the CWSA Clear
Water Home Inspection guidelines.
(17) Compliance with all provisions of Pennsylvania Act 121
of 2013 with respect to carbon monoxide detectors, is
required. Pursuant to this Act, "Each apartment in a
multifamily dwelling, which uses a fossil fuel-burning
heater or appliance, fireplace or an attached garage,
must have an operational, centrally located and
approved carbon monoxide alarm installed in the vicinity
of the bedrooms and fossil fuel-burning heater or
fireplace."
§ 5-16 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-16
2:318
(18) All non-owner-occupied housing must comply with all
applicable provisions of Chapter 11, Housing, of the
Codified Ordinances with respect to landlord licensing
and registration, including, but not limited to, the
designation of a responsible party for the maintenance
and upkeep of the property. This responsible party must
reside or have offices within 10 miles of the geographical
boundaries of Whitehall Township and be authorized to
accept service on behalf of the legal owner of said
property and be authorized to discharge alarms in case
of emergency and assume control of the property. Post
office boxes are not acceptable.
(19) All exterior structures and common areas will be
inspected, and all swimming pools and areas must be
secured according to current code.
1002.3 Assisted living/nursing facilities. All assisted and
skilled care nursing facilities located in the Township shall
be required to be inspected annually for compliance with
the provisions of this and other applicable codes, by the
Building Inspector and the Fire Chief. This inspection shall
be performed by April 15 of each year and will require
modifications if there are code violations or particular items
which need to be addressed pertaining to the specific use.
Subsequent to this annual inspection, additional inspections
of individual units which are vacated shall not be required.
When the structure(s) are determined to be free of violation,
the Code Officials shall issue a certificate of occupancy, which
shall be posted by the owner or occupant in a conspicuous
location. Said certificate shall be valid only for one year from
the date of issuance. The following items, in addition to the
provisions of the applicable Township codes, will be required
to be corrected/provided:
(1) Smoke detectors must exist on every floor level and/
or one at each sleeping area, including basement, and
must be operational. Where required, detectors must be
interconnected and have battery backup, if the house
was constructed after 1993.
(2) Stair railing must exist on all stairways of two steps or
more; this includes both sides if a stairway is an open
stairway.
(3) Proper firewalls must exist between units, where
applicable.
(4) Visible electrical violations will be noted and must be
corrected, such as missing wall cover plates, open
junction boxes and open splices. Any unused openings in
electrical box shall be closed.
§ 5-16 ANIMALS § 5-16
2:319
(5) There must be a minimum of two wall outlets per room,
preferably located on opposite walls. Floor receptacles
are not permitted.
(6) Any bathroom receptacles which are part of a fixture
must be disconnected, and at least one GFI receptacle
must be provided.
(7) Dryer venting must be to exterior of structure or other
approved method.
(8) Visible structural damage on chimneys, windows or any
other areas must be corrected. Any such visible damage
or suspected structural damage will result in the
recommendation to consult with a structural engineer
for professional review. Broken or cracked windows must
be replaced.
(9) Windows in sleeping areas must be operational.
(10) Street address or unit address must be properly
displayed on exterior of unit with minimum of four-inch
Arabic numerals, with a minimum stroke width of 0.5
inch.
(11) Bathrooms must have at least one operational window or
exhaust fan.
(12) Exterior of building must be free of rubbish, and there
may be no obstructions of outside stairs.
(13) Door locks must be per codes and operational. All
interior door locks must open without any need for prior
knowledge and without the use of a key for ease of
egress in emergency situations.
(14) All doors must swing in the direction of egress where
serving an occupant load of 50 or more persons, and
must open easily, and may not be wedged open.
(15) Doors must have proper hardware, and passageways
must be unobstructed.
(16) Exit and emergency lighting must be adequate, and
alarm bells must be undamaged.
(17) Amount and type of smoke detectors will be checked for
compliance.
(18) Where required, doors must have self-closures, and there
may not be any openings in the ceiling or walls.
(19) Elevator doors must be tight, and the elevator operation
status will be checked.
(20) All storage areas must be neat, and any storage of
flammable or combustible liquids should be no more than
five gallons and must be per code.
§ 5-16 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-16
2:320
(21) All boiler and heating rooms must be clean with proper
separations and adequate ventilation.
(22) Fire extinguishers must be properly inspected, and there
must be the proper amount of extinguishers and they
must be sized properly for the area and accessible for
use.
(23) Documentation of annual test of sprinkler system (where
applicable) shall be provided to the Fire Chief.
(24) No storage of materials shall be permitted in stairwell
area.
(25) Any kitchen areas requiring hoods will be inspected for
status. System activation switch will be required in the
proper location.
(26) Documentation of fire/heat resistance status of furniture,
bedding, etc., must be presented where no sprinkler
system exists.
(27) A public safety plan will be required to be presented.
(28) The landlord shall comply with all applicable provisions
of Chapter 11, Housing, of the Codified Ordinances with
respect to landlord licensing and registration, including,
but not limited to, the designation of a responsible party
for the maintenance and upkeep of the property. This
responsible party must reside or have offices within 10
miles of the geographical boundaries of Whitehall
Township and be authorized to accept service on behalf
of the legal owner of said property and be authorized
to discharge alarms in case of emergency and assume
control of the property. Post office boxes are not
acceptable. [Amended 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3019]
(29) Any inappropriate connections to the sanitary sewer
system shall be eliminated, including but not limited to
sump pumps and roof leaders. Points of inspection for
such connections shall be as noted on the CWSA Clear
Water Home Inspection Sheet as attached hereto as
Exhibit B,58 as amended from time to time.
58.Editor's Note: Exhibit B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 5-16 ANIMALS § 5-16
2:321
1002.4 Commercial and/or industrial space. For all
commercial or industrial establishments offered for sale or
lease, an inspection is required by the Building Inspector and
the Fire Chief. This inspection is intended to identify issues
which will be required to be addressed prior to any new
occupancy of the building, and may result in the issuance of a
certificate of use and occupancy or may require modifications
if there are code violations or particular items which need
to be addressed pertaining to the specific use proposed in
the structure. No such structure or space may be used or
occupied for business unless and until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued, either as a result of this
inspection or subsequent to the issuance of a building permit
and all construction as required being completed. The
following items will be noted on such inspection; however,
additional codes may apply:
1002.4.1 All doors, door swings, door closers, door
hardware, and force to open doors shall be maintained in
proper working order.
1002.4.2 All means of egress (exits) shall be clear and
unobstructed. In a multistory building with stairs, all stairs
shall be maintained and unobstructed. No storage allowed in
stair wells or under staircases.
1002.4.3 All emergency lights and exit lighting shall be
maintained in working order. These lights shall operate on
normal electrical power and on battery backup power.
Exception: buildings provided with an emergency backup
generator.
1002.4.4 If a building is required to have a sprinkler system,
a copy of the certification test and any annual certification
letters shall be provided to the Fire Inspector upon request.
1002.4.5 If the building is required to have a fire alarm
system, a copy of the certification test and any annual
certification letters shall be provided to the Fire Inspector
upon request.
1002.4.6 If the building is required to have a hood
suppression system, a state-licensed hood system company
shall service the system and supply a certification letter upon
request. The hood, ductwork, fan and filters shall be cleaned
and if a cleaning service is used, a certificate showing the
date of cleaning shall be maintained on the premises.
1002.4.7 Smoke and duct detectors shall be maintained in
proper working condition, also with any certification letters
made available to the Fire Inspector.
§ 5-16 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-16
2:322
1002.4.8 All fire extinguishers (five pounds ABC or more)
shall be maintained by a licensed fire extinguisher company
and shall have a current inspection tag signed and dated by
the company.
1002.4.9 In addition to the above-mentioned fire
extinguishers, if the place of business has a kitchen, there
must also be a "Class K" fire extinguisher.
1002.4.10 Any storage near electrical panels and/or
mechanical equipment shall be no closer than 30 inches from
the equipment. Each breaker in the panel box shall be
labeled.
1002.4.11 All electrical panels must have all breakers
labeled and any unused breakers must have approved covers.
1002.4.12 Storage of hazardous materials as defined by the
Fire Code: secure the necessary permits from the Fire Chief
and stored properly.
1002.4.13 Extension cords are allowed on a temporary basis
only, and only upon approval of the Code official. "Temporary"
is defined as not more than 30 days.
1002.4.14 All interior finishes required by the Life Safety
Code shall be maintained.
1002.4.15 All storage and housekeeping practices shall be in
neat order and cleanly maintained.
1002.4.16 Occupant load signs shall be maintained and
clearly visible in the area for which they apply if required.
1002.4.17 In a tenant space, ceiling tiles shall be removed in
a manner suitable for the Fire Inspector to thoroughly inspect
existing tenant demising walls.
1002.4.18 International Fire Code, Section 506, Key Boxes,
will be enforced. All commercial buildings must have a Knox
Box approved by the Fire Chief.
1002.4.19 All accessibility features shall be maintained
properly and in accordance with the Code, including but not
limited to vehicle parking, access to the building, pedestrian
access, restrooms, showers, water fountains, telephones, etc.
1002.4.20 Fire hydrants and Fire Department connections
must be free and clear of obstructions and in proper working
order.
1002.4.21 Addresses, street or unit numbers must be posted
and visible and also include suite number or letters where
they apply.
1002.4.22 Property owner is required to register with the
Township a responsible party for the maintenance and upkeep
of the structure while same remains unoccupied (Exhibit A59).
§ 5-16 ANIMALS § 5-16
2:323
1002.4.23 Property exterior must comply with all provisions
of Ordinance 2825, amending the Whitehall Township Zoning
Ordinance,60 with respect to exterior modifications for
changes in tenancy or occupancy.
1002.4.24 Any and all other required modifications for the
use intended to occupy the space pursuant to all applicable
Township and State Codes.
1002.4.25 Any inappropriate connections to the sanitary
sewer system shall be eliminated, including but not limited
to sump pumps and roof leaders. Points of inspection for
such connections shall be as noted on the CWSA Clear Water
Home Inspection Sheet as attached hereto as Exhibit B,61 as
amended from time to time.
1003 Abatement of violations.
1003.1 In the event that violations of the Township
Ordinances exist in or upon the premises, such violations
shall be addressed by either:
(1) The current property owner or landowner abating the
violations prior to the transfer of ownership of the
premises or prior to the tenant occupying the premises;
or
(2) The new owner or new tenant executing and notarizing a
statement to the effect that:
(a) The extent of the violations have been made known to
such owner or tenant; and
(b) That such new owner or tenant shall begin to abate the
violations within 30 days of taking possession or some
other time period deemed acceptable to the Township
Building Inspector, but no later than the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
59.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 27, Zoning, § 27-20D.
61.Editor's Note: Exhibit B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 5-16 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-16
2:324
§ 5-17. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of this article and of the code hereby adopted, insofar as
they are the same as those ordinance and/or codes in force immediately
prior to the enactment of this article, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinance and codes and not as new enactments. Any code or ordinance or
part of any code or ordinance in conflict with this code and this article is
hereby repealed. The provisions of this article and the code hereby adopted
shall not be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court,
or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed; nor shall
any just or legal right of remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this code or article.
1004 Certificate of occupancy. Prior to the new owner or tenant
taking possession of or occupying the premises, or
contemporaneously therewith, such new owner or tenant shall
secure from the Whitehall Township Bureau of Planning, Zoning
and Development a certificate of occupancy. A certificate of
occupancy shall not be issued unless the inspection(s) required
by this section has been completed and all violations are abated
pursuant to the provisions of § 1003. A temporary certificate of
occupancy may be issued in the discretion of the Bureau of
Planning, Zoning and Development, so long as corrections or
modifications are commenced and pursued with reasonable
diligence and within the time limits specified on the face of the
temporary certificate of occupancy.
1005 No warranty. By conducting the inspections pursuant to
this section, the Township does not warrant or guarantee the
complete safety or suitability of the dwelling, unit or structure
purchased or leased.
1006 Vacant Commercial Structures. It shall be the duty of
the property owner of every commercial or industrial structure
to complete the form attached as Exhibit A62 hereto, in order to
designate and provide information to the Township regarding a
local responsible agent for the property. This agent shall reside
or have offices within 10 miles of the geographical boundaries of
Whitehall Township, and be authorized to accept service on behalf
of the legal owner of said property, and be authorized to discharge
alarms and assume control of same.
62.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 5-16 ANIMALS § 5-17
2:325

ARTICLE VI
International Fire Code
[Adopted 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2438]
§ 5-18. Adoption of International Fire Code. [Amended 6-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
The Township of Whitehall hereby adopts the International Fire Code/2000
(hereinafter referred to as "code"), with certain additions, amendments,
deletions and insertions as hereinafter set forth. Copies of the code and
of this article are filed in the office of the Mayor and the Department of
Operations. The code and this article shall collectively be considered and
referred to as this "code" both herein and in the code.
§ 5-19. Insertion.
Subsection 101.1, Title, second line, the phrase "The Township of Whitehall"
shall be inserted for "(Name of Jurisdiction)."
§ 5-20. Additions, amendments and deletions. [Amended 12-8-2008
by Ord. No. 2750; 5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 3151]
A. The following additions, amendments and deletions shall be made as
indicated:
(1) Section 103, Department of Fire Prevention, Subsection 103.1,
shall be amended to read:
103.1 General. It shall be the duty and the responsibility of the
Chief of the Bureau of Fire and/or the Whitehall Township Fire
Marshal to enforce the provisions of this code as herein set forth.
The designated enforcement officer of this code is herein referred
to as the "Code Official."
(2) Section 105, Permits, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
(3) Subsection 109.3, Violation penalties, shall be amended to read as
follows:
109.3 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code or who shall fail to comply with any of
the requirements thereof in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit, license
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be
guilty of a criminal offense, punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense
upon judgment against any person.
(4) Section 108, Board of Appeals, shall be amended to read as follows:
§ 5-18 ANIMALS § 5-20
2:327
Any appeal from any decision of the Code Official shall be heard by
the Whitehall Township Building Code Board of Appeals pursuant
to and consistent with the practice and procedures established for
or by such Board. The application for appeal shall be filed on a form
obtained from the Department of Operations within 20 days after
the Code Official's decision or within 20 days after the notice was
served.
(5) 307.5 shall be amended to read as follows:
307.5 Open-flame cooking devices. Charcoal burners and other
open-flame cooking devices shall not be operated or stored on
combustible balconies or within 10 feet (3,048 mm) of combustible
construction.
Exceptions:
1. One- and two-family dwellings.
2. Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an
automatic sprinkler system.
3. LP-gas cooking devices having an LP-gas container with a
water capacity not greater than 2.5 pounds [nominal one
pound (0.454 kg) LP-gas capacity].
(6) Section 308.7, shall be added to read as follows:
308.7 Outdoor wood-fired boiler appliances.
308.7.1 Outdoor wood-fired boiler appliance. An accessory
structure, designed and intended, through the burning of wood, for
the purpose of heating the principal structure or any other site,
building, or structure on the premises. Also known as an "outdoor
wood-fired furnace."
308.7.2 Prohibition. No person shall install an outdoor woodfired
boiler in Whitehall Township until federal or state regulations
pertaining to the manufacturing and installation of wood-fired
boilers are adopted by the State of Pennsylvania as part of the
Uniform Construction Code, and subsequently by Whitehall
Township.
(7) Chapter 33, Explosives and Fireworks, Sections 3301, 3302, 3303,
3304, 3305, 3306, 3307 and 3308, shall be deleted in their
entireties and shall be replaced with the following subsections:
§ 5-20 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-20
2:328
3307.1. Scope. The equipment, processing and operations
involving the manufacture, possession, storage, sale,
transportation and use of explosives and blasting agents shall
comply with applicable requirements, ordinances, laws, rules and
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United
States Federal Government, and pursuant to the licenses issued
to the person, firm, corporation or entity operating or conducting
such business or activity.
3307.1.1. A notice of activity shall be filed with the Whitehall
Township Bureau of Planning, Zoning and Development for any
of the following conditions, activities or operations:
1. The manufacture, possession, storage, sale, or other
disposal of explosives or blasting agents.
2. The transportation of explosives or blasting agents in or
through the Township.
3. The use of explosives or blasting agents in the
Township.
4. The operation of a terminal for handling explosives or
blasting agents.
5. The delivery to or receipt of explosives or blasting
agents from a carrier at its terminal between the hours
of sunset and sunrise.
6. The transportation of blasting caps or electric blasting
caps on the same vehicle with explosives.
3307.1.2. Filing of notice of activity. The notice of
activity together with adequate documentation of insurance
coverage, at a minimum of $50,000, shall be filed with the
Whitehall Township Bureau of Planning, Zoning and
Development prior to the commencement, undertaking or
establishment of any condition or operation listed in Chapter
33. The notice of activity shall be filed by the individual,
person, corporation, firm or entity which shall be engaged
in, practice, or establish the condition, activity or operations
set forth in this subsection.
3307.1.3. Prohibited activities. The following conditions,
activities, operations or types of blasting agents or
explosives are strictly prohibited:
1. Liquid nitroglycerin.
2. Dynamite containing over 60% of liquid explosive
ingredient.
3. Dynamite having an unsatisfactory absorbent or
dynamite that permits leakage of a liquid explosive
ingredient under any conditions liable to exist during
storage.
§ 5-20 ANIMALS § 5-20
2:329
4. Nitrocellulose in a dry and uncompressed condition in a
quantity greater than 10 pounds (4.54kg) net weight in
one package.
5. Fulminate of mercury in a dry condition, and fulminate
of all other metals in any condition, except as a
component of manufactured articles not hereinafter
forbidden.
6. Explosive compositions that ignite spontaneously or
undergo marked decomposition, rendering the products
or their use more hazardous when subject for 48
consecutive hours or less to a temperature of 167° F.
(75° C.).
7. New explosives until approved by DOTn 49 CFR listed
in Chapter 44, except for permits issued to educational,
governmental or industrial laboratories or instructional
research purposes.
8. Explosives condemned by DOTn 49 CFR listed in
Chapter 45.
9. Explosives not packed or marked in accordance with
the requirements of DOTn 49 CFR Parts 100 through
178 listed in Chapter 45.
10. Explosives containing an ammonium salt and chlorate.
Exception: Gelatin dynamite.
3308. The manufacture, display, sale or discharge of fireworks
shall be governed by, and comply with applicable
requirements, ordinances, laws, rules, and regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United States Federal
Government.
3308.1. Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage,
sale, handling and use of fireworks is prohibited.
Exceptions:
1. Storage and handling of fireworks is permitted only
with a notice of activity as stated in Subsection 3308.2
2. The use of fireworks for display as stated in 3308.2
3. The possession, storage, sale, handling and use of
specific types of Division 1.4G where allowed by
applicable state laws, ordinances and regulations,
provided that such fireworks comply with CPSC 16 CFR
Parts 1500 through 1507, and DOTn 49 CFR Parts 100
through 178, for consumer fireworks.
§ 5-20 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-20
2:330
§ 5-21. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of this article and of the code hereby adopted, insofar as
they are the same as those ordinances and/or codes in force immediately
prior to the enactment of this article, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and codes and not as new enactments. Any code or ordinance
or part of any code or ordinance in conflict with this code and this article
is hereby repealed. The provisions of this article and of the code hereby
adopted shall not be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in
any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause or causes
of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed;
nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired
or affected by this code or this article.
3308.2. Notice of activity. Any person, firm, corporation, or
entity practicing or engaged in the manufacture, display, sale
or discharge of fireworks shall file a notice of activity with
the Bureau of Planning, Zoning and Development prior to the
commencement or establishment of such manufacture, sale,
or discharge. The notice of activity shall be made in writing
on a form as prescribed by the Whitehall Township Bureau of
Planning, Zoning and Development.
§ 5-20 ANIMALS § 5-21
2:331

ARTICLE VII
International Fuel Gas Code
[Adopted 2-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2357]
§ 5-22. Adoption of Fuel Gas Code. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
The Township of Whitehall hereby adopts the International Fuel Gas Code/
2000 (hereinafter referred to as "code"), with certain additions and
insertions as hereinafter set forth. Copies of the code and of this article are
filed in the office of the Mayor and the Department of Operations. The code
and this article shall collectively be considered and referred to as the "code"
both herein and in the code.
§ 5-23. Revisions/Insertions. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
A. The following additions, amendments and deletions shall be made as
indicated:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, second line, insert at space indicated for
"name of jurisdiction," the following:
Township of Whitehall
(2) Section 106.5.2, Fee Schedule, shall be amended to read as follows:
The fees for all work performed under this code shall be as
indicated in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule63 as found in the
Whitehall Township Code, as amended from time to time.
(3) Section 106.5.3, Fee Refunds, shall deleted in its entirety.
(4) Section 108.4, Violation Penalties, shall be amended to read:
63.Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 5-22 ANIMALS § 5-23
2:333
Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail
to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Code Official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall
be guilty of a criminal offense, punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both
such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues
after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
Upon judgment against any person by summary conviction or b
proceedings by summons, on default of payment of the fine or
penalty imposed by said judgment and the costs, the defendant
may be sentenced and committed tot he Township lockup for a
period not exceeding five days or to the County jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
(5) Section 108.5, Stop-Work Orders, the last sentence of this section
shall be amended to read as follows:
Any person who shall continue any work on the system after
having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as
that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $500 or more
than $1,000.
(6) Section 109, Means of Appeal, Subsection 109.1, Application for
Appeal, shall be amended to read:
Any appeal from any decision of the Fuel Gas Code Official shall be
heard by the Whitehall Township Code Board of Appeals pursuant
to and consistent with the practices and procedures established
for or by such Board. An application for appeal shall be based on
the claim that the true intent of this code or article or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of this code or article do not fully apply, or an equally
good or better form of construction is proposed. The application
for appeal shall be filed on a form obtained from the Department
of Operations, Bureau of Development, within 20 days after the
decision of the Fuel Gas Code Official or within 20 days after the
notice was served.
(7) Sections 109.2 through 109.7 shall be deleted in their entirety.
§ 5-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-23
2:334
ARTICLE VIII
International Residential Code For One- and Two-Family Dwellings
[Adopted 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2439]
§ 5-24. Adoption of International Residential Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Bureau of Planning, Zoning and Development, Department of Operations,
Township of Whitehall, being marked and designated as the "he
International Residential Code for One- and Two- Family Dwellings, 2000"
(hereinafter referred to as the "International Residential Code"); as
published in cooperation with the International Conference of Building
Officials and the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc.; as
hereinafter amended by and is hereby adopted as the "Whitehall Township
Residential Code," in the County of Lehigh, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
for the control of one- and two-family buildings and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said International Residential Code, as hereinafter
amended, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part of hereof as
if fully set out in this article. The International Residential Code and this
article shall collectively be considered and referred to therein as in the
International Code as the "code."
§ 5-25. Inconsistent ordinances.
All other building ordinances or codes inconsistent herewith, whether in
whole or in part, are hereby repealed, except as hereinafter specifically
adopted, continued, or included by reference. In the event that this article,
code or part thereof is in conflict with any other non-building ordinance
or code or part thereof, the more restrictive provisions shall be deemed
applicable.
§ 5-26. Additions, amendments, changes, deletions and insertions.
A. The International Residential Code is hereby revised and amended,
pursuant to the following additions, amendments, as:
(1) Subsection R101.1, Title, (second line) shall be amended to insert
"Township of Whitehall" for "(Name of Jurisdiction)."
(2) Chapter 1, Administration, Section R102, Applicability, Subsection
R102.1, General, the last sentence thereof shall be amended to
read as follows:
§ 5-24 ANIMALS § 5-26
2:335
Except as is required by any applicable state or federal law,
statute, rule, regulation, or order relative to making buildings
accessible to disabled persons, the construction, addition,
alteration, repair, or removal of or to any structures shall conform
to that required of a new structure without requiring the existing
structure to comply with all of the requirements of this code,
except that no owner of any commercial or industrial structure
shall affix any addition, enlargement or extension thereto unless
the original structure or building has a foundation which complies
with the requirements set forth in this code.
(3) Section R102, Applicability, Subsection R102.2, Other Laws, shall
be amended to include the following subsections:
R102.2.1. Requirements of department of labor and industry
of Pennsylvania: Whenever any provision or requirement of the
regulations of the Department of Labor and Industry of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania is more stringent or stricter than
a provision or requirement of the code, then the applicable
provision or requirement of the regulations of the said Department
of Labor and Industry shall supersede any such provision or
requirement of the code.
R102.2.2. Access by physically handicapped: All buildings and
building sites which are subject to federal or state laws, rules, or
orders relative to making the same accessible to and usable by
person with disabilities (i.e., the Americans With Disabilities Act)
shall comply with all such standards, specifications, and principles
of those legislative enactments including, but not limited to, areas
of refuge.
(4) Section R102, Applicability, Subsection R102.7.1, Additions,
Alterations or Repairs, shall be amended to read:
R102.7. Additions, alterations or repairs: Additions,
alterations or repairs to any structure shall conform to that
required for a new structure without requiring the existing
structure to comply with all of the requirements of this code
unless otherwise stated. Additions, alterations or repairs shall not
cause an existing structure to become unsafe or adversely affect
the performance of the building. Ordinary repairs to single-family
residential dwelling units shall be construed to include interior
alterations, additions or modifications of non-bearing walls or
supports that do not involve the relocation or extension of water
supply, sanitary sewer, gas service, electrical service or
mechanical conveyance systems. Where these utility systems are
relocated or extended, the jurisdiction of this code is limited to the
specific system(s) relocation(s) and not the entire project.
§ 5-26 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-26
2:336
(5) Section R103, Department of Building Safety, Subsections R103.1
through R103.3, are hereby deleted and shall be replaced with the
following:
R103.1. Administration. This code shall be administered by the
Department of Operations, Bureau of Planning, Zoning and
Development. The Township Zoning Officer shall receive all
requests and applications for building permits and zoning permits,
issue building permits and zoning permits, and keep a record of
all applications for permits and permits issued, with notation of all
special conditions involved.
R103.2. Effective administration and reports. Responsibility
for effective administration of this code and for periodic reports
relating to enforcement hereof is that of the chief of the Bureau of
Planning, Zoning and Development.
R103.3. Appointment. The Building Inspector or Inspectors shall
be appointed by the Mayor. Building Inspectors shall conduct
inspections of all work accomplished in the Township and shall
maintain detailed records of all such activities. Building Inspectors
shall not be engaged in the Township, directly or indirectly, with
the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the
construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, or in the
preparation of plans or specifications therefor, unless such
Inspector is the owner of such building. [Amended 6-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(6) Section R104, Duties and Powers of the Building Official,
Subsections R104.1 and R104.4, are hereby deleted and replaced
with the following:
§ 5-26 ANIMALS § 5-26
2:337
R104.1. General. This code may be enforced by the Director
of the Department of Operations. All individuals charged with
the enforcement are hereby deemed, individually, as the Code
Enforcement Officer and collectively as the Code Enforcement
Officers. Building Inspectors are hereby expressly granted
enforcement authority. The Building Official is hereby authorized
and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The building
official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this
code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the
application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and
procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of
this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of
waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code.
R104.4. Inspections. All required building code inspections shall
be made by the Building Inspector or by such other personnel
as are designated by the Bureau Chief of Planning, Zoning and
Development or by the Mayor. All inspections shall be reported
in writing to the Chief of the Bureau of Planning, Zoning and
Development or to his or her designee. Each Building Inspector
shall have the power and duty, in the interest of public safety,
health and general welfare, to designate reasonable requirements
in addition to those found herein, applicable because of the local
climactic or other conditions, provided that such additional
requirements do not waive any provision hereof. The building
official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed
necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise,
subject to the approval of the appointing authority. [Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(7) Section R105, Permits, Subsection R105.1, Required, shall be
amended to read as follows:
R105.1. Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends
to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the
occupancy of a building or structure or to erect, install, enlarge,
alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas,
mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is
regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done
shall first make application to the building official and obtain the
required permit. Application for a permit shall be made by the
contractor or his agent. If no contractor is involved, then and only
then may the owner or lessee apply for a building permit. If work
is commenced by any contractor or his agent without first applying
for a permit, said contractor's Township business license shall be
subject to revocation.
(8) Subsection R105.3.1, Action on Application, shall be amended to
include the following:
§ 5-26 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-26
2:338
For the purposes of this section, the phrase "reasonable time" shall
mean 90 days after a fully completed application is submitted.
Notice of the disapproval of an application shall include a brief
explanation setting forth the reasons for the disapproval and the
manner in which the application can be corrected and/or modified
to obtain approval. Where plans, specifications, plot plans and
engineering details are not required, or where plans and plot plans
are required for standard residential construction, action on the
application shall be taken no later than 10 working days after
the application is submitted. Notwithstanding any term, condition
or provision of this subsection, no permit shall be issued until
such time as the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
has either issued a letter that no approval is necessary or has
approved all commercial and/or multifamily plans and/or that the
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture has approved all food
service establishment plans.
(9) Subsection R105.3.2, Time Limitation of Application, shall be
amended to read as follows:
R105.3.2. Time limitation of application. An application for
a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been
abandoned 90 days after the date of filing, unless such application
has been diligently prosecuted or a permit shall have been issued;
except that the code official shall grant one or more extensions of
time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each if there is
reasonable cause.
(10) Subsection R105.6, Suspension or revocation, shall be amended to
read as follows:
R105.6. Suspension or revocation. The building official is
authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the
provision of this code wherever the permit is issued in error or on
the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in
violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provision of
this code. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized
work is not commenced within six months after issuance of the
permit or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for
a period of one year after the date of the commencement of the
work. Notwithstanding any term, condition or provision of this
code to the contrary, each and every building permit shall expire
within one year of the date that the said permit is issued.
(11) Subsection R106.1, Submittal documents, shall be amended to
read as follows:
§ 5-26 ANIMALS § 5-26
2:339
106.1. Submittal documents. Construction documents, special
inspection and structural observation programs, and other data
shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application
for a permit. For the construction, alteration, repairs, expansion,
addition or modification of all nonresidential buildings and all
multifamily apartment buildings, the code official shall require to
be filed adequate details of structural, mechanical and electrical
work, including computations, stress diagrams and other essential
technical data. All engineering plans and computations shall bear
the signature and seal of the engineer or architect responsible
for the design. Where special conditions exist, the building official
is authorized to require additional construction documents to be
prepared by a registered design professional. When construction
documents are required by this code for a building permit
application, the same shall be prepared by a registered design
professional consistent with the professional registration laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Such construction documents
shall include the name an address of a registered design
professional and shall be signed, sealed, and dated by the
registered design professional. All such plans shall first be
submitted for plan review by Building Officials and Code
Administrators (BOCA) International for mechanical, building, and
energy conservation, electrical and plumbing review.
(12) Subsection R106.2, Site plan, shall be amended to add the
following subsections:
R106.2.1. All new work shall be located strictly in accordance
with the approved plot plan. No changes shall be permitted,
except for changes which do not violate the provisions of this code
or any other Township codes.
R106.2.2. Changes in site plan. Changes in site plans are
governed by Chapter 27, Zoning, and Chapter 22, Subdivision and
Land Development, of the Code of the Township of Whitehall.
(13) Subsection R108.2, Schedule of permit fees, shall be amended to
read:
R108.2. Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures,
electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations
requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required
in Appendix M64 of the Code of Whitehall Township. The permit fee
for the demolition of a building or structure is also listed in this
appendix. No permit for demolition of any structure shall be issued
until such time as all required permits have been secured from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(14) Subsection R108.5, Refunds, shall be deleted in its entirety.
64.Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 5-26 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-26
2:340
(15) Subsection R109, Inspections, shall be amended to include the
following subsections:
R109.1.7. After foundation construction, and prior to backfilling
and prior to the commencement of framing or above-grade
construction.
R109.1.8. After completion of plastering, flooring and trim, but
prior to interior finishing or decoration.
(16) Subsection R109.2, Inspection agencies, shall be amended to read
as follows:
R109.2. Inspection agencies. The Building Inspector may
accept reports of accredited/licensed inspection services which
satisfy Township code requirements as to qualifications and
reliability, excepting final inspections, which shall be conducted by
appropriate Township personnel.
(17) Subsection R109.3, Inspection requests, shall be amended to
include the following subsections:
R109.3.1.1. Twenty-four-hour prior notice. The applicant or
his duly authorized agent or contractor shall be responsible for
notifying the Building Inspector at least 24 hours prior to each of
the above construction milestones.
R109.3.1.2. Applicant responsibility. The absence of full time
enforcement availability by the Building Inspector shall not relieve
the applicant form the requirement and responsibility for full
compliance with all applicable provisions of this code.
(18) Section R110, Certificate of occupancy, Subsection R110.1, Use
and occupancy, shall be revised to read:
R110.1. Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be
used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy
classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall
be made until the building official has issued a certificate of
occupancy therefore as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate
of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of
the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the Township.
Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of this code or other ordinances of the Township shall
not be valid. A certificate of occupancy shall only be issued upon
full compliance with all applicable Whitehall Township ordinances,
including but not limited to the Whitehall Township Zoning,
Building, Electrical, Mechanical, Fire Prevention and Plumbing
Code Ordinances.
(19) Subsection R110.3, Certificate issued, shall be amended to read as
follows:
§ 5-26 ANIMALS § 5-26
2:341
R110.3. Certificate issued. When a building or structure is
entitled thereto, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a
certificate of use and occupancy within 10 days after written
application therefor. The certificate of use and occupancy shall
certify compliance with the provisions of this code and the
purposes for which the building or structure will be used in its
several parts. The certificate of use and occupancy shall specify
the use group, the type of construction, and any special
stipulations and conditions of the construction permits (building,
plumbing electrical, etc.).
(20) Section R112, Board of Appeals, Subsection R112.1, General, shall
be amended to read:
R112.1. General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders,
decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative
to application and interpretation of this code, there shall be, and
is hereby created, a board of appeals. The Board of Appeals shall
be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at is
pleasure. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting
its business. The Board of Appeals shall consist of five Whitehall
Township residents appointed to five- year terms respectively by
resolution of the Township Board of Commissioners, except that
the initial appointments shall be staggered for one- , two- , three-
, four- and five-year terms, respectively, and thereafter each new
member or reappointed member shall serve a five- year term. In
addition, the Board of Commissioners may appoint by resolution
at least one, but not more than three, residents of the Township
to serve as alternate members of the Board. The term of office
of an alternate member shall be three years. The Township shall
designate and provide a secretary to the Board of Appeals. The
Secretary shall keep minutes and a detailed record of all
proceedings held before the Board for the files of the Building
Inspector.
(21) Subsection 112.3, Qualifications, shall be amended to read as
follows:
112.3. Qualifications. The Board of Appeals shall consist of
members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on
matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees
of the jurisdiction. Each member shall have either training,
education, or experience in either engineering, architecture, or
construction supervision. At least one of the members shall be
either a structural engineer, civil engineer, professional land
surveyor or architect who is currently licensed by and practicing
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(22) Section R112, Board of Appeals, shall be amended further by the
addition of the following subsections:
§ 5-26 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-26
2:342
R112.5. Compensation of members. Compensation for all
Board members shall be determined by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
R112.6. Postponed hearings. When three qualified members
of the Board of Appeals are not present to consider a particular
appeal, either the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer,
or the appellant or his/her respective representative shall have the
right to request an immediate continuation of the hearing.
R112.7. Board decision. The Board of Appeals shall modify or
reverse the decision of the Building Inspector by a concurring vote
of a majority of the members present at the hearing. However,
if all members are not present, the Board may only modify or
reverse the decision of the Building Inspector by a concurring
vote of at least two members of the Board. Failure to secure two
concurring votes (if less than all members are present) shall be
deemed a confirmation of the decision of the Building Inspector. If
the hearing is held before less than all members of the Board, the
appellant shall be entitled to a further hearing before a full Board
upon request therefor.
R112.8. Court review. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the
Board of Appeals, whether or not a previous party of the decision,
or any officer or official board of the Township may, pursuant
to the Pennsylvania Local Agency Law, appeal to the Court of
Common Pleas of Lehigh County within 30 days after due notice of
the filing of the Board of Appeals' decision with the Bureau Chief
of Planning, Zoning and Development.
(23) Subsection R113.4, Violation penalties, shall be amended to read:
R113.4. Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair
mechanical equipment or systems in violation of the approved
construction documents, a directive of the code official, of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall be
guilty of a criminal offense, punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues
after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense. Upon judgment against any person by summary
conviction or by proceeding by summons, on default of the
payment of the fine or penalty imposed by said judgment and
the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the
Township lockup for a period not exceeding five days or to the
County jail or workhouse for a period not exceeding 30 days.
(24) Subsection R114.2, Unlawful continuance, shall be amended to
read as follows:
§ 5-26 ANIMALS § 5-26
2:343
R114.2. Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue
any work after having been served with a stop-work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $100 or more than $1,000, plus costs of the action, including
reasonable attorney's fees for each day of such violation.
(25) Section R202.0, General Definitions, shall be amended as set forth
hereinafter:
REVISED DEFINITIONS:
BUILDING LINE — The setback line established by ordinance
or indicated upon a duly accepted or recorded lot plan or deed,
beyond which a building shall not extend.
NEW DEFINITIONS:
AGGREGATE — Inert material which is mixed with cement and
water to produce concrete, consisting in general of sand,
pebbles, gravel, cinders, crushed stone, blast furnace slag, burnt
shale, slay, or similar materials. Fine aggregate shall mean
aggregate consisting of particles 1/4-inch or less in size.
ALLEY — A secondary way, less than 24 feet in width, utilized as
a public or private thoroughfare for pedestrians or vehicles.
BEAM — A principal horizontal structural member used to
support a load over an opening, or, form post-to-post, over the
floor of the building.
BEAM, GRADE — A beam, at or below grade, which supports a
wall.
BEAM, HEADER — A beam into which the common beams frame
around an opening.
BEAM, TRIMMER — A beam into which a header beam frames.
BOARDING HOUSE — A building arranged or used for lodging
for compensation, with or without meals, and not occupied as a
single-family unit. A boarding house shall also include rooming
houses or units.
CAISSON PILE. (FOUNDATION PIER) — A large diameter shaft
from which the inside material has been excavated and replaced
with concrete, plain or reinforced.
CANTILEVER — A projecting structural member supported on
one end and overhanging the second support.
CARPORT — A motor vehicle parking or storage structure,
which is accessory to a private dwelling, not more than one story
in height, without enclosure on at least two sides, roofed over,
and whose floor rests on or about ground level.
§ 5-26 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-26
2:344
CEILING — The overhead lining of a room suspended from
or attached to the underside of floor or roofs, that is not a
structural part of a floor or roof or the underside of exposed floor
or roof joists or other members.
CRAWL SPACE — An unfinished accessible space below the first
floor, usually less than full story or basement height.
DRAFT CURTAIN — A curtain or baffle, that extends downward
form a roof or ceiling to stop drafts or bank up heat from a fire.
FENCE — A vertical structure not a part of a building or any
other structure that forms a barrier between lots, between a lot
and a street or an alley, or between portions of a lot or lots.
FUEL OIL — A hydrocarbon oil, refined for use in heating
equipment, free from grit and fibrous or other foreign matter,
and with a flash point not less than 100° F. when tested in
accordance with ASTM Designation D92, titled "Cleveland Open
Cup Test Method."
GLUED LAMINATED TIMBER CONSTRUCTION — Assemblies
of specially selected and prepared wood laminations
approximately parallel longitudinally.
GYPSUM BLOCK or TILE — The term "gypsum block" or
"gypsum tile" shall mean a solid or hollow building unit of
gypsum or of suitable aggregate with a gypsum binder.
GYPSUM CONCRETE — Gypsum concrete shall consist of a
mixture of gypsum and water, with or without chips, shavings,
fiber or other approved aggregate. The gypsum and wood chips,
shavings, or fiber may be premixed, requiring only the addition
of water at the building site.
GYPSUM WALLBOARD — A sheet having a noncombustible
core, essentially gypsum.
HANGAR — A building or part of a building designed or used for
the shelter, storage, or servicing of one or more aircraft.
HANGAR BUILDING GROUP — A building or group of buildings
containing several separated storage or servicing areas, each of
which may be used for one or more aircraft at any one time.
LAITANCE — Extremely fine material of little or no hardness
which may collect on the surface of freshly-placed concrete and
resulting from the use of excess mixing water.
LOAD, DESIGN — Total load which a structure is designed to
sustain including dead load, live load, and impact load.
LOAD, RACKING — A concentrated or resultant load
eccentrically applied, parallel to a plane of an assembly, so
as to simultaneously produce longitudinal and transverse
deformations in that plane. Also, this term applies to the test
load as described in ASTM Designation E72 applied in a
horizontal direction to floor, wall, and roof assemblies.
§ 5-26 ANIMALS § 5-26
2:345
MAINTENANCE — Of a building, structure, appliance,
apparatus, or equipment shall mean the way or manner any
building, structure, appliance or equipment is serviced, repaired
or altered to perpetuate the use or purpose for which such
building, structure, appliances, apparatus or equipment was
originally intended.
MEAN GRADE — Mean grade shall be considered to be an
average elevation of the ground area which is contiguous to, and
within 20 feet of, the building or within the lot line where it is
closer than 20 feet from the building. Such grade shall in no case
be permitted to exceed a ratio of one foot vertical-to-two feet
horizontal.
MEMBER (PRIMARY) — Any member of the structural frame of
a building or structure used as a column, grillage beam, or to
support masonry walls and partitions, including trusses, isolated
lintels spanning an opening of eight feet or more, and any other
member required to brace a column or truss. To be considered
a primary member, steel joists must be constructed of hot-rolled
structural sections and top and bottom chords. Likewise, they
must be properly braced laterally.
MEMBER (SECONDARY) — Any member of the structural
framework, other than a primary member, including filled-in
beams or steel joists of floor systems.
MOBILE UNIT — Any vehicle or structure used or occupied for
dwelling purposes or any commercial use which utilizes wheels
and axles for its transportation or is designed to be moved from
one site to another and to be used with or without a permanent
foundation.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A single building or group of
attached dwelling units intended and designed to contain three
or more dwelling units, including row houses and townhouses.
PARKING LOT — An open space, other than a public or private
street or way, used exclusively for other parking or motor
vehicles.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any building, or that part thereof,
containing one or more rooming units in which space is let to
three or more persons.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping
but not for cooking or eating purposes.
SHEATHING — That element of a wall or roof construction,
such as thin boards, plywood, or sheets of cemented materials
directly a attached to the wall studs and roof rafters, to which
the outer finished surface is attached or applied.
SINGULAR HANGAR BUILDING — A building in which there is
a single storage or servicing area for one or more aircraft.
§ 5-26 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-26
2:346
SKELETON CONSTRUCTION — A type of building construction
in which all loads are transmitted to the foundations by
connected framework of suitable material.
SOFFIT — The underside of a member of subordinate structure.
SOIL — Any inorganic material except water in a geologic
formation in its natural state and location.
SPIRE — The high tapering roof of a steeple or tower, including
the space under such roof.
STRUCTURAL DAMAGE — Loosening, twisting, warping,
cracking, distortion, or breaking of any piece, or of any fastening
or joint, in a structural assembly with loss of sustaining capacity
of the assembly. The following shall not be deemed to constitute
structural damage: small cracks in reinforced concrete
perpendicular to the reinforcing bars, and deformation of sheet
material when a structural assembly is under applied load,
which increases as such load increases but which disappears
when such load is removed.
STUCCO — A material used in a plastic form which can be
trowled to form a hard covering for exterior walls or other
exterior surfaces of any building or structure.
TON OF REFRIGERATION — The unit of capacity of
refrigeration equivalent to the removal of heat at the rate of
12,000 B.T.U. per hour.
UNDERPINNING — The masonry or concrete construction
required to extend a wall, footing of a wall, or any part thereof
to a lower level.
WRITTEN NOTICE — A notification delivered in writing, in
person to the individual or the parties intended, or delivered
or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last
residential or business address known to the party giving notice.
(26) Section R309.2, Separation required, shall be amended to read:
R309.2. Separation required. Notwithstanding any term,
condition or provision hereof, all garages which attach to or adjoin
a residence or accessory structure shall have 5/8-inch type "X"
drywall on the warm wall side and the ceiling, and 1/2-inch drywall
on the other walls.
(27) Section R311, Exits, shall be amended to include the following
subsection:
R311.6. Construction. In buildings three stories or higher, stair
towers shall be constructed entirely of steel or other approved,
noncombustible materials with handrails on both sides of
stairways and platforms.
§ 5-26 ANIMALS § 5-26
2:347
(28) Subsection R311.7, Exit sign graphics, shall be amended to read as
follows:
R311.7. Exit sign graphics. Every exit sign and directional exit
sign shall have plainly-legible, red letters on a white background,
not less than six inches (152 mm) high with the principal strokes
of the letters not less than 0.075 inch (19.1 mm) wide. The word
"EXIT" shall have letters having a width of not less than two inches
(51 mm) wide, except the letter "I," and the minimum spacing
between letters shall not be less than 0.375 inch (9.5 mm). Signs
larger than the minimum established in this section shall have the
letter widths, strokes and spacing in proportion to their height.
The word "EXIT" shall be red letters and in high contrast with
the white background and shall be clearly discernible both when
the exit sign illumination means is and is not energized. When
necessary, these exit signs shall be supplemented by directional
signs in the access corridors indicating the direction and way
of egress. If an arrow is provided as part of the exit sign, the
construction shall be such that the arrow direction cannot be
readily changed.
Notwithstanding any term, condition, or provision hereof to the
contrary, "Exit" signs shall not be powered or otherwise
illuminated with any hazardous substance (as defined by any
federal, state or local law, rule, ordinance, order, directive or
promulgation), whether or not such hazardous substance is fully
contained.
(29) Subsection R314.2, Treads and risers, shall be amended to read as
follows:
R314.2. Treads and risers. In occupancies in Group R-3, as
applicable in Section 101.2; within dwelling units in occupancies
in Group R-2, as applicable in Section 101.2; and in occupancies
in Group U, which are accessory to an occupancy in Group R-3,
as applicable in Section 101.2, the maximum riser height shall be
8 1/4 inches, and the minimum tread depth shall be nine inches.
A nosing of not less than one inch shall be provided on stairways
with solid risers where the tread depth is less than 11 inches.
(30) Chapter 3, Building Planning, shall be amended to add the
following subsections:
R328. Safeguards during construction.
R328.1. Whenever a building or structure is erected, altered,
repaired, removed or demolished, the operation shall be
conducted in a safe manner, and suitable protection for the
general public shall be provided including continued flow of
stormwater runoff (through appropriate conduits).
§ 5-26 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-26
2:348
R328.2. Dumpster. At such time as any new construction is
commenced on a lot and prior to the time that any lumber
is delivered to the site, the owner of the lot or the developer
shall have a dumpster on site in which all refuse shall be
deposited. The dumpster shall remain on site until such time
as the construction is complete. The dumpster shall be emptied
within 72 hours of being filled to capacity. A separate "dumpster
permit" shall be required for any dumpster proposed to be
placed within the public right-of-way.
R328.3. Erosion and sedimentation control. Prior to any
disturbance of any soil on a lot for construction of
improvements or lot grading or lot stripping, all required
erosion and sedimentation control devices shall be properly
installed and maintained until the soil is covered with stabilized
vegetation, i.e., grass. The provision of this section shall apply
to construction of individual residential units as well as other
construction. For the purposes of this section, the phrase
"required erosion and sedimentation control devices" shall
include the Erosion Control Guidelines for Single Residential
Lots as drafted by the Lehigh County Conservation District and
as amended and updated.
R328.4. Exposed party walls. Exposed party walls not
intended to be used again as a party wall, shall be made
structurally sound and shall be made permanently
waterproofed by the application of stucco, brickote, gunite, or
other approved, noncombustible material.
R328.5. Collar ties are required at every third rafter.
R328.6. All gable ends must have framing 16 inches on center.
R328.7. Roof ridge shall have a minimum of 3T ridge pole
supports.
R328.8. Roof and exterior corners must be a minimum of 1/
2 inch thick approved-grade exterior plywood or approved
bracing.
R328.9. All openings in the upper or lower plates of interior
walls must be sealed tight with approved fire-rated sealant.
R328.10. An approved smoke detector must be installed on
every floor level, including the basement and bedroom, and
hard wired with battery back up.
R328.11. All commercial self storage units must be
constructed with a minimum one-hour, fire-rated wall between
units.
R328.12. On all trussed roofs, mechanical fasteners must be
used (i.e., hurricane clips) instead of the simple "toenail"
method.
§ 5-26 ANIMALS § 5-26
2:349
R328.13. In conditions where a structure is demolished when
there is a common wall with another structure, it shall be
the responsibility of the property owner of the structure to be
demolished to assure the stability and safety of the adjoining
structure as well as to weather proof the remaining open wall.
(31) Chapter 4, Foundations, Section R401, General, Subsection
R401.4, Soil Tests, shall be amended to include the following
subsections:
R401.4.2. Presence of rock. When rock is present at or near a
foundation, additional reinforcement may be necessary.
R401.4.3. On grade slabs. On-grade slabs shall have 1 1/2 inch
thick R-7.5 insulation value and 24-inch rigid board depth on
perimeter insulation on all occupied buildings.
(32) Subsection R403.1.4, Minimum depth, shall be amended to read:
R403.1.4. Minimum depth. Except where erected on solid rock
or otherwise protected from frost, foundation walls, piers and
other permanent supports of buildings and structures larger than
400 square feet (37m2) in area or 10 feet (3048 mm) in height
shall extend below the frost line, and spread footings of adequate
size shall be provided where necessary to properly distribute the
load within the allowable load-bearing value of the soil.
Alternatively, such structures shall be supported on piles where
solid earth or rock is not available. Footings below the frost line
shall not bear on frozen soils unless such frozen condition is of
a permanent character. The frost line referenced herein shall be
considered to be at a depth of 36 inches below the ground surface.
The top of all footings shall be a minimum of 27 inches below the
exterior grade.
(33) Section R403, Footings, Subsection R403.1.1, Minimum size, shall
be amended to read:
§ 5-26 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-26
2:350
R403.1.1. Minimum size. Minimum sixes for concrete and
masonry footings shall be as set forth in Table R403.1 and Figure
R403.1(1). The footing width, W, shall be based on the loadbearing
value of the soil in accordance with Table R401.4.1.
Spread footings shall be at least six inches (152mm) in thickness.
Footing projections, P, shall be at least two inches (51 mm) and
shall not exceed the thickness of the footing. The size of footings
supporting piers and columns shall be based on the tributary load
and allowable soil pressure in accordance with Table R401.4.1
Footings for wood foundations shall be in accordance with the
details set forth in Section R403.2, and Figures R403.1(2) and
R403.1(3). Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections Table
R403.1 and Figure R403.1(1) hereof, footings shall not be less
than nine inches thick. The width of footings shall be 18 inches for
eight-inch foundation walls and 20 inches for 10-inch foundation
walls.
(34) Section R404, Foundation Walls, Subsection R404.1, Concrete and
Masonry Foundation Walls, shall be amended to include the
following sentence:
Foundation walls in residential structures shall be poured at such
height to allow a clearance of seven feet six inches from the top
of the foundation wall to the top of the basement floor to allow for
the future finishing of basement areas.
(35) Section R404.1.5, Foundation wall thickness based on walls
supported, shall be amended to read as follows:
R404.1.5. Foundation wall thickness based on walls
supported.
A. The thickness of foundation walls shall be: eight- inch
poured concrete walls for one-story buildings; 10- inch
poured concrete walls for buildings having two or more
stories; 10- inch concrete masonry units for one-story
buildings; and 12- inch concrete masonry units for buildings
having two or more stories. All walls having standard brick
veneer shall have either a minimum of 10- inch poured
concrete walls or 10- inch concrete masonry units. All walls
having stone veneer shall have either a minimum of 12- inch
poured concrete walls or 12- inch concrete masonry units.
B. In frame construction, plates must be anchored to
foundation walls at corners and at intervals of six feet (12
inches from corners and 12 inches from plate ends) with 1/
2 inch bolts embedded not less than 16 inches in masonry
walls. There must be a minimum of two bolts per plate.65
65.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(35.1), added 10-12-2009 by Ord. No. 2795, which
provided for the addition of Section R502.1.4.1 on prefabricated/engineered wood I-joists,
was repealed 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2866.
§ 5-26 ANIMALS § 5-26
2:351
(36) Section R602, Wood Wall Framing. Subsection R602.2, Grade, shall
be amended to read as follows:
R602.2. Grade. All framing lumber shall be number two or better
and/or be properly graded.
(37) Section R602, Wood Wall Framing, Subsection R602.3.1, Stud
spacing, shall be amended to read:
R602.3.1. Stud spacing. In bearing walls, studs that are not
more than 10 feet (3048mm) in length shall be spaced not more
than is specified in Table R602.3(5). In bearing walls, studs that
are more than 10 feet (3048mm) in height shall be spaced not
more than specified in Table R602.3.1. Studs, joists and rafters
shall be spaced 16 inches on center with a minimum of four-inch
bearings.
(38) Section R602, Wood Wall Framing, Subsection R602.8.1, Materials,
shall be amended to include the following subsection:
R602.8.1.3. Standards. Notwithstanding any term, condition or
provision of this code, all sill plates shall be treated lumber; all
headers six feet or larger must be packed with 1/2 inch thick
plywood and supported with double 2x4 jack studs at both ends.
Three-quarter inch tongue and groove sturdy floor can be used
in lieu of the 1 1/2 inch sub-floor and one 1/2 inch underlayment
combined. Supports under main beams shall be four-inch steel
pipe with steel plates fastened at both ends.
(39) Subsection R602.8, Fireblocking Required, Subsection 1 shall be
amended to read as follows:
1. Concealed wall spaces. Fireblocking shall be provided in
concealed spaces of stud walls and partitions, including furred
or studded-off spaces of masonry or concrete walls. Fire stops
and draft stops shall be provided at the ceiling and floor
or roof levels and at maximum intervals of eight feet, both
vertically and horizontally.
(40) Chapter 39, Devices and Lighting Fixtures, shall be amended to
include the following subsection:
§ 5-26 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-26
2:352
E3903.13. Outdoor emergency notification lights. All new
residential construction shall include outdoor emergency
notification lights on or at the front of the dwelling. In the event
that the dwelling includes a front port, then the outdoor
emergency notification light shall be on or at the front porch. If
there is no front porch, then the outdoor emergency notification
light shall be located so as to be visible from the public street
from either side property line and shall be operable from the
interior of the dwelling by an emergency notification switch.
Notwithstanding any provisions of the Chapter 27, Zoning, of the
Code of Whitehall Township, the outdoor emergency notification
lights may flash or blink intermittently in order to notify
emergency management services of the location of the dwelling.
(41) Appendix G, Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs, Section AG105,
Barrier Requirements, Subsection AG105.2, Outdoor Swimming
Pool, Subsection 1 shall be amended to read: [Added 3-11-2013
by Ord. No. 2924]
1. The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches (1219 mm)
above grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces
away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical
clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall
be 2 inches (51 mm) measured on the side of the barrier which
faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool
structure is above grade, such as an above-ground pool, the
barrier may be at ground level or mounted on the top of the
pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool
structure, it shall be a minimum of 24 inches (609.6 mm) in
height, and the maximum vertical clearance between the top
of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be 4
inches (102 mm).
(42) Appendix G, Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs, Section AG105,
Barrier Requirements, Subsection AG105.2, Outdoor Swimming
Pool, Subsection 10 shall be amended to read: [Added 3-11-2013
by Ord. No. 2924]
10. Where the barrier for an above-ground pool structure is
mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of
access is a ladder or steps:
10.1. The ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured,
locked or removed to prevent access; or
10.2. The ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier
which meets the requirements of Section AG105.2,
Items 1 through 9. When the ladder or steps are
secured locked or removed any opening created shall
not allow the passage of a 4-inch diameter (102 mm)
sphere.
§ 5-26 ANIMALS § 5-27
2:353
§ 5-27. Continuation of existing provisions.
Notwithstanding any term, condition, or provision hereof to the contrary,
the code hereby adopted shall not be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding now pending in any court, or any right acquired, accrued, or
liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action accrued or exiting, under
any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in § 5-25 of this article, nor
shall any just or legal right or remedy of any individual or entity of any
character be lost, impaired, or affected by this article or the code.
§ 5-27 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-27
2:354
ARTICLE IX
Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2464]
§ 5-28. Adoption of Uniform Construction Code.
Whitehall Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 5-29. Amendments, changes and deletions.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of Whitehall Township,
with the following modifications:
A. Section 403.42(b) is hereby deleted (emergency repairs).
B. Section 403.62, Permit Requirements and Exemptions (Residential
Buildings), Subsection (c)(1), is hereby modified to delete the following
subsections: (i), (ii), (iv), (xi), (xvii); and Subsection (c)(2) to delete the
following subsections: (ii), (iii), (iv); and Subsection (c)(5) to delete the
following subsections: (i), (ii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii), (ix); and
Subsection (c)(6) to delete the following subsections: (ii), (iii), (iv), (v).
C. Sections 403.62 (d) and (e) shall be deleted in their entireties.
D. Section 403.43(g) shall be amended to read:
(g) A permit becomes invalid unless the authorized construction work
begins within 180 days after the permit's issuance or if the
authorized construction work permit is suspended or abandoned
for 180 days after the work has commenced. A permit holder may
submit a written request for an extension of time to commence
construction for just cause. The building code official may grant
extensions of time to commence construction in writing. A permit
may be valid for no more than one year from its issue date.
E. Section 403.43(k) shall be deleted in its entirety.
F. Section 403.83, Subsection (b), shall be amended to read:
(b) The order to show cause shall contain a statement of the grounds
for the action, the alleged violations of the Uniform Construction
Code and notification that the building, structure or equipment
may be closed or vacated. The order to show cause shall contain
notification that the owner or owner's agent shall submit a written
answer within five business days. The building code official shall
serve the order to show cause upon the owner or owner's agent by
certified mail or personal service.
§ 5-28 ANIMALS § 5-29
2:355
§ 5-30. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within Whitehall Township
shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the Board
of Commissioners of Whitehall Township from time to time by resolution:
§ 5-31. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners of Whitehall Township in conformity with the requirements
of the relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for
the purposes set for therein. If at any time enforcement and administration
is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board
of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
G. Section 403.83, Subsection (c), shall be amended to read:
(c) The owner or owner's agent may file a written answer to the
order to show cause with the building code official within five days
following service of the order to show cause. The answer shall
contain specific admissions or denials of the allegations contained
in the order to show cause and set forth the specific facts, matters
of law or Uniform Construction Code interpretation relied upon by
the owner. The answer may contain a request for a variance or an
extension of time for compliance. The building code official shall
forward all requests for variances, extensions of time or appeals
regarding interpretations of the Uniform Construction Code to
the board of appeals within five business days. The building code
official shall send a request for variance, extension of time or
appeals regarding interpretation of the Uniform Construction
Code's accessibility requirements to the Department within five
business days.
A. By the designation of an employee of the Township to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of Whitehall Township.
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of Whitehall Township.
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this act through an intermunicipal
agreement.
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this act on behalf of Whitehall
Township.
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and
miscellaneous use structures.
§ 5-29 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-32
2:356
§ 5-32. Continuation of existing provisions.
§ 5-33. Fees.
Fees assessable by Whitehall Township for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this article shall be as established by
the Board of Commissioners in Appendix M66 of the Code of the Township of
Whitehall, as amended by resolution from time to time.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances, including
Whitehall Township Ordinances 2440, 2439, 2441, 2438, 2357, 2358,
and 2371, provisions of which were adopted by the Municipality on or
before July 1, 1999, and which equal or exceed the requirements of the
code, shall continue in full force and effect until such time as such
provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the
code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this article and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby amended to
conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of Whitehall Township
not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
66.Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 5-32 ANIMALS § 5-33
2:357
Chapter 6
CONDUCT
§ 5-33 WHITEHALL CODE § 5-33
2:358
ARTICLE I
Fireworks
[Adopted 3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 314267]
§ 6-1. Discharge of rockets and other dangerous combustible
material.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to
use and/or discharge rockets, powder or any other dangerous combustible
material not included within the definition of "consumer fireworks," as
defined below, within the corporate limits of the Township of Whitehall,
County of Lehigh, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 6-2. Sale, procurement and possession prohibited; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity of any nature whatsoever, to
bargain and sell, offer for sale, sell, possess, barter, furnish, procure, use
or store, rockets, or any mixture of compound of any explosive character
not included within the definition of "consumer fireworks," as defined below,
within the corporate limits of the Township of Whitehall, County of Lehigh,
and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 6-3. Definitions; use and sale of consumer fireworks. [Amended
5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 3154]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Any combustible or explosive composition
or any substance or combination of substances which is intended to
produce visible or audible effects by combustion that is suitable for use
by the public and permitted to be sold, possessed and used through the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
OCCUPIED STRUCTURE — A structure, vehicle or place adapted for
overnight accommodation of persons or for conducting business,
whether or not a person is actually present.
PYROTECHNIC DEVICE — Any device not classified as a firework
which produces a visible or audible effect by combustion for the
purpose of entertainment, including novelty devices.
B. Restrictions on the use of fireworks. Fireworks are permitted in the
Township of Whitehall, provided that they are used and sold in
compliance with House Bill 542, Act No. 2017-43 and subject to the
following restrictions:
(1) No person shall discharge fireworks on any public or private
property within 150 feet of any occupied structure. In the absence
67.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Fireworks, adopted 2-13-1969 by
Ord. No. 915, as amended.
§ 6-1 ANIMALS § 6-3
2:359
§ 6-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
of any occupied structure, use or storage of fireworks on public or
private property requires the express permission of the property
owner.
(2) No fireworks may be purchased, possessed, used or stored by any
person under 18 years of age.
(3) No fireworks or pyrotechnic device shall be discharged within, out
of or toward any vehicle or building, or directed at any person.
(4) No fireworks or pyrotechnic device shall be used by any person
under the influence of alcohol, controlled substance, or other drug.
(5) No fireworks or pyrotechnic device shall be discharged between
22:00 hours (10:00 p.m.) and 6:00 hours (6:00 a.m.), with the
exception of New Year's Eve, when fireworks or pyrotechnic
devices may be discharged until 00:30 hours on New Year's Day
(January 1 at 12:30 a.m.) but not between the hours of 00:30 (12:30
a.m.) and 6:00 (6:00 a.m.).
C. Restrictions on the sale of fireworks. Fireworks are permitted in the
Township of Whitehall, provided that they are used and sold in
compliance with House Bill 542, Act No. 2017-43 and subject to the
following restrictions:
(1) Fireworks may be purchased at any licensed facility, including
temporary ones as may be permitted under Pennsylvania law, with
the licenses being issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Agriculture.
(2) Temporary structures, including but not limited to tents and other
structures found in parking lots, to the extent permitted to sell
fireworks under Pennsylvania law, are permitted to sell fireworks in
the Township of Whitehall between the dates of June 15 and July 8,
and December 21 and January 2, each year.
(3) Any temporary structures must comply with the current
International Fire Code as well as any building codes adopted or
enacted by the Township of Whitehall.
§ 6-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 6-4
2:360
ARTICLE II
Public Property
[Adopted 11-12-1973 by Ord. No. 1118]
§ 6-5. Definitions. [Amended 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 1252]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Includes all buildings, structures and land owned or
leased by the Township of Whitehall, the Township of Whitehall authorities,
the Whitehall-Coplay School District, the Coplay-Whitehall Sewer Authority
and any private playground supported in whole in part by Township funds.
§ 6-6. License or privilege to use public property.
Any person who enters or remains in or upon property which is at time
opened to the public does so with license and privilege unless he fails or
refuses to obey an order not to enter or remain personally communicated to
him or publicly announced by the person authorized to give such order in
charge of said property or his designee.
§ 6-7. Certain public property not to be entered.
A license or privilege to enter or remain on property which is only partly
open to the public is not a license or privilege to enter or remain in any part
of the property which is not open to the public.
§ 6-8. Authority for ejection of disruptive persons.
The person in charge of said property or his designee shall further have the
right to order any person that is a disruptive influence or whose actions are
inconsistent with the purposes for which the property is opened, or who is
a threat to the safety of other persons on the property or the property itself,
not to enter or to remain on said property. Any person ordered not to enter
or remain on said property who enters or remains on said property enters
or remains without license and privilege.
§ 6-9. Violation of regulations.
Any person who enters or remains upon the property as set forth in this
article, without license and privilege, violates the provisions of this article.
§ 6-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-9-1995 by Ord. No.
1944]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 6-5 ANIMALS § 6-10
2:361

ARTICLE III
Littering
[Adopted 11-10-1969 by Ord. No. 939]
§ 6-11. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms and/or words shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section unless from the
particular context it clearly appears that some other meaning is intended:
LITTER — Any wastepaper, ashes, glass, grass, clipping, trimmings,
advertising circulars, samples, fruit peelings and other food residue, cans,
dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash, metal, wood, plastic or
any other material.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or
any entity of any nature whatsoever.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Whitehall.
§ 6-12. Littering prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person throw, dump, place or leave, or cause
or permit to be thrown, dumped, placed or left any litter on the highways,
streets, parkways, roadways, throughways, alleys, thoroughfares,
sidewalks, grounds of the public parks, swimming pools, playgrounds,
recreation areas, public buildings, streams, water or banks of such streams
or rivers, vacant lots, front yards, porches, parked motor vehicles, business
and commercial establishments or the private property of others generally.
§ 6-13. Restrictions on distributions of advertising matter.
No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed any handbill, flyer,
circular, card, booklet, placard or other advertising matter of any nature
whatsoever, in or upon any street or public place, parking lot, front yard,
malls or courtyards, in or about any private, public, business and
commercial locations or establishments, or on any stoop, in the vestibule or
hall of any building, or in a letterbox therein or thereat; provided further,
that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit or otherwise
regulate the delivery of any such matter by the U.S. postal authorities
or prohibit the orderly distribution of sample copies of newspapers of
general circulation regularly sold by the copy or by annual subscription.
This section is not intended to prevent the lawful distribution of anything
other than commercial or business advertising matter. Permit is required for
permissive distribution and application therefor must be signed by a legally
responsible person, without charge for such permit.
§ 6-14. Littering, mud and dirt from vehicles prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person during the transportation of litter within
the Township limits to permit the dropping or scattering of litter along the
areas specified in § 6-12 hereof; and provided further, it shall be unlawful
§ 6-11 ANIMALS § 6-14
2:363
to drive or cause to be driven trucks or other motor vehicle that has mud
or dirt clinging to the wheels and undercarriage of any such vehicle and
which permits mud, dirt or debris to be deposited, dropped or scattered
onto streets, alleyways, highways and roadways in the Township.
§ 6-15. Material not to be accumulated.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the accumulation of litter, mud,
gravel or other similar material on property which he owns or occupies
in any matter whatsoever to such an extent that such material is blown,
carried, washed or swept onto adjacent property owned by other persons,
the Township or any governmental agency.
§ 6-16. Litter storage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store, warehouse or retain litter in
any open area except in adequate receptacles as determined by the Health
Officer or Board of Health of the Township, which receptacles shall control
and conceal said litter.
§ 6-17. Temporary signs become litter; time limit.
Political signs and special social events notices are deemed temporary and
shall be deemed "litter" 10 days after the event or primary or general
election as the cause may be, whether on poles, posts, trees and the like,
on the ground or otherwise outside of a building or structure; however, any
such signs shall not be deemed "litter" for the period beginning 45 days
before any such event, primary or general election to 10 days thereafter,
respectively.
§ 6-18. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Whitehall Township Police Department to enforce
this article.
§ 6-19. Special events litter disposal.
Groups or organizations holding festivals, picnics, block parties and similar
events, shall provide proper receptacles for litter and constantly police
the premises and be certain area is clear of all litter, placed in proper
receptacles at the end of each day thereof.
§ 6-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-11-1990 by Ord. No.
1684; 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 6-14 WHITEHALL CODE § 6-21
2:364
§ 6-21. Township to remove litter and assess damages. [Amended
10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 1252; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
In addition, the Mayor or his designate is hereby authorized to the penalties
set forth in § 6-20, to effectuate the removal of any such litter, dirt, mud
or other debris which has not been completely removed with 24 hours and
to assess damages for all costs and expenses incurred by the Township to
remove the litter, dirt, mud or other debris, together with a penalty of 10%
of such costs.
§ 6-21 ANIMALS § 6-21
2:365

ARTICLE IV
Off-Road Motor Vehicles
[Adopted 6-16-1988 by Ord. No. 1616]
§ 6-22. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
ATV — A motorized off-road vehicle designated as either a "Class I" or "Class
II" all-terrain vehicle by 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7702.
EXCESSIVE NOISE or NOISE POLLUTION — A noise level which exceeds
99 dbA, or decibels when measured at 20 inches for ATV's. For all other offroad
vehicles, "excessive noise" shall mean sound in excess of 82 dbA when
measured in accordance with SAE Recommended Practice J 192 Exterior
Sound Level for Snowmobiles, as amended.
LANDOWNER — The person, corporation, business entity or other
authorized representative or lessor thereof, having legal ownership,
possession, or control of private property.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any police officer or auxiliary police
officer, whether employed by Whitehall Township or the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or a Code Enforcement Officer of the Township of Whitehall.
LICENSED VEHICLE — A vehicle bearing a current license issued by the
Department of Motor Vehicles of Pennsylvania under the Motor Vehicle
Code or a valid license from another State, which is authorized to travel on
the public roads and highways of the Commonwealth.
OFF-ROAD MOTOR VEHICLES — Any self-propelled motor vehicle having
two or more wheels, which is intended for or capable of use on land not
containing established roadways or a paved surface. Such definition shall
include, but not necessarily be limited to, those vehicles commonly referred
to as: minibikes; dirt bikes; trail bikes; all-terrain vehicles (of three or
more wheels); go-carts and altered unlicensed automobiles. Provided, this
definition shall not apply to the following: agricultural tractors, combines or
other farm vehicle; lawn mowers; motorized air compressor units used to
power tools and/or construction equipment or vehicles commonly used for
earth moving, grading, trenching, boring or lifting, or golf carts, military or
fire vehicles or vehicles being used exclusively for emergency purposes.
OPERATOR — The person having control of the vehicle or having a grasp on
the handlebars, steering wheel or operational throttle and braking devices.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Property owned or leased by the Township of
Whitehall, the County of Lehigh, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the
Federal government, including lands, highways, streets and alleys.
REGISTRATION DECAL — The decal required to demonstrate registration
of any snowmobile or ATV as required by 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7713.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE or AGRICULTURAL ZONE — Those zones delineated
and specified as "residential" or "agricultural" by the Township of Whitehall
§ 6-22 ANIMALS § 6-22
2:367
on its Zoning Map, incorporated by reference in § 27-603 of the Township of
Whitehall Code of Ordinances.
SNOWMOBILE — An engine-driven vehicle of a type which utilizes sled type
runners or skis or an endless belt tread or any combination of these or other
similar means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated.
§ 6-23. Prohibited conduct.
A. Operation on private property. No person shall operate an off-road
motor vehicle on private property without the written consent of the
landowner or lessor thereof. Any person operating an off-road motor
vehicle upon lands of another or public property shall immediately stop
and identify himself upon the request of the landowner or his duly
authorized representative or any law enforcement officer upon oral
demand or hand signal. If requested to do so by the landowner, such
person shall promptly remove the off-road motor vehicle from the
premises. In the event that such person has obtained permission from a
private landowner, the person shall produce written proof of such
permission to any law enforcement officer upon demand. In the absence
of proof of permission to operate on private property, such person shall
be rebuttably presumed to be a nuisance. Any person operating an
unlicensed off-road motor vehicle on public property or roads with the
engine running shall also be deemed a disorderly person, except under
certain conditions set forth below relating to snowmobiles and ATV's.
B. Operation of snowmobiles and ATV's on public property, bridges and
streets. No person shall operate a snowmobile or ATV on public
property unless such property, highway, road or street has been
designated as a snowmobile road, an ATV road, or both, pursuant to 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 7722, and in that event, only snowmobiles and ATV's bearing
a current registration decal may be used on said public property or
street.
(1) Excepting that: a snowmobile or ATV bearing a current registration
decal may be operated on highways and streets only:
(a) During periods of emergency when so declared by a policy
agency having jurisdiction.
(b) When necessary to cross a bridge or culvert.
(2) And further excepting that: a snowmobile or an ATV may make a
direct crossing of a street or highway upon compliance with the
following requirements:
(a) The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90° to the
direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing.
(b) The snow mobile or ATV is brought to a complete stop before
crossing the shoulder or main-traveled way of the highway.
§ 6-22 WHITEHALL CODE § 6-23
2:368
§ 6-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any act prohibited
by this article which can also be prosecuted under any provision in the laws
(c) The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic.
(d) In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another public street or
highway, all as set forth at 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7721.
C. Operation of other off-road motor vehicles on public property, bridges
and streets. With the exceptions set forth above in Subsection B
relating specifically to snowmobiles and ATV's, no other unlicensed offroad
vehicle may operate on any public property, bridge or street unless
such are is specifically designated by the Township as an "off-road
vehicle area" and posted as such.
D. Operation within 250 yards of dwelling house. No person shall operate
an off-road motor vehicle within 250 yards of a dwelling other than his
own in a residential or agricultural zone, without the written consent of
the landowner(s) owning such dwelling(s), unless such vehicle is a
street-legal licensed vehicle on a public road or is otherwise specifically
permitted to do so by a statute of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Excessive noise and noise pollution caused by off-road motor vehicles.
(1) It is unlawful to operate an off-road motor vehicle which is not
equipped at all times with a muffler in good working order which
blends the exhaust into the overall noise of the machine and is in
constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise. The
exhaust system shall not emit or produce a sharp popping or
crackling sound. The sound intensity for ATV's using measurement
procedures in accordance with ANSI/SAE Recommended Practice J
1287 March 1982, Measurement of Exhaust Level of Stationary
Motorcycles, shall not exceed 99 dbA, or decibels, when measured
at 20 inches.
(2) For all other off-road motor vehicles, the sound intensity shall not
exceed 82 dbA when measured in accordance with SAE
Recommended Practice J 192 Exterior Sound Level for
Snowmobiles, as amended.
(3) Any noise emitted by an off-road motor vehicle which is not within
the specifications of this section shall constitute "noise pollution"
and shall be deemed a nuisance, and the operator of the vehicle
emitting such noise shall be irrebuttably deemed a nuisance.
§ 6-23 ANIMALS § 6-24
2:369
of Pennsylvania shall be considered a violation of the applicable state law
and shall be prosecuted under such law and not under this article.
§ 6-24 WHITEHALL CODE § 6-24
2:370
ARTICLE V
Loitering
[Adopted 9-10-1990 by Ord. No. 1699]
§ 6-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITERING — To remain idle or linger in essentially one location and shall
include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing, lingering or walking
about aimlessly and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging
around."
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or a substantial group
has access including, but not limited to, highways, streets, parking lots,
sidewalks, schools, apartment houses, places of business or amusement,
any neighborhood or any premises which are open to the public.
§ 6-26. Types of loitering prohibited.
No person shall loiter in a public place in such a manner as to:
§ 6-27. Request to leave.
Whenever any person in any public place engages in any of the prohibited
conduct set forth in § 6-26, any Township Police Officer or state law
enforcement official may order that person to leave that place. Any person
who willfully fails to obey the order to leave by a Township police officer or
State law enforcement official shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace by
willfully or recklessly creating a hazardous or physically offensive
condition by any act which serves no legitimate purpose.
B. Willfully or recklessly create or cause to be created any disturbance or
annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person.
C. Willfully or recklessly obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or
vehicles.
D. Willfully or recklessly obstruct, molest or interfere with any person
lawfully in any public place.
E. Willfully interfere with the lawful use of nearby real property by an
owner or possessor of said property or by his/her invitees or customers
of said premises.
F. Willfully make unreasonable noise, willfully use obscene language or
willfully make an obscene gesture.
§ 6-25 ANIMALS § 6-28
2:371
§ 6-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 6-28 WHITEHALL CODE § 6-28
2:372
ARTICLE VI
Sledding
[Adopted 4-12-1971 by Ord. No. 1026]
§ 6-29. Sledding on sidewalks prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to coast or ride upon any sled or similar
conveyance upon any sidewalk in the Township of Whitehall, or upon any
street or alley in the said Township, unless such street or alley shall at the
time be set off or designated as a "play highway."
§ 6-30. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
§ 6-29 ANIMALS § 6-30
2:373

ARTICLE VII
Possession and Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages
[Adopted 2-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2359]
§ 6-31. Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages on
Township park property.
§ 6-32. Warning. [Amended 2-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2539]
A. No person shall possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in or at any
Township park property operated, contributed to, or owned by the
Township of Whitehall or upon any thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, alley,
public parking lots or any other public way adjacent thereof.
B. Definition, alcoholic beverage. Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other
liquid containing more than 1/2 of 1% of alcohol by volume, which is fit
for beverage purposes or intended for beverage purposes.
C. As an exception to the foregoing, alcoholic beverages may be allowed in
the following buildings pursuant to securing a permit from the
responsible playground organization:
(1) Fullerton Memorial Community Center.
(2) West Catasauqua Playground Community Building.
(3) Zephyr Park Playground Community Building.
(4) Cementon Playground Community Building.
(5) Egypt Memorial Playground Community Pavilion.
(6) Hokendauqua Playground Community Pavilion.
D. In order to possess or consume alcoholic beverages outside of the
designated location, application must be made to the Mayor or his
designee for a special events permit which shall set forth the areas and
types of drinks allowed with such approval not to be unreasonably
withheld. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
A. Before issuing a citation for a violation of this article, any Police Officer
of the Township shall give an oral warning, or issue a written warning
ticket. If the person or persons receiving the oral warning or warning
ticket does not discontinue the violation, a citation for ordinance
violation shall be issued to the violator. If it appears necessary to make
an arrest to preserve the public peace, a police officer may make an
arrest for a violation of this article, with or without a previous oral
warning or warning ticket.
B. Warning not required. Police officers shall use discretion with respect
to enforcement of this article. However, no warning, verbal or written,
§ 6-31 ANIMALS § 6-32
2:375
§ 6-33. Signs and notices.
Signs shall be posted and notices shall be placed on bulletin boards in
the Township park property, stating substantially as follows: "Alcoholic
Beverages Prohibited in this article Except with a Special Permit in
Designated Areas. Township Ordinance in Force." The signs shall be placed
in locations to be visible on entering the park or parkland.
§ 6-34. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall
be fined not less than $5 nor more than $500 for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
the violation occurs or continues.
shall be required for those violations in which signs and/or notices are
properly posted.
§ 6-32 WHITEHALL CODE § 6-34
2:376
ARTICLE VIII
Sexual Offender Residency Prohibition
[Adopted 10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 2594]
§ 6-35. Findings and intent.
§ 6-36. Sexual offender and sexual predator residence prohibition;
penalties; exceptions.
A. The Whitehall Board of Commissioners has reviewed the findings of the
Pennsylvania Legislature when it adopted Megan's Law II as well as
resource materials from the Criminal Justice Information Services
Division of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Center for Sex
Offender Management (www.csom.org.) as established in June 1997 as
a collaborative effort of the Office of Justice Programs, the National
Institute of Corrections and the State Justice Institute and administered
by the Center for Effective Public Policy and the American Probation
and Parole Association, the goal of which is to enhance public safety by
preventing further victimization through improving the management of
adult and juvenile sex offenders who are in the community. The Board of
Commission finds that repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who
use physical violence, and sexual offenders who prey on children are
sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety.
Sexual offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to
repeat their offenses, and most sexual offenders commit many offenses,
have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for
only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender
victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant.
B. It is the intent of this article to serve the Township's compelling interest
to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the Township by creating areas around locations where
children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein
certain sexual offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from
establishing temporary or permanent residence.
A. It is unlawful for any person who has been convicted of a violation of
§ 9795.1 of Megan's Law II, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 9795.1 (relating to
registration), in which the victim of the offense was less than 16 years
of age, to establish a permanent or temporary residence within 2,500
feet of any school, childcare facility, park or playground.
B. For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the
requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the
outer property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence
to nearest outer property line of a school, childcare facility, park or
playground.
C. Penalties. A person who violates this section shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60
§ 6-35 ANIMALS § 6-36
2:377
§ 6-37. Notification of the Pennsylvania Board of Probation and
Parole.
The Board of Commissioners shall supply or cause to be supplied to the
Pennsylvania Board of Probation and Parole a duly certified copy of this
article to inform the state and county prison and probation and parole
personnel about the limitations on residence set forth in this article.
days or period of community service not to exceed 90 days, or any
combination of the same as determined at the discretion of the
Magistrate Judge; for a second or subsequent conviction of a violation
of this section, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$1,000 or imprisonment in the county jail not more than 12 months, or
by both such fine and imprisonment.
D. Exceptions. A person residing within 2,500 feet of any school, childcare
facility, park or playground does not commit a violation of this section if
any of the following apply:
(1) The person established the permanent residence prior to October
17, 2005.
(2) The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and
was not convicted as an adult.
(3) The person is a minor.
(4) The school, childcare facility, park or playground within 2,500 feet
of the person's permanent or temporary residence was opened
after the person established the residence.
§ 6-36 WHITEHALL CODE § 6-37
2:378
ARTICLE IX
Noise
[Adopted 4-8-2019 by Ord. No. 3143]
§ 6-38. Unnecessary noise declared to be nuisance; applicability.
A. The making of unnecessary noise, while residing or occupying or
present in or around a dwelling, building or other structure in the
Township of Whitehall by a person, animal, musical instrument,
amplifying systems or otherwise, between 22:30 hours (10:30 p.m.) and
6:00 hours (6:00 a.m.) is declared to be a public nuisance. Prohibited
conduct shall include, but not be limited to, the following between the
hours referenced above:
(1) No person shall operate or allow to be operated a radio, stereo,
boom box, tape and/or CD player or any other type of soundreproduction
device in any area within the Township of Whitehall at
a sound level which is audible at a distance of greater than 150 feet
from the location of any such sound-reproduction device.
(2) No person or animal shall be permitted to create any sound or
noise which endangers or injures the safety or health of another
person or animal, which annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of
normal sensitivities, or which endangers or injures personal or real
property or a property right or interest.
(3) No person shall make unnecessary noise in the handling of ash,
trash, garbage receptacles, either in loading or unloading, and
whether full or empty.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) The emission of sound, including radios, public address systems or
other communications devices, from a police, fire and/or
ambulance vehicle, device or building.
(2) The emission of sound from a municipal waste hauler, or other
municipal and/or utility services vehicle, device or building.
(3) The emission of sound or noise pursuant to a lawfully issued permit
authorizing an exception to the noise restrictions of this article.
(4) The sound of any bell or chime used in conjunction with places of
religious worship.
(5) The use of devices such as public address systems, amplifying
systems, bull horns, musical instruments, tape messages or similar
devices which are used at political or labor rallies, or athletic
events or other Township of Whitehall licensed, permitted or
authorized events to the extent already protected by law and when
the sound or noise otherwise in violation of this article is authorized
by permit.
§ 6-38 ANIMALS § 6-38
2:379
§ 6-39. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Whitehall Township Police Department to enforce
this article.
§ 6-40. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall be subject to the following penalties:
(6) The operating of any tools or equipment used in construction,
drilling or demolition work, provided that such work does not occur
between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless a special permit is
obtained.
(7) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency or emitted in response to an emergency.
A. First violation: a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $100.
B. Second violation: a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $300.
C. Third and each subsequent violation: a fine of not less than $500 or 30
days imprisonment, or both.
§ 6-38 WHITEHALL CODE § 6-40
2:380
Chapter 7
FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE PROTECTION
§ 6-40 ANIMALS § 6-40
2:381

Part 1
[AdoptAeddm7i-n1i2s-t1r9a9ti9veB PyrOovrdis.i oNnos. 2183]
ARTICLE I
Whitehall Township Fire Department
§ 7-1. Fire Department recognition; membership.
The Whitehall Township Fire Department (the "Department") is hereby
recognized and shall consist of such individuals who are at least 18 years
of age and fire companies as have been and may be admitted to the
Department and such fire apparatus and fire equipment as may be acquired
for or added to the Department from time to time by the Township Board of
Commissioners.
§ 7-2. Admission of individuals to Fire Department.
Any individual at least 18 years of age desiring to be admitted to one of the
recognized volunteer fire companies, shall apply to the Board of Directors
of that company for such admission. The Board of Directors shall admit to
membership all those applicants who are at least 18 years of age, who meet
minimum qualifications as determined by that company, who will obey and
be governed and abide by all the laws, ordinances and regulations of the
Department and all orders of the Fire Chief.
§ 7-3. Admission of fire companies to Fire Department.
All existing volunteer fire companies shall continue to be recognized by the
Township. In addition, any newly established fire company, which has been
duly organized hereafter, desiring to be admitted to the Department shall
apply to the Board of Commissioners for admission, and if so admitted shall,
through its President and Secretary, sign an agreement (duly authorized
by resolution of said company properly passed at a regular meeting of
said company and shall be placed upon its minutes) that is and all its
members will obey and be governed and abide by all the laws, ordinances
and regulations of the Township for the government of said Department and
all orders of the Fire Chief. When so admitted, the Township shall determine
what area, duties and supplies or equipment shall be allocated to such new
company.
§ 7-4. Appointments; prerequisite qualifications; compensation;
death, resignation or removal of Fire Chief during term; and
replacement procedure.
A. Appointments. The Mayor, with the approval of the Board of
Commissioners by a majority vote of the total number thereof, shall
appoint one person to be known as the Chief of the Fire Department of
the Township of Whitehall (the "Fire Chief"). Said person shall:
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
§ 7-1 ANIMALS § 7-4
2:383
(1) Be able and competent to fulfill the prerequisite qualifications as
established in Subsection B below.
(2) Perform the duties set forth in the job description for the position
as amended from time to time.
(3) Pass a noncompetitive examination administered by an outside
professional testing agency (such examination shall test general
firefighting knowledge).
(4) After an offer and acceptance of employment, pass a physical
examination.
B. Prerequisite qualifications. All applicants for the position of Fire Chief
shall at the time of application (unless another time period is
specifically set forth herein):
(1) Have a current and valid Pennsylvania drivers license and
commercial drivers license or secure same within six months of
being hired.
(2) Have no felony convictions or disqualifying criminal histories
within the past seven years.
(3) Be able to read, write and communicate effectively in the English
language.
(4) Be able to obtain the necessary NFPA (National Fire Protection
Association) certification required for a fire chief.
(5) Have seven years experience in fire service work, three years of
which must have been equivalent to fire lieutenant or higher.
(6) Have earned a high school diploma or equivalent.
(7) Completion of training.
(a) Have satisfactorily completed training in the following areas:
[1] Advanced firefighting.
[2] Arson investigation.
[3] Basic firefighter.
[4] Building construction.
[5] BOCA classroom training of three sessions or more for the
BOCA Fire Prevention Code.
[6] Hazardous materials.
[7] Officer's training.
[8] Waters supply.
§ 7-4 WHITEHALL CODE § 7-4
2:384
§ 7-5. Duties of Fire Chief.
The Fire Chief shall:
(b) In the event that the applicant has not satisfactorily completed
training in Subsection B(7)(a)[4] and/or [8], the applicant will
be given one year (with diligent effort) after the offer and
acceptance of employment to satisfactorily complete such
training.
(8) Have completed of all such requirements necessary to perform fire
inspections and code compliance reviews on behalf of the
Township.
(9) All documents supporting an applicant's satisfaction of the above
requirements (including written certifications provided by the
issuing authority with respect to satisfactory completion of
training) must be provided to the Township, shall be authenticated
by the Township and shall be maintained in the applicant's
personnel file.
C. Compensation. The salary of the Fire Chief shall be in accordance with
the applicable salary guide for nonunion employees of the Township.
The position of Fire Chief shall be deemed a full-time position, unless
subsequently established to be less than a full-time position by the
Board of Commissioners.
D. Removal of Fire Chief during term.
(1) The Fire Chief shall serve during good behavior and satisfactory
service and shall not be removed from office during his or her term,
except for cause.
(2) For the purposes of this Subsection D the term "cause" shall be
deemed to mean misfeasance or malfeasance related to office,
conviction of a crime of the third degree or above, a crime involving
moral turpitude, or continual neglect of duty or failure to satisfy the
qualifications in Subsection B above.
(3) In the event that cause for removal is alleged against the Fire Chief,
the Fire Chief shall have an opportunity to respond to such written
charges at a hearing before the Board of Commissioners conducted
pursuant to the provisions of the Local Agency Law (2 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 551 et seq.).
(4) Removal of the Fire Chief shall occur only upon the affirmation vote
by a majority vote of the total number of Board of Commissions
following a hearing.
(5) In the event of death or removal of the Fire Chief, the Deputy Chief/
Fire Marshall will take control and act as the interim fire chief until
a new chief is appointed and approved.
§ 7-4 ANIMALS § 7-5
2:385
A. Superintend and direct the operations of the several fire companies of
the Department.
B. Have full control of all fire personnel and fire apparatus; issue and
enforce all such orders as, in his judgment, may be best calculated for
the protection of life and property, the extinguishment of fires and the
welfare of the public and the Department.
C. Enforce all rules and regulations of the Department and all laws and
ordinances pertaining thereto.
D. Make monthly reports and recommendations for the preceding month
to the Mayor, giving a full statement of the conditions of the
Department, together with a statement of all fires and the origin of the
same and the money expended by the Departments. [Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
E. Report promptly to the Mayor any appointee or member of the
Department whom the Fire Chief has suspended for disobeying orders
or for violating any of the laws, ordinances, rules or regulations
governing the Department, and any person so suspended shall not be
permitted to act or to help at any fire or to operate or handle any fire
apparatus until such suspension shall have been removed by the Mayor
or by the Fire Chief. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
F. As Fire Marshal and the BOCA Fire Prevention Code Enforcement
Officer:
(1) Perform inspections and code compliance reviews on behalf of the
Township.
(2) Supervise the inspection of buildings and other properties for fire
hazards and enforce fire prevention ordinances.
G. Establish policies and procedures for the Department in order to
implement directives from the Mayor. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
H. Supervise the personnel directly and other volunteer Department staff
and officers through subordinate officers, if any; address grievances
and maintain the departmental morale.
I. Plan and implement programs for the Township in order to better carry
out the Township's policies and goals relating to fire prevention, review
Departmental performance and effectiveness and formulate programs
or policies to alleviate deficiencies.
J. Supervise and coordinate the preparation and presentation of an
annual budget for the Fire Department, direct the implementation of
the several fire companies' budgets, plan for and review specifications
for new or replaced equipment.
§ 7-5 WHITEHALL CODE § 7-5
2:386
§ 7-6. Duties of Assistant Fire Chiefs.
The Assistant Fire Chiefs, if any, shall act and perform in their several
districts in the absence of the Fire Chief such duties as are required of the
Fire Chief, but only in their several districts and only in the absence of the
Fire Chief.
§ 7-7. Appointment of driver-operators.
The Fire Chief is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to appoint for
each fire company having fire apparatus, persons who shall be members of
the said company, as driver-operators of such apparatus, all of whom shall
be sober and competent and able to operate the apparatus when appointed
and during the term of their appointment.
§ 7-8. Supervision over drivers.
Drivers shall be under the direction and control of the Fire Chief, and in his
absence they shall be under the direction and control of an Assistant Fire
Chief or Deputy Chief/Fire Marshall in the district in which they are located
or are operating.
§ 7-9. Tenure of drivers.
The driver-operators shall each serve until the first Monday of January of
the first even-numbered year succeeding their appointment, at which time
the Fire Chief shall appoint their successors from a list of names approved
by the Board of Directors of the individual fire companies.
§ 7-10. Taking fire apparatus outside of fire house.
Except in case of fire or other emergency, or for approved fund-raising
or public relations, the fire apparatus shall not be taken out of the fire
house without permission of the Fire Chief or the Assistant Chief in charge
of a particular company. Any driver violating this provision is subject to
immediate dismissal.
§ 7-11. Removal and replacement of drivers.
Any chief driver or assistant driver may be removed from that position at
any time by the Fire Chief for incompetence or misconduct and a successor
to take his place shall be appointed as provided in this Part 1.
K. Provide public education in fire prevention, including giving
presentations and demonstrations before community groups, schools
and other organizations or institutions.
L. Direct the operation of departmental in-service training activities.
M. Control the expenditure of departmental appropriations.
§ 7-5 ANIMALS § 7-12
2:387
§ 7-12. Posting of copy of part.
A copy of this Part 1 be posted in each fire house.
§ 7-12 WHITEHALL CODE § 7-12
2:388
ARTICLE II
Fire Police
§ 7-13. Appointment, tenure and duties.
The Whitehall Township fire companies are hereby authorized and
empowered to nominate members to serve as fire police within the
Township on the first regular meeting in February of each even numbered
year. After so nominating, the companies shall submit these names to the
Board of Commissioners for confirmation. When so confirmed and sworn,
the fire police shall be authorized to enter upon their duties as outlined
herein, and when displaying a badge of authority, shall have full power to
regulate traffic and keep crowds under control at or in the vicinity of any
authorized fire activity and to exercise such other police powers as are
necessary in order to facilitate and prevent interference with the work of
firemen extinguishing fires. In addition, the confirmed fire police shall have
all police powers necessary to perform their duties when functioning as
special fire police at parades, accidents, floods or other emergencies or at
any public function conducted by or under the auspices of any volunteer
fire company, at the request of the Chief of Police or Fire Chief of said
municipality, and when so functioning as special fire police, shall be deemed
to be performing the duties of their employment.
§ 7-14. Officers.
A. Officers of Fire Police Association. The Captain of the Fire Police shall
be nominated by the fire police membership and approved by the Board
of Commissioners at the first regular meeting in February of each evennumbered
year. The Captain of the Fire Police shall serve for a period of
two years, with approval of the Board of Commissioners.
B. Qualifications of Captain of Fire Police. The Captain of the Fire Police
must have the ability to effectively give orders, direct personnel,
evaluate information and allocate resources to respond to a variety of
emergency situations encountered by the fire department. Applicants
for the position of the Captain of the Fire Police shall possess the
following qualifications:
(1) Be an adult, over the age of 21 years.
(2) Have a current and valid Pennsylvania drivers license.
(3) Have no felony convictions or disqualifying criminal histories
within the past seven years.
(4) Have five years experience in fire police work.
(5) Be able to read, write and communicate effectively in the English
language.
(6) Have satisfactorily completed training in the following areas:
§ 7-13 ANIMALS § 7-14
2:389
§ 7-15. Authority outside district of appointment.
Fire police so appointed when in attendance at a fire, or when such special
fire police are on special duty as hereinbefore provided, shall have the same
power and authority in the whole of the township, town or municipality as
they would have in Whitehall Township.
§ 7-16. Limited powers and authority.
The fire police herein provided for shall have only those powers and
authority as spelled out in this Part 1 or as may be specially conferred upon
them by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 7-17. Biennial organization.
The fire police herein provided for shall meet at the first regular meeting
in February of each even-numbered year for organizing and at such other
times as the Captain of the Fire Police may determine.
§ 7-18. Removal of Captain of Fire Police or a member of Fire
Police.
(a) Basic fire police.
(b) Officer's training.
(c) Legal concepts.
(7) Shall not be a member of the Whitehall Township Board of
Commissioners.
(8) All documents supporting an applicant's satisfaction of the above
requirements (including written certifications provided by the
issuing authority with respect to satisfactory completion of
training) must be provided to the Township, shall be authenticated
by the Township and shall be maintained in the applicant's
personnel file.
C. Staff officers of Fire Police. On the first regular meeting in February of
each even-numbered year, after being appointed by the Board of
Commissioners, the Captain of the Fire Police shall appoint his or her
staff of officers from the fire police membership for a period of two
years as follows: one deputy captain, two lieutenants, three sergeants.
A. The members of the fire police and the Captain of the Fire Police shall
serve during good behavior and satisfactory service and shall not be
removed from office during his or her term except for cause.
B. For the purposes of this section, the term "cause" shall be deemed to
mean misfeasance or malfeasance related to office, conviction of a
crime of the third degree or above, a crime involving moral turpitude or
§ 7-14 WHITEHALL CODE § 7-18
2:390
continual neglect of duty or failure to satisfy the qualifications in
§ 7-14B.
C. Any charges against an individual member of the fire police shall be
reviewed by the Captain of the Fire Police with recommendations of
such charges being referred to the Fire Chief and/or Mayor for such
disciplinary actions as may be necessary, which could lead to a
suspension or dismissal from the fire police. The individual member of
the fire police shall have an opportunity to respond to such disciplinary
action at a hearing before the full Board of Commissioners conducted
pursuant to the provisions of the Local Agency Law (2 Pa.C.S.A. § 511 et
seq.). [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
D. In the event that cause for removal is alleged against the Captain of the
Fire Police, the Captain shall have an opportunity to respond to such
written charges at a hearing before the full Board of Commissioners
conducted pursuant to the provisions of Local Agency Law (2 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 551 et seq.).
E. Removal of an individual member of the fire police or the Captain of the
Fire Police shall occur only upon the affirmative vote by a majority of
the total number of the Board of Commissioners following the hearing
referenced in Subsections C and D above.
§ 7-18 ANIMALS § 7-18
2:391

Part 2
[Adopted 10K-9ey-2 L0o1c7k BByoOxersd. No. 3097]
ARTICLE III
Lock Box Requirements
§ 7-19. Applicability; timeframe for compliance; type to be used.
§ 7-20. Contents; second box.
A. The following structures shall be equipped with a key lock box (Knox
box) at or within six feet of the main entrance at a height between four
feet and five feet from the walking surface:
(1) Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic
alarm system or automatic suppression systems, or such structures
that are secured in a manner that restricts access during an
emergency;
(2) Multifamily residential structures that have restricted access
through locked doors and have a common corridor for access to the
living units;
(3) Governmental structures, schools, and nursing care facilities.
B. All newly constructed structures subject to this section shall have a key
lock box (Knox box) installed and operational prior to the issuance of an
occupancy permit. All structures in existence on the effective date of
this article and subject to this section shall have one year from the
effective date of this article to have a key lock box (Knox box) installed
and operational.
C. The Fire Chief shall designate the type of key lock box system (Knox
box) to be implemented within the Township and shall have the
authority to require all structures to use the designated system. Owners
and operators of structures subject to this section shall obtain an
authorization order form from the Township for the key lock box system
(Knox box), which must be completed to ensure compatibility of the key
lock box system (Knox box) with the Township's system.
A. The owner or operator of the structure required to have a key lock box
(Knox box) shall, at all times, maintain the following items within the
key lock box (Knox box):
(1) Keys, separately tagged and indexed to a floor plan to clearly and
quickly identify what doors or locks they operate to:
(a) All locked points of access to the structure;
(b) All locked points of access to common hallways or utility rooms
contained within such structure;
(c) All locked mechanical rooms;
§ 7-19 ANIMALS § 7-20
2:393
§ 7-21. Information to be provided to Fire Chief; updating required.
§ 7-22. Rules and regulations for use.
The Fire Chief shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations for
the use of the key lock box system (Knox box).
§ 7-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of up to $1,000 for each offense and the
(d) All locked electrical rooms;
(e) All locked sprinkler control rooms;
(f) All areas of the structure where fire alarm panels and fire
protection systems are located;
(g) All locked elevator rooms and controls;
(h) Any fenced or secured areas;
(i) All other locked areas, other than individual apartments or
rented rooms; and
(2) Name(s) and phone number(s) of individual(s) with access to the
structure(s) after hours (plant manager, owner, etc.).
B. The labeling/tagging of keys and contact information contained within
the key lock box (Knox box) must be kept current.
C. In lieu of having the interior keys in the exterior key lock box (Knox
box), a second key lock box (Knox box) may be located within the main
lobby of the building to hold these keys. If a second key lock box (Knox
box) is installed within the main lobby, it must be located at or within six
feet of the main entrance at a height between four feet and five feet
from the walking surface.
A. The owner or operator of the structure required to have a key lock box
(Knox box) shall provide the following items to the Fire Chief
electronically by sending them to firechief@whitehalltownship.com:
(1) Floor plans which include utility locations (gas, electric, etc.); and
(2) Copies of the material safety data sheets that are required to be on
file, as well as a floor plan or written description that indicates the
location(s) of the general areas of these materials within the
structure, if the structure contains a business that is required to
maintain material safety data sheets.
B. The plans and the material safety data sheets provided to the Fire Chief
must be kept current.
§ 7-20 WHITEHALL CODE § 7-23
2:394
cost of prosecution and, in the event of default of payment of each fine and
cost, shall be subject to imprisonment for not more than 90 days. Each day
that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Any person found guilty of violating this article shall be assessed court costs
and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Township in the enforcement
proceedings.
§ 7-23 ANIMALS § 7-23
2:395

Part 3
[Adopted 2-1O2p-2en01 B8uBrnyiOngrd. No. 3104]
ARTICLE IV
Limitation of Burning
§ 7-24. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Burning Ordinance."
§ 7-25. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the following meanings:
GARBAGE — All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
OPEN FIRE — All fires kindled or maintained outside of a building and shall
include all fires maintained in containers, enclosures, barrels, or devices
commonly known as "burn barrels" or "fire pits." Open fires also include
brush fires or field fires which are not confined by any type of container or
enclosure.
OUTDOOR PREPARATION OF FOOD — Those fires which are kindled or
maintained for the sole purpose of food preparation, which use charcoal,
natural gas, or liquefied petroleum gas as a fuel or heat source.
PERSON — Includes persons, partnerships, corporations, and other
business entities.
RUBBISH — Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive,
including but not limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets, wood,
excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, tree leaves, crockery, masonry, and
other similar materials.
TRADE WASTE — All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations, or the prosecution of any business, trade,
or industry, including but not limited to plastic products, cartons, paint,
grease, oil, and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders, and other
waste forms of solid or liquid waste materials; provided, however, that
trade waste shall not include any coal refuse associated with the mining or
preparation of coal.
§ 7-26. Limitation on burning.
No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or fire which burns garbage,
rubbish, or trade waste or authorize any such fire to be kindled or
maintained on or in any public street, alley, road, or other public ground,
or on private property. This limitation shall include any and all open fires
and other outdoor fires which are kindled or maintained in containers,
enclosures, barrels, incinerators, or devices commonly known as "burn
barrels" or "fire pits."
§ 7-24 ANIMALS § 7-27
2:397
§ 7-27. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
§ 7-28. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of up to $1,000 for each offense and the
cost of prosecution and, in the event of default of payment of each fine and
cost, shall be subject to imprisonment for not more than 90 days. Each day
that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Any person found guilty of violating this article shall be assessed court costs
and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Township in the enforcement
proceedings.
A. A fire set solely for the outdoor preparation of food;
B. A fire relating to indoor heating appliances such as fireplaces, wood,
and coal stoves;
C. A fire set solely for recreational purposes from an outdoor heating
device using propane, and no other source, with a flame no more than
18 inches in height; or
D. Industrial or commercial incinerators which have been issued valid air
quality and operating permits by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 7-27 WHITEHALL CODE § 7-28
2:398
Part 4
Eme[rAgdenopcyte Rde5s-p1o4n-s2e0 1P8ayBmyeOnrtd R. eNimo.b 3u1r1s3em] ent
ARTICLE V
Reimbursement to Bureau of Fire
§ 7-29. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Emergency Response Payment
Reimbursement Ordinance."
§ 7-30. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the following meanings:
ACTUAL AND REASONABLE RESPONSE COSTS — An amount that is
consistent with what a reasonable person would pay in the same or similar
circumstances for the same business or for the same or similar item. This
term shall not include any costs for labor.
EMERGENCY — Incidents, including but not limited to motor-vehicle
accidents, home fires, flooding, and water damage, and spills of hazardous
materials, that require responsive, coordinated action to protect an
individual and/or entity, the environment, critical infrastructure or property.
OFFICIAL DISPATCH — The dispatch of any Whitehall Township Bureau of
Fire equipment or personnel to an emergency by the Lehigh County 911
Call Center or a response to a special call or request from a municipal,
regional, or state police department with an emergency.
THIRD-PARTY BILLING SERVICE — Any entity authorized and utilized by
the Township of Whitehall and the Whitehall Township Bureau of Fire for
billing and collection of actual and reasonable response costs.
WHITEHALL TOWNSHIP BUREAU OF FIRE — The Township of Whitehall's
Fire Department, including but not limited to the volunteer fire companies
within the Township of Whitehall, their equipment, and personnel, who
provide fire and rescue services throughout the Township of Whitehall
and in neighboring municipalities upon request and/or in connection with
the Township of Whitehall and its neighboring municipalities' mutual aid
agreements.
§ 7-31. Liability for reimbursement.
A person and/or entity involved in an emergency that necessitates a
response and/or official dispatch from the Whitehall Township Bureau of
Fire shall be liable for the actual and reasonable response costs incurred by
the Whitehall Township Bureau of Fire.
§ 7-32. Billing and reimbursement procedure.
§ 7-29 ANIMALS § 7-32
2:399
A. Billing. The Whitehall Township Bureau of Fire shall have the right and
authority to seek reimbursement for actual and reasonable response
costs related to an emergency as provided for under this article, which
includes but is not limited to the actual or reasonable response costs of
services provided, materials used, or equipment damaged in an
emergency. The Township of Whitehall and the Whitehall Township
Bureau of Fire are hereby authorized to utilize third-party billing
services in seeking reimbursement for actual and reasonable response
costs permitted by this article. A bill for reimbursement must clearly
itemize the costs that have been incurred by the Whitehall Township
Bureau of Fire and shall be in accordance with and consistent with the
billing list attached hereto as Exhibit A,68 which billing list may be
revised from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners
of the Township of Whitehall.
B. Reimbursement. If a person and/or entity receives a bill for actual and
reasonable response costs as provided for under this article, the person
and/or entity shall be responsible for payment of the bill. A person and/
or entity may elect to submit the bill to an insurance company; however,
submission of a bill to an insurance company shall not relieve the
person and/or entity from financial responsibility for payment of the bill
if an insurance company denies payment of the bill or opts not to pay
the bill in full.
C. Failure to pay. The Whitehall Township Bureau of Fire or any third-party
billing service that submits to a person and/or entity a bill for actual and
reasonable response costs as provided for under this article may file an
action in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover the amount of
actual and reasonable response costs if the person and/or entity fails to
pay the amount of the bill. Any action in a court of competent
jurisdiction brought by the Whitehall Township Bureau of Fire or any
third-party billing service may include reasonable interest, reasonable
administrative fees, reasonable attorney fees, and court fees in addition
to the outstanding amount of the bill for actual and reasonable response
costs.
68.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 7-32 WHITEHALL CODE § 7-32
2:400
Part 5
F[iAred oPpretevden8t-i1o2n- 2A0n1d9 LBifye OSradfe. tNy oP. r3o1g6r9am]
ARTICLE VI
Designated Official; Inspections
§ 7-33. Title.
This part may be cited and shall be known as the "Township of Whitehall
Fire Prevention and Life Safety Program," hereinafter referred to as the
"Fire Prevention Program."
§ 7-34. Purpose; applicability.
The Fire Prevention Program is designed to reduce conditions which would
pose a threat to life, property and the environment through a regular
inspection and enforcement program.
§ 7-35. Designated official; conduct of inspections.
A. The Township of Whitehall designates the Fire Inspector, or the Fire
Inspector's designee ("designated official") as the official who shall
inspect all commercial industrial, institutional and multifamily
residential facilities/buildings according to an established schedule.
The designated official may, upon reasonable belief or suspicion of
hazard, inspect such facility as necessary to ensure compliance with
applicable codes. The designated official shall be an employee under
the supervision and control of the Township Mayor. The designated
official will be the authority having jurisdiction (AHJ) pertaining to the
violations and repairs of properties within the scope of the International
Property Maintenance Code/2009, as amended, and all later versions
adopted by the Township of Whitehall.
B. Educational uses, child day-cares, assembly uses with a fifty-person
occupancy load or higher, institutional uses, factories, buildings over
three stories in height above grade plane, buildings of greater than
20,000 square feet, and hight-hazard uses shall be inspected annually
(the "annual inspection").
C. Other occupancies shall be inspected at two-year intervals (the
"biannual inspection").
D. In buildings or structures containing more than one business, a
separate inspection shall be required for each business or commercial
area. Any areas under the control of the owner shall also require an
inspection.
E. Inspections shall be based on the fire, safety and health code
requirements within the current International Property Maintenance
Code/2009, as amended, and all later versions adopted by the Township
of Whitehall. The person(s) designated under this part, may, during
§ 7-33 ANIMALS § 7-35
2:401
§ 7-36. Inspection fees.
The fees for the Fire Prevention Program shall be established by the Board
of Commissioners of the Township of Whitehall and shall be set forth in
the Township of Whitehall Schedule of Fees. Fees shall be amended by
ordinance.
hours of operation or by agreement of the building owner/agent, enter
any public or private building for the purpose of inspection under the
fire prevention program.
F. Initial fire inspections shall be based on the same requirements as the
periodic inspections required to obtain a certificate of occupancy as
defined in the International Property Maintenance Code/2009, as
amended, and all later versions adopted by the Township of Whitehall.
Initial fire inspections will be conducted when a change in the business
owner or the occupancy within a commercial, industrial or multifamily
dwelling or building occurs. A business owner or property owner must
contact the Township of Whitehall designated official for notification
and scheduling of an initial inspection before an occupancy shall be
allowed to open and operate.
G. During all inspections, the designated official shall provide the owner/
agent with a written or electronically communicated list of code
violations, if any, and a date by which all violations must be corrected.
In cases where an owner/agent does not agree with a violation(s) or the
required correct measures order by the designated official and believes
he/she does meet the intent of the Code by other means, the owner/
agent may file an appeal with Whitehall Township Building Code Board
of Appeals as defined in the International Property Maintenance Code/
2009, as amended, and all later versions adopted by the Township of
Whitehall.
H. Failure to allow access for the designated official to perform the
scheduled inspection(s) may result in violation of this part. The
designated official may obtain an administrative search warrant to
enter any property or structure when an owner/agent denies access.
A. The inspection fee shall cover the initial inspections, and any second or
subsequent inspection shall be billed to the property owner at an hourly
rate as set forth in the Township of Whitehall Schedule of Fees.69 Such
billing shall be for a minimum of one hour, and shall continue after the
first hour in thirty-minute increments thereafter.
B. Any additional reinspections shall be subject to an additional fee, as
contained in the fee schedule, until code compliance is achieved.
C. Permit fees shall be assessed and collected along with the inspection
fee.
69.Editor's Note: See Ch. A29, Fees.
§ 7-35 WHITEHALL CODE § 7-36
2:402
§ 7-37. Inspection certificate required.
Upon approval by the designated official, the business or property owner
will be issued a certificate of compliance.
§ 7-38. Keeping of records.
All official records of inspection and certificates of compliance shall be
kept by the Township of Whitehall Fire Code Official in the offices of the
Township of Whitehall for a period of five years.
§ 7-39. Immediate fire or other safety hazard.
If, upon inspection, it is the opinion of the designated official that an
immediate fire hazard or condition dangerous to human life or property
exists, the designated official is hereby authorized to order an immediate
evacuation of the premises and to secure the same until such hazard or
condition has been corrected.
§ 7-40. Responsibility of owner/occupant.
Scheduling of the Fire Prevention Program inspections shall be made by the
designated official. It is the responsibility of the owner/occupant to maintain
all systems and premises in accordance with applicable codes. If violations
occur, then the owner, agent or occupant is responsible to correct such
violation as to be in compliance with said codes. This will include vacant/not
in use commercial, industrial, institutional and multiresidential properties,
in which case the property manager or building owner will be responsible
for all repairs and fees.
D. All inspection fees shall be collected prior to the completion of any Fire
Prevention Program initial inspection. Failure to submit payment by the
specified date will prevent the inspection and shall constitute a
violation of this part, excepting that the property owner will be billed
for reinspections.
A. The certificate of compliance shall indicate the following:
(1) Owner/occupant name and address.
(2) Applicable codes of compliance.
(3) Date of inspection.
(4) Time for which the certificate is valid.
(5) Any other information as the designated official deems necessary.
B. The certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place, as to be visible to
any employee, customer or Township official entering the facility.
§ 7-36 ANIMALS § 7-41
2:403
§ 7-41. Failure to comply.
The failure or neglect of any person designated by this part to comply with
any order or directive issued by the designated official under this part,
within the specified period of time and pursuant to the provisions of this
part or applicable codes, shall be deemed to be in violation of this part.
§ 7-42. Violations and penalties.
§ 7-43. Appeals.
Any person, partnership, corporation, trust or other entity aggrieved by any
provision of this part or any code issued thereunder may appeal the same to
the Township of Whitehall Building Code Board of Appeals.
A. Any person, partnership, corporation, trust or other entity, who or
which, in any way violates any of the provision of this part of the Code
or who or which refuses to obey any lawful order issued thereunder
shall be liable, upon conviction in a summary jurisdiction, to pay a fine
or penalty to the Township of Whitehall in an amount not less than $100
nor more than $1,000 and/or be sentenced to imprisonment in the
county prison for a period not exceeding 30 days, as provided by the
law.
B. Prosecution of violations. If the notice of violation is not complied with
promptly, the designated official is authorized to institute the
appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or
abate such violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or
direction made pursuant thereto.
C. Each day of violations of this part or applicable code shall be considered
separate offense, for which the fines and penalties stated herein may be
imposed on a daily basis.
§ 7-41 WHITEHALL CODE § 7-43
2:404
Chapter 8
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police force — See Ch. 1, Part 9.
Fire prevention and fire protection — See Ch.
7.
Health and safety — See Ch. 10.
§ 8-1. Establishment.
A local emergency management agency is hereby established, and the
Bureau shall be known as the "Whitehall Township Emergency Management
Agency."
§ 8-2. Legislative authority.
The Whitehall Township Emergency Management Agency is established
pursuant to the provisions of the Emergency Management Services Code
(35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7501 et seq.).
§ 8-3. General duties and responsibilities.
The Whitehall Township Emergency Management Agency shall have the
responsibility for emergency management and disaster response and
recovery within the Township. The Whitehall Township Emergency
Management Agency shall also provide emergency management and
disaster response and recovery services outside the Township as required
by the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 8-4. Declaration of local disaster emergency.
A. The Mayor will declare a local emergency declaration with approval by
a majority of the Board of Commissioners in any case of a declaration by
the Mayor or any of the following successors. In the event of the
Mayor's absence, the following order will be followed: Deputy Mayor,
Police Chief, Fire Chief, Emergency Management Coordinator, Bureau
Chief of Public Works, Board of Commissioners President, Vice
President, Secretary of BOC, and remaining commissioners in
descending order of their ages.
B. The declaration of a local disaster emergency shall not be continued or
renewed for a period in excess of seven days unless approved by the
Board of Commissioners.
C. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local
disaster emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity, and a
§ 7-43 ANIMALS § 8-4
2:405
§ 8-5. Local coordinator of emergency management.
copy of any such order or proclamation shall be filed promptly with the
Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency.
D. Upon declaration of a local disaster emergency, the applicable response
and recovery aspects of the Whitehall Township local emergency
management plan shall be activated, and all provision for aid and
assistance thereunder shall be authorized.
A. The Whitehall Township Emergency Management Agency shall have a
coordinator who shall be responsible for the planning, administration
and operation of the agency, subject to the direction and control of the
Mayor and Township Board of Commissioners.
B. The coordinator of the Whitehall Township Emergency Management
Agency shall be appointed by the Governor of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania upon recommendation of the Whitehall Township Board of
Commissioners. The Whitehall Township Board of Commissioners may,
upon agreement by resolution with adjoining municipalities,
recommend to the Governor a candidate for coordinator for emergency
management activities in said political subdivisions. The Whitehall
Township emergency management coordinator shall serve at the
pleasure of the Whitehall Township Board of Commissioners.
C. The coordinator of the Whitehall Township Emergency Management
Agency shall:
(1) Be professionally competent and capable of planning, effecting and
coordinating operations among agencies of government and
controlling coordinated operations by local emergency
preparedness forces.
(2) Attend and successfully complete the first phase of the career
development program as prescribed by the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency within one year after
appointment.
(3) Attend and successfully complete the second phase of the career
development program as prescribed by the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency within three years after
appointment.
(4) Attend basic and advanced seminars, workshops and training
conferences called by the Director of the Pennsylvania Emergency
Management Agency and/or its Director of Training and Education.
D. Failure to attend and successfully complete the career development
program phases as described above or failure to attend a prescribed
training program for two consecutive years shall be cause for
replacement of the coordinator of the Whitehall Township Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 8-4 WHITEHALL CODE § 8-5
2:406
§ 8-6. Powers and duties.
The Whitehall Township Emergency Management Agency is hereby directed
to:
E. Responsibility for the professional in-service training of the coordinator
of the Whitehall Township Emergency Management Agency shall rest
with the Emergency Management Coordinator of Lehigh County.
F. The Township of Whitehall will reimburse its coordinator for actual
expenses incurred as the result of his or her attendance at scheduled
meetings and training programs.
A. Prepare, maintain and keep current a disaster emergency plan for the
Township for the prevention and minimizing of injury and damage
caused by disaster, for prompt and effective response to disaster and for
disaster emergency relief and recovery in consonance with the
Pennsylvania Emergency Management Plan and the Lehigh County
Emergency Management Plan.
B. Establish, equip and staff an emergency operations center for the
Township.
C. Establish a warning and communications system for the Township that
will support governmental operations in emergencies.
D. Provide essential facilities and equipment to those agencies and
organizations that have been assigned emergency functions under the
provisions of this chapter.
E. If necessary and required, provide individual and organizational
training programs for police officers, firefighters, rescue personnel,
ambulance personnel, emergency management volunteers and the
general public to insure prompt, efficient and effective disaster
emergency services.
F. Organize, prepare and coordinate all locally available manpower,
materials, supplies, equipment and facilities necessary for disaster
emergency readiness, response and recovery.
G. Adopt and implement precautionary measures to mitigate the
anticipated effects of a disaster.
H. Execute and enforce such rules, regulations and orders as the Whitehall
Township Emergency Management Agency may adopt pursuant to the
provision for this chapter.
I. Cooperate and coordinate with any public and private agencies or
entities in achieving any purpose of this chapter.
J. Have available for inspection at its emergency operations center all
emergency management plans, rules, regulations and orders of the
Governor and the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency.
§ 8-5 ANIMALS § 8-6
2:407
§ 8-7. Coordination, assistance and mutual aid.
§ 8-8. Approvals and ratification of agreements.
K. Provide prompt and accurate information regarding local disaster
emergencies to appropriate commonwealth and local officials and
agencies and the general public.
L. Make monthly reports to the Township on the status and programs of
the Whitehall Township Emergency Management Agency, its personnel,
programs and plans.
M. Execute and enforce such rules and orders as may be adopted by the
Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency.
N. Make timely recommendations to and secure the consent of the
Township concerning the development of plans, the acquisition of
materials, supplies and equipment and the development of a budget for
the agency, except as provided for in disaster emergencies.
O. Identify areas within the Township that are particularly vulnerable to
disaster.
P. Upon request of the Board of Commissioners or Mayor, assist the
Township and/or its police, fire, rescue or emergency medical services
in handling and coordinating special, nondisaster emergencies and
situations.
A. The Coordinator of the Township Emergency Management Agency may
develop and maintain mutual aid agreements with adjacent political
subdivisions for reciprocal emergency assistance. The agreements shall
be consistent with the plans and programs of the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency and the Lehigh County Emergency
Management Agency.
B. The agreements shall stipulate that direction of emergency disaster
assistance is the responsibility of the lowest level of government
affected, that the County Emergency Management Agency shall provide
coordination and support when more than one political subdivision
within Lehigh County is affected and that the Pennsylvania Emergency
Management Agency or its area organization shall provide coordination
and support when two or more counties are affected. In disaster
emergencies, request for mutual aid assistance shall be referred to the
organization, as outlined above, having responsibility for coordination,
and, in time of emergency, it shall be the duty of the Township
Emergency Management Agency to render assistance in accordance
with these mutual aid agreements. In all cases, support services
provided from outside the affected area shall remain under the
command and control of the receiving area.
A. Except during local disaster emergencies:
§ 8-6 WHITEHALL CODE § 8-8
2:408
§ 8-9. Gifts and grants of monies.
Any gifts or grants of monies made to the Township Emergency
Management Agency or to the Township for the payment of expenses
incurred or to be incurred by or for the Emergency Management Agency
shall be deposited in the treasury of the Township and shall be appropriated
only for the purpose for which the gifts or grants were made.
§ 8-10. Representation on boards and agencies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the Township
Emergency Management Agency from providing representation to other
boards or agencies, as outside emergency management advisory boards,
emergency health services councils, regional communications committees,
that coordinate with or otherwise impact the delivery of emergency
management services.
§ 8-11. Insignia and identifying marks.
The Township Emergency Management Agency shall, with the approval of
the Board of Commissioners, adopt such insignia and/or other identifying
marks or markings as are necessary to ensure the correct, prompt
identification of its personnel, equipment and facilities.
§ 8-12. Applicability of state statutes.
The provisions of the Emergency Management Services Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Act 1978-323 (Pi. 1332),70 shall govern
the emergency management activities of the Township and the Whitehall
Township Emergency Management Agency except in circumstances where
the Emergency Management Services Code does not address local
provisions or conditions provided for by this chapter.
Chapter 9
(1) All expenditures of the Whitehall Township Emergency
Management Agency must be approved, in advance, by the Board
of Commissioners.
(2) The Board of Commissioners must approve attendance and
participation of personnel of the Emergency Management Agency
at training sessions, seminars and meetings.
(3) The Township Emergency Management Plan must be reviewed and
approved by the Board of Commissioners.
B. All mutual aid agreements (209) shall be ratified by the Board of
Commissioners and by the governing bodies of the other affected
municipalities prior to implementation.
70.Editor's Note: See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7501 et seq.
§ 8-8 RESERVED § 8-12
9:409
RESERVED
Chapter 10
HEALTH AND SAFETY
§ 8-12 WHITEHALL CODE § 8-12
9:410
ARTICLE I
Barbed Wire and Electrified Fences
[Adopted 5-12-1969 by Ord. No. 930]
§ 10-1. Scope. [Amended 3-9-1981 by Ord. No. 1377]
This article provides for the regulation of all fences permitted by Whitehall
Township ordinances which now contain or may in the future contain wires
with barbs or fences which are or may be in the future electrified in the
Township of Whitehall, Pennsylvania.
§ 10-2. Barbs not permitted within five feet of ground. [Amended
3-9-1981 by Ord. No. 1377]
§ 10-3. Removal of fences; future construction.
Should any fence or similar installation presently exist in the Township
which constitutes a violation of this article, the owner or occupier or both
shall remove the same by no later than July 30, 1969. No fences or similar
purpose installation shall be constructed, built or maintained within the
Township of Whitehall that are in violation of the tenets hereof.
§ 10-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Fences or similar purpose installations shall not contain any barbs or
similar devices in the area of five feet or less from the ground inasmuch
as they are deemed a hazard to children and the public health, safety
and general welfare.
B. Fences or similar purpose installations shall not be electrified inasmuch
as they are deemed a hazard to children and the public health, safety
and general welfare.
§ 10-1 RESERVED § 10-4
9:411

ARTICLE II
Weeds
[Adopted 8-10-1979 by Ord. No. 964]
§ 10-5. Definitions. [Amended 3-11-1974 by Ord. No. 1135;
5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 1674]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WEEDS — Any uncultivated vegetable growth which is injurious to health,
diffuses obnoxious or commonly offensive odors, diffuses pollen in such
amounts as is unhealthful to persons with allergies or is otherwise offensive
to the health, safety or welfare of the community. It shall include any
vegetation which conceals or creates any unsanitary condition.
§ 10-6. Weeds unlawful and a nuisance under certain conditions.
[Amended 3-11-1974 by Ord. No. 1135; 5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 1674]
§ 10-7. Notice of violation to cut weeds. [Amended 4-13-1981 by
Ord. No. 1379]
The Township, upon inspection shall notify the owner by regular mail or
telephone to cut or destroy the weeds within seven days after notification.
§ 10-8. Township to cut or destroy weeds at expense of defaulting
property owner.
Should any person refuse, neglect or fail to comply with any of the terms
or provisions and requirements of this article or with any notice given
in conformity with or pursuant to the provisions hereof, the Township of
Whitehall shall, through its own agents, contractors and/or employees,
cause said weeds or other undesirable vegetation to be cut or destroyed,
together with any cleanup work to be required. The cost and expense
A. No person owning or holding any real estate within the Township shall
permit noxious weeds or other undesirable vegetation, as defined in the
prior section to grow thereon to a height in excess of 15 inches or to
mature their seeds thereon, or fail to cut such growth when notified by
the Township to do so. Such growth of weeds or other undesirable
vegetation is declared to be a nuisance injurious to the public interest
and public health.
B. In such case where real estate exists within the Township which is
undeveloped, or is subject to growth of weeds, and is in area greater
than 217,800 square feet (five acres), weeds on such real estate shall be
cut or destroyed within an area of no less than 100 feet from all
boundaries of such property, when such property abuts development
parcels. In addition, such growth shall be cut or destroyed within an
area no less than 50 feet from all boundaries of such property, where
such property abuts a public right-of-way.
§ 10-5 RESERVED § 10-8
9:413
thereof including, but not limited to, administration and supervision,
transportation of equipment, equipment rental, equipment operator, and
incidental labor shall be certified to the Township Solicitor, who shall enter
the same as a lien against the property in the Court of Common Pleas and
shall proceed to collect the same in like manner as other municipal claims
are by law collectible. An action of assumpsit may be brought to recover the
same in the name of the Township from the owner.
§ 10-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-13-1980 by Ord. No.
1356; 4-13-1981 by Ord. No. 1379; 5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 1674;
8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $500 for a first occurrence within one season or more than $1,000
for every subsequent occurrence within the same season plus costs and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 10-8 WHITEHALL CODE § 10-9
9:414
ARTICLE III
Hazardous Materials Management
[Adopted 5-10-1982 by Ord. No. 1403]
§ 10-10. Title.
This article may be cited as the "Township of Whitehall Hazardous Materials
Management Ordinance."
§ 10-11. Purposes.
The purposes of this article are:
§ 10-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISPOSAL — The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or
placing or any hazardous material into or on any land or water so that such
hazardous material or any constituent thereof may enter the environment,
be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground
waters.
GENERATION — The act or process of producing hazardous material.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL —
A. Insuring safe and effective hazardous materials management.
B. Establishing a program of regulation over the storage, treatment and
disposal of hazardous materials in the Township of Whitehall.
Any substance or combination of substances of a solid, liquid, contained
gaseous or semisolid form which because of its quantity, concentration
or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, as established by
the Mayor, may: [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness.
(1)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or
disposed of, or otherwise manage
(2)
A.
Such materials include, but are not limited to, those which are toxic,
carcinogenic, flammable, irritants, strong sensitizers or which generate
pressure through decomposition, heat or other means, as well as
containers and receptacles previously used in the transportation,
storage, use or application of the substances described as a hazardous
material.
B.
§ 10-10 RESERVED § 10-12
9:415
MAYOR — The Mayor of the Township of Whitehall, Pennsylvania or his or
her designated agent.[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation (including a
government corporation), trust, association, firm, joint stock company,
organization, commission, governmental body or other entity.
STORAGE — Containment in such a manner as not to constitute disposal.
TRANSPORT — Movement within the corporate limits of the Township of
Whitehall.
TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process, including neutralization,
designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of a hazardous material so as to neutralize or as to render
it nonhazardous, safer for transport, amenable for recovery or storage or
reduced in volume.
TREATMENT FACILITY — A location for treatment, including an incinerator
or a facility where generation has occurred.
§ 10-13. Permits. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
§ 10-14. Rule-making.
A. No person shall construct, substantially alter or operate any hazardous
material treatment or disposal facility site or store, treat or dispose of
any hazardous material without first obtaining a permit from the Mayor
for such facility, site or activity.
B. The Mayor or his designate is authorized to issue, vary or modify the
terms of any permit or to suspend, revoke or deny a permit to achieve
the purpose of this article, except that the permit shall be granted for a
period of one year, such a permit year beginning January 1 and ending
December 31 and each permit must be renewed annually before the
first day of January of the subsequent year. The Mayor shall establish
the appropriate permit fee to cover the costs associated with its
issuance, which fee shall be paid immediately upon the issuance or
renewal of a permit. A list of permit holders shall be provided to the
Board of Commissioners.
A. Within six months after the effecting date of this article, the Mayor shall
promulgate and may thereafter revise as appropriate, rules and
regulations necessary to carry out the purposes and provisions of this
article including, but not limited to: [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(1) Rules and regulations regarding the following aspects of proper
hazardous materials management:
§ 10-12 WHITEHALL CODE § 10-14
9:416
§ 10-15. Variance. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
Any application for a variance shall be in writing and a copy of the same
shall be provided to the Board of Commissioners for comment at least 48
hours before said application shall be acted upon by the Mayor. After the
giving of the notice as aforesaid, and the consideration of any comments
received, the Mayor may grant a variance upon a showing that compliance
with the requirements of this article or the rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto would result in an unreasonable financial
hardship and that the public health and welfare would not be endangered.
Board to receive notice and has 48 hours to reply.
§ 10-16. Inspections, rights of entry.
(a) Criteria for determining the quantities and characteristics that
constitute a hazardous material.
(b) Storage, treatment and disposal of hazardous materials.
(c) Transportation, containerization and labeling of hazardous
materials (consistent with those issued by the United States
Department of Transportation).
(d) Onsite handling, including the separation and combination of
hazardous materials.
(e) Procedures and requirements for the use of a manifest or form
which identifies and quantity, composition, origin and use of
hazardous materials within the Township.
B. At the time of promulgation of the proposed rules and regulations
referred to in this section, a copy of the same shall be provided to the
Board of Commissioners of the Township of Whitehall for their approval
and in addition shall be published two times in a newspaper of general
circulation within the Township.
A. For the purpose of enforcing this article or any rule or regulation
promulgated pursuant to this article, the Mayor or his designate may at
any reasonable time and in a reasonable manner: [Amended 6-8-2009
by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(1) Enter without delay any place where hazardous materials are
generated, stored, treated or disposed.
(2) Inspect and obtain samples of any records, reports, information or
test results relating to the purposes of this article. Each such
inspection shall be commenced and completed with reasonable
promptness.
B. If the officer or employee obtains any samples prior to leaving the
premises, he or she shall give to the owner, operator or agent in charge,
§ 10-14 RESERVED § 10-16
9:417
§ 10-17. Appeal procedure.
Any person adversely affected by an action taken pursuant to the provisions
of this article or the rules and regulations promulgated thereto, may appeal
from that action to the Board of Commissioners within 30 days of the date
of the action appealed.
§ 10-18. Suspension and revocation of a permit. [Amended 6-8-2009
by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
§ 10-19. Injunction. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, if the Mayor finds that
any person is operating a storage, treatment or disposal facility or site,
or is transporting hazardous materials in an illegal, unsafe or otherwise
improper manner as to endanger the public health or welfare, the Mayor
may order such person to immediately discontinue the act. Upon failure
to comply with this order, the Board of Commissioners may request the
Township Solicitor to commence appropriate civil action in the Lehigh
County Superior Court to secure a temporary restraining order, a
preliminary injunction, a permanent injunction or other appropriate relief.
a receipt describing the sample obtained and, if requested, a portion
of each such sample equal in volume or weight to the portion retained.
If any analysis is made of such samples, a copy of the results of such
analysis shall be furnished promptly to the owners, operators or agent
in charge.
A. The Mayor may suspend a permit issued in accordance with § 10-13 of
this article (for a period of 30 days) if the holder of the permit is in
violation of this article or the rules and regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto. Written notice of the suspension shall be served upon
the affected party or his or her designated agent. If no appeal is filed
within 30 days of this notice, the suspension shall become final.
B. Where there is a history of repeated violations and/or a permit has been
previously suspended, the Mayor may revoke a permit, upon a showing
of subsequent violation and upon providing the affected party or his or
her designated agent, with written notice of the intent to revoke the
permit, with an opportunity for a hearing prior to revocation. The
revocation shall take effect five days after the notice has been given
unless a written request for a hearing is received by the Board of
Commissioners within that period.
C. Where a permit has been revoked, the person affected has the right to
reapply for a permit. If this person is able to demonstrate an ability and
willingness to comply with the permit and with the provisions of this
article, and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto,
the Mayor may consider granting this new permit.
§ 10-16 WHITEHALL CODE § 10-20
9:418
§ 10-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
Whenever the Mayor or his designate has reason to believe that there has
been a violation of this article or of the rules and regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto, the Mayor or his designate, in lieu of or in addition to
the person or persons responsible therefor, and order these persons to take
such corrective measure as are deemed reasonable and necessary. This
notice shall state the nature of the violation and shall allow reasonable time
for the performance of the necessary corrective measures. If a person fails
to comply with this notice within the time period stated in the notice, the
Mayor or his designate shall institute such action as may be necessary to
terminate the violation. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $300 or more than $1,000 plus costs and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 10-20 RESERVED § 10-20
9:419

ARTICLE IV
Ambulance Services
[Adopted 5-13-1976 by Ord. No. 1197]
§ 10-21. Definitions. [Amended 3-17-1977 by Ord. No. 1237;
11-13-1979 by Ord. No. 1316]
Definitions used in this article or in any regulations thereunder shall mean:
AMBULANCE — Any motor vehicle that is specially designed, constructed
or modified and equipped and is used or intended to be used, maintained
or operated for the purpose of rendering emergency medical care to, and
transportation of, patients.
AMBULANCE SERVICE — Regularly based facility in Whitehall Township
engaging in the service of providing emergency medical care and
transportation of patients within the Township.
INVALID COACH — Any vehicle that is intended to be used only routinely
to transport persons who are convalescent or otherwise nonambulatory and
do not require medical treatment while in transit.
PATIENT — Any individual who is sick, injured, wounded or otherwise
incapacitated or helpless.
PENNSYLVANIA VOLUNTARY AMBULANCE SERVICE CERTIFICATION
PROGRAM — State recognized quality emergency medical care
requirements and approval process on a voluntary basis.
RESCUE VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is designed and equipped for
rescue operations and which is not used for emergency medical care and
transport of patients.
§ 10-22. Voluntary ambulance service program. [Amended
11-13-1979 by Ord. No. 1316]
A. Township concern for quality health care in the emergency services
area can currently best be served through the Pennsylvania Voluntary
Ambulance Service Certification Program inaugurated in 1977. The
Township of Whitehall endorses this program, a joint project of the
Pennsylvania Department of Health, Division of Emergency Health
Services, the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, the
Pennsylvania Emergency Health Services Council and the regional
Emergency Health Services Councils of the Commonwealth. Townshipbased
ambulance corps are urged to apply for the above certification to
assure continuing quality health care to patients in the Township.
B. The program is offered to afford ambulance service recognition by the
Pennsylvania Department of Health, in the absence of a Minimum
Standards Act to provide statewide standards of ambulance design,
equipment, personnel training and manning, communications,
reporting and operations.
§ 10-21 RESERVED § 10-22
9:421
§ 10-23. Attention to highway laws. [Amended 11-13-1979 by Ord.
No. 1316]
Emergency services shall be subject to the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle
Code. (Ref. §§ 3105 and 4571 D).
§ 10-24. Amendments. [Amended 11-13-1979 by Ord. No. 1316]
Any amendments hereto shall be presented to two public hearings at least
10 days apart.
C. Voluntary ambulance service participation in the state program will
prevent any municipal duplication of efforts, promote closer
professional relationships among ambulance services and the Eastern
Pennsylvania Emergency Medical Services Council, and facilitate
awareness of an acquisition of all available financial assistance for
ambulance services, which assistance normally involves such health
channels.
§ 10-22 WHITEHALL CODE § 10-24
9:422
ARTICLE V
Public Safety Radio Amplification Systems
[Adopted 5-10-2004 by Ord. No. 2477; amended in its entirety
11-9-2015 by Ord. No. 3031]
§ 10-25. Radio coverage.
Except as otherwise provided, no person shall maintain, own, erect or
construct any building or structure, or any part thereof, or cause the same
to be done which fails to support adequate radio coverage for Township
Police, Fire and EMS personnel. For purposes of this article, "adequate
radio coverage" shall include all of the following:
§ 10-26. Amplification system allowed.
A. A minimum signal strength of 95 dBm available in 95% of the area of
each floor of the building for two-way portable transmissions when
transmitted to the closest Lehigh County Communications System site.
B. The frequency range to be supported shall be 151.000/162.000.
A. Buildings and structures shall be equipped with any of the following in
order to achieve the required adequate radio coverage: a radiating
cable system or an internal multiple-antenna system with FCC type
accepted bidirectional VHF amplifiers to include Fire, Police and EMS
radio networks as needed to encompass Lehigh County
B. The system shall be capable of operating on an independent battery
and/or generator system for a period of at least 12 hours without
external power input. The battery system shall automatically charge in
the presence of external power input. There shall be no connectivity
between the amplification system and fire alarm system. This system
shall be designed to operate in conjunction with equipment utilized by
the Lehigh County Communications Center and the Whitehall Township
Bureau of Police Fire and EMS.
C. Any bidirectional amplifier unit shall be enclosed in a cabinet with
suitable access for servicing the unit. If installed in outdoor or
unprotected locations, the cabinet shall be weatherproof stainless steel
meeting NEMA standards for weatherproof installations.
D. The unit shall be installed in a secured environment to prevent
tampering. This requirement may be met by the use of a lock on the
cabinet or by installing the unit within a secured room. Only authorized
radio communications technicians are permitted to make adjustments
to these systems.
E. Township Police, Fire or EMS shall have access to the equipment at all
times. A Knox-Box® is required for any building or structure which is
required to have radio amplification equipment under this article.
§ 10-25 RESERVED § 10-26
9:423
§ 10-27. Testing procedures.
F. Each signal amplification system shall comply with and be updated to
current industry technology standards as adhered to and implemented
by Lehigh County, as they may change from time to time.
A. Acceptance test procedure.
(1) New construction.
(a) Upon completion of construction of the structure and at such
time as the commercial structure shall become fully
operational, it will be the building owner's responsibility to
have the communication system tested to ensure that two-way
coverage on each floor of the building is a minimum of 95% and
shall properly interface with the total county communication
design. Said test will be conducted within 30 days of issuance
of an occupancy permit. For multitenant buildings, this test
shall be conducted within 30 days of the occupancy of 50% of
the total building area or at such time as deemed necessary by
the Township.
(b) Each floor of the building shall be divided into a grid of 12
equal areas. A maximum of two nonadjacent areas will be
allowed to fail the test. In the event that three of the areas fail
the test, in order to be more statistically accurate, the floor
may be divided into 24 equal areas. A maximum of four
nonadjacent areas will be allowed to fail the test.
(c) After the second area test, if the building continues to fail, it
will be the building owner's responsibility to have an
amplification system installed to meet the coverage
requirement of 95%.
(d) The test shall be conducted using public safety portable radio,
or equivalent portable radio, talking through the Lehigh
County Communications System. A spot located approximately
in the center of a grid area will be selected for the test, then
the radio will be keyed to verify two-way communications to
and from the outside of the building through the Lehigh County
Communications System. Once the spot has been selected,
prospecting for a better spot within the grid area will not be
permitted.
(e) If the newly constructed and fully operational building fails the
test, it will be the building owner's responsibility to bring the
building or structure into compliance with this article at the
owner's sole expense within 90 days from the date such work is
contracted and within 180 days of the date of the
determination of noncompliance of the building or structure
with this article.
§ 10-26 WHITEHALL CODE § 10-27
9:424
§ 10-28. Qualifications of testing personnel.
Personnel conducting radio system tests shall be qualified to perform the
work. All tests shall be documented and signed by a person in possession
of a current technician certification. All test records shall be retained on
the inspected premises by the building owner and a copy submitted to the
Township.
(f) The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the test
measurement results shall be kept on file with the building
owner so that the measurements can be verified each year
during the annual tests. In the event that the measurement
results become lost, the building owner will be required to
rerun the acceptance test to reestablish the gain values.
(2) Existing structures. Upon notification from the Township Police,
Fire or EMS personnel, the Township will initiate, at its expense, a
radio system test to insure the two-way coverage on each floor of
the building is a minimum of 95%. The test shall be conducted
using a public safety portable radio, or equivalent portable radio,
talking through the Lehigh County Communications System. If the
existing building fails the test, the Township will transmit the
results of the test to the building owner. It will be the building
owner's responsibility to bring the building or structure into
compliance with this article at the owner's sole expense within 90
days from the date such work is contracted and within 180 days of
the date of the determination of noncompliance of the building or
structure with this article.
B. Annual tests for new construction and existing structures. When an inbuilding
radio system is required, it shall be the building owner's
responsibility to have all active components of the system, such as
amplifiers and power supplies and backup batteries, tested to a
minimum of once every 12 months. The annual test results shall be
supplied to the Township within 18 months next following the original
technical certification. Amplifiers shall be tested to ensure that the gain
is the same as it was upon initial installation and acceptance. Backup
amplifiers shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same as it was
upon initial installation and acceptance. Backup batteries and power
supplies shall be tested under load of a period of one hour to verify that
they will properly operate during an actual power outage. If within the
one-hour test period, and in the opinion of the testing technician, the
battery exhibits symptoms of failure, the test shall be extended for
additional one-hour periods until the integrity of the battery can be
determined. All other active components shall be checked to determine
that they are operating within the manufacturer(s) specifications for
the intended purpose.
§ 10-27 RESERVED § 10-29
9:425
§ 10-29. Administration.
The building owner shall submit to the Township a design for any required
amplification system to achieve the required adequate radio coverage. The
Township shall transmit to the county the design for review by its technical
advisor or his/her designee. Should the design, as submitted, comply with
the county design criteria for the building or structure, the county shall
issue a conditional approval of the design, as submitted. After installation
of the amplification system in the building or structure, the communication
interface shall be tested and, if found to be in compliance with the
provisions of this article, a technical certificate of compliance shall be
issued. The county or its designee and the Township shall each signify their
respective approval and consent to the issuance of the technical certificate
of compliance. The technical certificate of compliance shall be issued by the
Township, provided that all fees exacted therefor are paid in full.
§ 10-30. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to residential buildings in the use group R-3
pursuant to the Whitehall Township Building Code (the Uniform
Construction Code, as amended). Parking structures and stairwells are
included in the definition of "building," but elevators may be excluded.
§ 10-31. Violations and penalties.
A. When any required police, fire and EMS communication enhancement
system is installed and becomes inadequate or inoperative thus
affecting the safety of a building, structure or the occupants therein,
the Township shall order the system, unit or device to be repaired or
upgraded as necessary and returned to service within 60 days. It shall
be the responsibility of the building owner or occupant to make repairs,
alterations or additions to maintain operability of the system.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to
a fine not to exceed $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, including
attorneys' fees incurred by the Township; provided, further, that each
day's violation of any provision of this article after the expiration of the
one-hundred-eighty-day notice of noncompliance period shall constitute
a separate offense, and the violation of each section hereof shall
constitute a separate offense.
C. Should any person refuse, neglect or fail to comply with any provision of
this article or with any notice given in conformity with or pursuant to
the provisions hereof, the Township through its own agents, contractors
and/or employees may cause the system, unit or device to be repaired
or upgraded as necessary at the owner's sole expense. The cost and
expense thereof shall be certified to the Township Solicitor, who shall
enter the same as a lien against the property in the Court of Common
Pleas and shall proceed to collect the same in like manner as other
municipal claims are by law collectible. An action of assumpsit may be
§ 10-29 WHITEHALL CODE § 10-31
9:426
brought to recover the same in the name of the Township from the
owner.
D. It has been determined by the Township that the construction and
maintenance of any building or structure, or part thereof, that
interferes with the Township Police Department and county operational
telecommunications networks constitutes a nuisance, per se, because it
threatens the health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors to
Whitehall Township. In addition to any other remedies or enforcement
procedures provided herein, Whitehall Township may seek an
injunction to restrain such a nuisance.
E. The Mayor or his or her designee is charged with the enforcement of
this article.
§ 10-31 RESERVED § 10-31
9:427
Chapter 11
HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 4.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 5.
Fire prevention and fire protection — See Ch.
7.
Health and safety — See Ch. 10.
§ 11-1. Requirements for owners, operators, responsible agents or
managers of residential rental units.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate or cause to
be rented, either as owner, operator, responsible agent or manager, any
residential rental unit within the Township of Whitehall without having a
landlord license as required by Chapter 11, Housing, § 11-1, Requirements
for owners, operators, responsible agents or managers of residential rental
units; and the owner, operator, responsible agent or manager shall include
the amendment attached hereto, as Exhibit A,71 as an addendum to the
residential rental agreement in each lease of a residential rental unit taking
effect on or after February 11, 2010. Said amendment is hereby considered
to be a part of every lease of a residential rental unit in the Township
of Whitehall executed on or after February 11, 2010; and it shall be the
responsibility of every owner, operator, responsible agent or manager to
display the residential rental registration in the residential rental unit. This
residential rental registration shall include the following information:
Chapter 12
LIBRARIES
A. The name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner,
operator, responsible agent or manager.
B. The evenings on which garbage and recycling are to be placed curbside
for collection or, if more than four rental units, the location of disposal
facilities onsite or the name of the private hauler.
C. The telephone number to call to register complaints regarding the
physical condition of the residential rental unit.
D. The telephone number for emergency police, fire and medical services.
E. The date of expiration of the residential rental registration is December
31 of the said calendar year of issuance.
71.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 10-31 WHITEHALL CODE § 12-1
12:428
§ 12-1. Whitehall Township public library established.
In accordance with the Library Code of June 14, 1961, P.L. 324, 24 P.S.
§ 4101 et seq., there is hereby established a local library for the territorial
jurisdiction of Whitehall Township which shall be known as the "Whitehall
Township Public Library."72
Chapter 13
LICENSES, PERMITS AND GENERAL BUSINESS
REGULATIONS
72.Editor's Note: The library was established as the Whitehall Township Free Library by Ord.
No. 725, 7-5-1963, amended to the Whitehall Township Public Library, by Ord. No. 756,
12-13-1964. The cooperative Whitehall Township-Whitehall Coplay School District venture
was voided by a 1971 agreement, whereby the latter assumed control of the library and
the former, control of Township recreation.
§ 12-1 LIBRARIES § 12-1
12:429

ARTICLE I
Junkyards
[Adopted 4-13-1970 by Ord. No. 952]
§ 13-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Whitehall
Junkyard Control Ordinance."
§ 13-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this to have the meanings herein indicated:
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of Whitehall
Township, Pennsylvania.
JUNK — Any discarded material or article and shall include, but not be
limited to, scrap metal, scrapped, abandoned or junk motor vehicles of
every nature whatsoever, nonmotor vehicles of every nature whatsoever,
machinery, equipment, glass, paper, containers and structures. It shall not
include, however, refuse, ashes or garbage kept in a proper container for
the purpose of prompt disposal.
JUNK DEALER — Any person who shall engage in the business of selling,
buying, exchanging, salvaging and dealing in junk, and who maintains and
operates a junkyard within the Township of Whitehall.
JUNKYARD — Any place where any junk (as hereinafter defined) is stored,
dispose of or accumulated.
PERMIT — The permit granted to a person who accumulates, stores,
exchanges or disposes of junk, in an area permitted by the Zoning
Ordinance (Chapter 27) of the Township of Whitehall, Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm, corporation
and entity of any nature whatsoever.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Whitehall, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
§ 13-3. Permit; fee. [Amended 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 1252]
No person(s) shall engage in business as a junk dealer or maintain a
junkyard without first having obtained a permit from the Township Director
of Operations or his designate. A permit fee, in accordance with the
schedule hereinafter set forth, shall be paid to Township for the use of the
Township. The permit shall be granted for a period of one year, with such
permit year beginning January 1 and ending December 31, and each such
permit must be renewed annually before the first day of January of the
subsequent year. An original junk dealer permit issued at any time during
the year shall also expire on December 31 and be subject to the foregoing
renewal requirements.
§ 13-1 LIBRARIES § 13-4
12:431
§ 13-4. Application for permit. [Amended 10-10-1977 by Ord. No.
1252]
The permit provided for in this article shall be issued by the Township
Director of Operations or his designate after written application shall have
been made therefor by the person desiring to obtain a permit. Such permit
shall state the name of the person to whom such permit is issued and the
premises on which such business is to be conducted or the junkyard is to
be maintained. Once issued, said permit shall be posted conspicuously upon
the premises identified in such permit. The written application for permit
mentioned above shall be accompanied by a form issued by the Township
Director of Operations or his designate and every question therein must be
answered. The applicant shall also submit a legal description, accompanied
with a plot or sketch, of the premises used or to be used in connection with
such permit.
§ 13-5. Issuance of permit. [Amended 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 1252]
Upon receipt of an application, the Township Director of Operations or his
designate shall issue a permit or shall refuse to issue a permit to the person
applying therefor after an examination of the application and consideration
of the suitability of the property proposed to be used for the purposes of
the permit, the character of the properties located nearby, compliance with
Chapter 27, Zoning, relative to junkyards and the like and the effect of
the proposed use upon the Township, both economical and aesthetic and
the effect on the reasonable and adequate protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. In the event the Township Director of Operations or
his designate shall issue a permit, it may impose upon the permit and the
person applying therefor such reasonable terms and conditions in addition
to the regulations herein contained and adopted pursuant to this article,
and Chapter 27, Zoning, relative to junkyards, as may be deemed necessary
to carry out the spirit and intent of this article.
§ 13-6. Permit fee.
§ 13-7. Permit limitation.
No person receiving a permit under this article shall, by virtue of one
permit, keep more than one place of business within the Township or
maintain more than one junkyard for the purpose of buying, selling,
exchanging and dealing in junk. No person shall engage in business as a
junk dealer in any place other than the place designated upon his permit or
A. The permit fee shall be paid immediately upon the issuance or renewal
of a permit. The amount of the permit fee shall be set forth from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. [Amended
8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
B. No permit shall be issued for the use of a tract of land in excess of five
acres, excluding setback areas.
§ 13-4 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-7
12:432
maintain a junkyard in any place other than the place designated upon his
permit.
§ 13-8. Transfer of permit.
Permits issued under this article are not transferable or assignable under
any circumstances.
§ 13-9. Permit revocation.
The Board of Commissioners shall have the power to revoke or refuse to
allow the renewal of a permit for noncompliance with any of the provisions
of this article.
§ 13-10. Junk dealer requirements.
From and after May 1, 1970, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons
as herein defined to engage or continue to engage in business as a junk
dealer or to establish or maintain or continue to operate or maintain a
junkyard and scrap yard, within the limits of the Township, except as
provided in this article.
§ 13-11. Expansion.
There shall be no expansion of any junk, salvage and scrap yard in existence
on the effective date of this article, nor shall any such business extend
beyond the boundaries presently occupied by the junk, scrap, motor
vehicles or other materials presently on the premises unless the owner shall
have complied with the provisions of this article.
§ 13-12. Existing businesses.
Existing junk, salvage and scarp yards, and the like, in existence on the
effective date of this article:
§ 13-13. Records.
Every person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business covered by this
article, shall continuously maintain a ledger book which contains detailed
information recording the time of the purchase of any junk, a description of
every article or material purchased or received by him, the date and hour
of such purchase and the person from whom such article or material was
purchased, received or handled by such person and such ledger book shall
A. Shall be required to obtain a permit.
B. Shall not expand or extend its business from the effective date of this
article except as herein provided for such businesses.
C. Shall be in full compliance with all the provisions of this article by no
later than December 31, 1970.
§ 13-7 LIBRARIES § 13-13
12:433
at all times be available for and subject to inspection by Township official or
his designee.
§ 13-14. Delay in disposal.
Every person engaged in the business contemplated by this article shall
keep and retain upon the premises, for a period of 48 hours after the
purchase or receipt thereof, all junk received or purchased by him and he
shall not disturb, reduce, change, modify or alter the original form, shape
or condition of same until such period of 48 hours shall have elapsed.
§ 13-15. Regulations.
Every person receiving a permit under this article shall constantly maintain
the premises in accordance with and the manner prescribed by this section
and any subsequent regulations adopted by the Board of Commissioners:
§ 13-16. Restrictions on storage of flammable liquids.
No flammable liquid shall be permitted to remain in any junk vehicle or
container whether or not the container is a separate item or is an integral
part of another item, at any time.
§ 13-17. Storage of certain materials.
All rags, bottles and scrap paper, and the like, must be kept within the walls
of a building constructed of fire-resistant material as determined by the Fire
Chief of the Township.
A. Such premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to harbor the
breeding of rodents and vermin, create a menace of the health, safety
and welfare of adjoining property owners or the community in general
or otherwise constitute a nuisance.
B. No garbage or other organic waste shall be stored in or on such
premises.
C. Whenever any motor vehicle or other item containing gas or oil shall be
received on the premises as junk or otherwise, all gasoline and oil shall
be drained and removed therefrom immediately upon receipt of the
same. Gasoline in an amount not exceeding 10 gallons may be stored
aboveground in the junkyard provided the same be placed in
containers, approved, in writing, by the Fire Chief of Township. All
other gasoline which is kept on the premises shall be stored
underground, which underground storage must be approved, in
writing, by the Board of Commissioners and must be in compliance with
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania relating to the same.
D. The storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage facilities of the
premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant
water upon the premises and to facilitate access for firefighting
purposes.
§ 13-13 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-18
12:434
§ 13-18. Restrictions on burning.
A person receiving a permit under this article shall not burn more than
one vehicle or its equivalent at any one time. No oil, grease, tires, gasoline
or other similar material that might be dangerous or tend to produce
obnoxious smoke or odors shall be burned within the junkyard at any
time. Burning of vehicles and other permitted items must be attended and
controlled at all times.
§ 13-19. Setback from street and property lines.
The area to be used for the storage, placement, disposal or accumulation of
junk shall maintain a minimum setback distance of 500 feet from the rightof-
way lines on all streets or roads, and a minimum setback distance of 500
feet from all other property lines. The area between the setback line and
the right-of-way line and all streets and roads, and all other property lines,
shall be kept clear and free of weeds and scrub growth at all times.
§ 13-20. Fencing.
All junk shall be stored behind a fence, as specified below, which fence
shall be placed at least 50 feet from all lot lines of the permitted premises
occupied by the junkyard. Whenever such fence, or any part of such fence,
is visible from a public road or from a residence or any adjoining property,
a landscaped evergreen screen of trees and/or shrubs four feet or more in
height at planting and which are capable of attaining a continuous height of
eight feet or more, shall be planted along such fence or section of fence.
§ 13-21. Type of fences required.
Every junkyard shall be completely fenced with a heavy-duty chain link or
wire mesh fence at least six feet in height with gates of similar fencing
material, which gates shall be at all times be securely locked except during
business hours when an adult attendant employed as such is on the
premises. Such fence shall have maximum openings of four square inches
and the wire mesh shall be a minimum size and strength of number 10
gauge steel wire.
§ 13-22. Visibility of material restricted.
No vehicles, equipment trailers or junk shall be visible from beyond the
boundaries of the property.
§ 13-23. Aisles and roadways required.
All vehicles, equipment trailers or junk shall be kept, stored or arranged on
the premises for which a permit is granted as follows, to wit: There shall
be established and maintained in all junk salvage and scrap yards, parallel
aisles or roadways of not less than 10 feet in width and not more than 50
feet apart and intersecting perpendicular aisles or roadways of not less than
§ 13-18 LIBRARIES § 13-23
12:435
10 feet in width and not more than 50 feet apart. All aisles or roadways shall
be kept clear of weeds, brush and debris at all times.
§ 13-24. Processing of application. [Amended 10-10-1977 by Ord.
No. 1252]
Upon receipt by the Department of Operations of an application for an
original or renewal permit, the procedure shall be as follows, to wit:
§ 13-25. Discontinued operations.
All junk, salvage and scrap ceasing business for any reason whatsoever,
voluntary or involuntary, shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 27,
Zoning, relating to the same, as amended from time to time.
A. An application for an original permit, except for existing businesses
covered by this article, shall be forwarded by the Department of
Operations to the Planning Commission that the latter shall make
recommendation to the former regarding the manner of appropriately
landscaping and/or enclosing said business with a fence so as to
eliminate any nuisance or unattractive appearance.
B. Applications for a renewal permit shall be reviewed by the Department
of Operations without forwarding to the Planning Commission unless
there is a request for expansion or extension of the business; in such
latter events, the same shall be first processed by the Planning
Commission as stated aforesaid for original permits, except that
existing junkyards, salvage and scrap yards and the like shall be
reviewed as hereinafter indicated.
C. Application for renewal of permit for presently existing businesses
covered by this article for the year 1971, shall also be forwarded to the
Planning Commission for review and determination as to whether or not
such business has complied with Chapter 27, Zoning, prior to January 1,
1971.
D. All applications to be reviewed by the Planning Commission as
hereinbefore indicated shall be accompanied with the description of the
premises owned or leased by the applicant for the businesses covered
by this article and shall also be accompanied by a plan reflecting the
outer perimeter of the land owned or leased with identity of owner or
street on each side of the same; and, in addition, the inner perimeter
reflecting the area to be used for the purposes of the permit, with
courses and distances, metes and bounds, of both. The plot should also
disclose the location of any permitted buildings and the aisles and
roadways hereinbefore referred to.
§ 13-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-26
12:436
§ 13-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No. 1356; by
Ord. No. 1944; 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this section continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 13-27. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to the remedies provided hereinbefore, any continued violations
of this article which shall constitute a nuisance in fact or which shall in the
opinion of the Board of Commissioners constitute a nuisance, may be abated
by proceeding against the violator in a court of equity for relief.
§ 13-26 LIBRARIES § 13-27
12:437

ARTICLE II
Peddlers
[Adopted 2-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2538]
§ 13-28. Commercial canvassers, solicitors and peddlers on private
residential property.
A. Permit required.
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall canvass, solicit, distribute
circulars or other matter or call from house to house in the
Township of Whitehall to sell, promote the sale of or attempt to sell
goods by sample or to take or attempt to take orders for the future
delivery of goods, merchandise, ware or any property, personal or
real, of any nature whatsoever, or take or attempt to take orders for
services to be furnished or performed presently or in the future
without first having obtained a written permit therefor from the
Police Department of the Township of Whitehall.
(2) In the case of a firm or corporation, a permit shall be required for
each individual who is to conduct such activities.
B. Exemptions. The permit requirement shall not apply to:
(1) Any person, firm or corporation canvassing on behalf of a bona fide
religious, charitable or political organization subject to the
provisions of § 13-29 of this article.
(2) Any person engaging in religious proselytizing, anonymous political
speech or the distribution of political or religious handbills or
circulars.
(3) Any person, firm or corporation delivering goods or performing
services which have previously been ordered by the person owning,
leasing or occupying the property where such delivery is made or
service performed prior to the effective date of this article.
(4) Any person, firm or corporation calling upon or soliciting from
commercial establishments located in the Township of Whitehall.
C. Application.
(1) The application form for a permit under this section shall require
the following information:
(a) Name of the applicant.
(b) Permanent home address.
(c) Temporary address.
(d) Name and address and telephone number of the employer or
firm represented.
§ 13-28 LIBRARIES § 13-28
12:439
§ 13-29. Religious, charitable and political solicitors and
canvassers.
(e) Place or places of residence of the applicant for the preceding
three years.
(f) Date on which soliciting or canvassing is to commence and
end.
(g) Nature of goods or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale or
the nature of the services to be furnished.
(h) Whether the applicant has been convicted of a crime,
disorderly persons offense or violation of any ordinance
relating to canvassing or soliciting and, if so, when, where and
the nature of the offense.
(i) The names of other municipalities in Pennsylvania where the
applicant has been issued a permit to solicit in the past two
years.
(j) Whether any motor vehicle will be used in connection with the
canvassing or soliciting and, if so, the make, year, color, type
and license plate number.
(k) Physical description of the applicant.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by a letter or other written
statement from the individual, firm or corporation employing the
applicant certifying that the applicant is authorized to act as the
representative of the individual, firm or corporation.
D. Permit fee; term. Each applicant for a permit shall pay a fee of $50 for
an annual permit. In the case of a firm or corporation, a permit shall be
required for each individual who is to conduct such activities. The
permit shall expire on December 31 of each year, and no permit fee
shall be prorated for part of a year.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BONA FIDE RELIGIOUS, CHARITABLE, EDUCATIONAL OR
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION — Any organization that is qualified under
state or federal law as a tax exempt, nonprofit organization or any
organization or group that espouses or advocates a position or belief on
any subject of public interest or on behalf of any candidate for public
office.
CANVASS — To call upon persons to elicit or determine opinions,
feelings, sentiments or information of any nature.
SOLICIT — To call upon persons to seek donations or contributions
to such bona fide religious, charitable, educational or political
organizations.
§ 13-28 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-29
12:440
B. Exemptions. The permit requirement shall not apply to:
(1) Candidates for political office exempt. Any candidate for public
office or person campaigning on behalf of such a candidate, where
such candidate is seeking election to an office to be voted upon by
the residents of the Township of Whitehall who are duly registered
to vote in elections in accordance with the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) Political and religious canvassers. Any person engaging in religious
proselytizing, anonymous political speech or the distribution of
political or religious handbills or circulars.
C. Application.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation soliciting as herein defined on
behalf of a bona fide religious, charitable or political organization,
as defined in this section, shall, prior to such solicitation file with
the Whitehall Township Police Department a completed application
in the form provided.
(2) The application for a permit under this section shall contain the
following information:
(a) The name and address of the firm, corporation or organization
represented by the individual solicitor, when applicable.
(b) The name, address and telephone number of the person in
charge of such organization to be contacted in case of
emergency.
(c) The name, address (both temporary and permanent),
telephone number and date of birth of all individual solicitors
who will be soliciting within the Township of Whitehall.
(d) Whether the applicant has been convicted or a crime,
disorderly person's offense or violation of any ordinance
relating to soliciting and, if so, when, where and the nature of
the offense.
(e) The names of other municipalities in Pennsylvania where the
applicant has been issued a permit to solicit in the past two
years.
(f) Whether any motor vehicle will be used in connection the
soliciting and, if so, the make, year, color, type and license
plate number.
(g) Nature or purpose of the solicitations.
D. Permit; term. In the case of a firm or corporation, a permit shall be
required for each individual who is to conduct such solicitation
activities. There is no fee for the permit. The permit shall expire on
§ 13-29 LIBRARIES § 13-29
12:441
§ 13-30. Administrative regulations.
December 31 of each year and no permit fee shall be prorated for part
of a year.
A. The provisions of this section shall apply to both §§ 13-28 and 13-29.
B. Administration.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation seeking a permit to canvass or
solicit shall file an application with the Whitehall Township Police
Department on a form supplied by the Department.
(2) The Whitehall Township Police Department shall accept
applications for processing only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. No applications shall be
processed on weekends or holidays.
C. Issuance of permits. The Whitehall Township Police Chief or his
designee shall ordinarily act on all applications within 48 hours after
submission of a complete application. Saturdays, Sundays and holidays
shall be excluded from such computation. If the Police Chief or his
designee determines the application should be denied, then the
application shall be submitted to the Township Commissioners or their
designee for a determination.
D. Hours of soliciting and canvassing. Soliciting and canvassing shall be
allowed only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
E. Display of permit. Each permittee shall be issued a permit which shall
be carried upon the person of the permittee whenever such permittee is
engaged in canvassing or soliciting.
F. Permit not transferable. No permit shall be transferable. In the case of a
firm or corporation, each person representing such firm or corporation
shall be issued a separate permit.
G. Action by Chief of Police regarding revocation, denial or suspension of
permit.
(1) In any case where, in the opinion of the Chief of Police or his
designee, a permit should be revoked or should not be issued, the
Chief shall immediately forward such matter to the Township
Commissioners or their designee for their consideration. Such
transmittal shall include the application together with supporting
data and information and the reasons which form the basis of his
recommendation for revocation or denial. The Township
Commissioners or their designee may deny or revoke a permit
where they find the applicant or permittee has failed to comply with
any of the provisions of this article or has been convicted or a
crime, disorderly person's offense or ordinance violation which
§ 13-29 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-30
12:442
§ 13-31. Violations and penalties.
Any falsification of information contained in an application or failure to
comply with any other provision of this article shall result in immediate
revocation of the permittee's permit. In addition, any person, firm or
corporation charged with a summary offence for violating any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, pay to the Township
a fine in a sum not to exceed $300 for any single violation of this part.
relates adversely to the activity for which the permit has or would
be issued.
(2) In cases where a permit is subject to revocation for any reason
provided for in this article, the Chief of Police or his designee may
temporarily suspend such permit, pending consideration of the
matter by the Township Commissioners or their designee.
§ 13-30 LIBRARIES § 13-31
12:443

ARTICLE III
Transient Retail Merchants
[Adopted 6-8-1992 by Ord. No. 1768]
§ 13-32. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Whitehall Township Transient Merchant
Ordinance."
§ 13-33. Definitions.
When used in this subpart, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings assigned in this section.
EVENT — The occurrence of a promotion, show, sale or offering for sale
services or merchandise or the display of wares for sale or the exhibition
of items for sale or demonstrations. Such event shall be further defined as
follows:
Nonselling/no admission event. An event at which the primary purpose
is to display, demonstrate or advertise a good or service where no
admission is charged for viewing or participating in the event. An
example of this type of event would be a home show in a mall where
the purpose is clearly advertising but not immediate sale of items or
services displayed.
A.
Nonselling/paid admission event. This type of event would be a show
or display of any individual or group of exhibitors or promoters that
display their goods or services without selling them, but an admission
fee is charged at the gate or door to enter.
B.
Selling/no admission fee event. This type of event includes the display
or arts, crafts, goods or services with the intent to sell same. Examples
of this type of event would be a craft show or hobby show where
individuals or promoters displayed wares or services with the intent to
have them purchased.
C.
Selling/paid admission event. An event which would charge admission
to enter the display or show area, where goods, wares, services or
tickets for future events would be displayed with the intent of selling
same.
D.
Single vendor/transient merchant event. A vendor which sets up a
temporary business and sells a product or service within the Township
on a temporary basis. Examples of this type of event would include
a fur show within a motel, sales from trucks, sales in parking lots or
rented space areas or other circumstances under which a single vendor
displays or promotes goods or services with the intent to sell.
E.
Nonprofit sale or display. An event at which a nonprofit group would
sell or display goods or services for advertising, public recognition or
selling purposes. Examples of this type of event would be Girl Scout
F.
§ 13-32 LIBRARIES § 13-33
12:445
OWNER OF REAL PROPERTY — The person which has the present legal
right to possess or occupy the property, whether through fee simple title,
lease or otherwise.
PERSON — Without limitation, an individual, a partnership, an association,
a corporation and a trust.
PROMOTER — A person who organizes, coordinates or sponsors a
gathering (a "promotion") of two or more transient merchants and/or
nonselling exhibitors to conduct their transient businesses at a single
location, two or more adjacent or connected locations, or two or more
locations associated with or advertised as a part of a single coordinated
event or a person who sells, promotes or attempts to sell a product or
service within the Township in a "transient business." If one person
sponsors a promotion and another person is requested to organize,
coordinate or sponsor two or more transient merchants to conduct their
transient businesses as a part of the larger promotion, both persons shall
be considered a "promoter."
SELLING — A mercantile transaction involving the exchange of cash or
credit for merchandise, services or anything of value or the contracting for
same, either written or oral, with expectation of delivery or performance at
a future date.
SERVICES — Includes, without limitation, the performance of a personal,
commercial or professional service or the furnishing of a right to participate
in an amusement or other activity.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Whitehall, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, a
Pennsylvania home rule charter municipality and municipal corporation.
TRANSIENT BUSINESS — A temporary or seasonal business of selling,
contracting for, delivering and/or providing goods, wares, merchandise or
services within the Township, or that portion of a business which involves,
on a temporary or seasonal basis, the selling contracting for, delivering and/
or providing of goods, wares, merchandise or services within the Township,
provided that one or more of the transient merchants engaged in such
business hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor
cookie sales, church bake sales, charity solicitations, school club car
washes or events sponsored by a nonprofit entity as certified by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Educational/seminar/meeting events. Events which are primarily for
the purpose of advertising, promoting, educating or providing a service
to person who attend, whether or not admission is charged. Examples
of this type of event would include smoking cessation classes, real
estate marketing classes, regional meetings or a sales force for network
marking groups or group solicitations whether or not a fee is charged
at the gate.
G.
Paid amusement events. Those events which would fall under the
category of the Amusement Tax Ordinance (Chapter 24) where a gate
admission is charged.
H.
§ 13-33 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-33
12:446
vehicle, tent, railroad box car, hotel, motel, lodging house, apartment, shop,
mall, street, alley, parking lot or any other place, for the exhibition for
sale, sale or provision of such goods, wares, merchandise or services, either
privately or at public sale or auction.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any person who engages in a transient
business, whether as owner, agent or consignee and whether or not a
resident of the Township. The person so engaged shall not be relieved
from complying with the provisions of this subpart merely by reason of
associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as
a part of or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant, auctioneer
or trade association. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the term
"transient merchant" shall not include any merchant who is exempt from
the provisions of this subpart under § 13-40A or by a statute of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT FEE — The fee paid by a transient merchant or
a promoter on behalf of a transient merchant involved in the promoter's
event, where the transient merchant has not obtained a business privilege
license and is not exempt as set forth in § 13-40 of this article. The transient
merchant fee shall be in an amount as may be established from time to time
through resolution of the Commissioners.[Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
VALUE — That price for which goods, wares, merchandise or services were
sold by the transient merchant, or in the case of a controversy, that price of
goods as estimated by the Township Treasurer or his/her designee.
§ 13-34. License required.
A. It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant to engage in a transient
business within the Township of Whitehall without satisfying at least
one of the following conditions:
(1) Acquisition of a business privilege license from the tax office of the
Township of Whitehall and satisfaction of all requirements thereof.
(2) Participation in an event conducted by a promoter where the
promoter has paid all appropriate fees to the Township and
satisfied all conditions of that license.
(3) Payment of the fee for, and acquisition of, a transient merchant's
license where no promoter for the event has registered and
acquired a license.
B. It shall be unlawful for any promoter to permit any person to engage in
a transient business as a part of his promotion unless such promoter
has first obtained a promoter's or a business privilege license and has:
(1) Paid the transient merchant fee in an amount as may be set, from
time to time, by the Board of Commissioners by resolution for each
transient business which has not obtained a current Whitehall
§ 13-33 LIBRARIES § 13-34
12:447
§ 13-35. Application for transient merchant license.
Township business privilege license. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord.
No. 2578]
(2) Obtained either a business privilege license or a promoter's
license, filed the appropriate forms for each transient business and
otherwise complied with the terms of this article.
C. Any person obtaining a transient merchant license shall also be
required to comply with all other applicable laws of the Township, and
secure all other necessary approvals for the business operation,
including but not limited to zoning and building code regulations, and
the mere issuance of a transient merchant license shall not imply
compliance with all other Township regulations. [Added 2-14-2005 by
Ord. No. 2538]
A. Applicants for a transient merchant license required under § 13-34 of
this article, who have not already obtained a business privilege license,
shall either obtain a business privilege license or shall file a written,
certified application with the Township Treasurer, in a form approved
by the Township Treasurer, not less than 10 days prior to the
commencement of the transient business within the Township. The
provision of this information required by this section may be provided
by a promoter on behalf of the applicant. Provided, that the promoter
has fully satisfied all requirements of the promoter's license.
B. Unless the transient business is participating in an event coordinated
by a promoter, the following shall apply: If the applicant is an individual,
the application shall be signed by the applicant. If the applicant is a
partnership, the application shall be signed by a designated managing
partner of the partnership or by a person certifying that he or she has
full power and authority to legally bind the entity. If the applicant is a
corporation, the application shall be signed by the President of the
corporation or one certifying authority to bind the corporation. If the
applicant is another type of entity, the application shall be signed by
persons who, individually or collectively, have authority to bind the
entity.
C. The application shall include all of the following information:
(1) The local address of the applicant while engaged in the transient
business.
(2) The permanent business address of the applicant.
(3) The name(s) of the individual(s) having the management or
supervision of the transient business during the time that it is
proposed to be carried on within the Township.
(4) The capacity in which such individual(s) will act (e.g., as a
proprietor, agent etc.).
§ 13-34 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-35
12:448
(5) If the transient business will be carried on behalf of any other
person(s), the name(s) and address(es) of such person(s).
(6) If the applicant is a corporation, the jurisdiction under whose laws
the applicant is incorporated and the type of corporation (e.g.,
business, nonprofit, etc.).
(7) The place(s) in the Township where the applicant proposes to carry
on its transient business.
(8) The period of time during which the applicant proposes to carry on
its transient business.
(9) The nature, character and quality of the goods, wares, merchandise
or services to be sold or offered for sale by the transient merchant
within the Township of Whitehall.
(10)Written permission or copy of the rental contract given by the
owner of the property or the promoter where the transient business
is to be conducted (or his authorized agent) which authorizes the
applicant or promoter to conduct such business on his property.
(11) Such other reasonable information relating to the identity of the
person(s) having the management or supervision of the proposed
transient business, the applicant, or relating to the method or plan
of conducting such business, as the Township Treasurer may deem
proper to fulfill the purposes of this article.
D. Upon the issuance of a transient merchant license under this article,
the license fee shall be nonrefundable. If an application for license
under this article is denied, or if an applicant shall withdraw his
application prior to the issuance of a license, the license fee shall be
refunded, less $15 for processing the application and/or conducting an
investigation. A license may be refused by the Treasurer if the
application is incomplete, if the fee is not paid or if the applicant or
transient business has outstanding unpaid taxes due to the Township.
E. The application shall be accompanied by cash, check or money order in
an amount as set forth, from time to time, by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners. The license shall be valid for 30 days from the date of
issue. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
F. Each license issued shall contain the number of the license, the date of
its issuance, the nature of the business authorized to be carried on, the
amount of the license fee paid, the effective date and expiration date of
the license, the place where said business may be carried on under the
given license and the name(s) of the person(s) authorized to conduct
the transient business at that location.
§ 13-35 LIBRARIES § 13-36
12:449
§ 13-36. Exhibition of license.
Each transient merchant license issued under this article shall be posted
conspicuously at the place of business indicated therein.
§ 13-37. Loud noises and sound devices.
No licensee under this article, nor anyone in his behalf, shall shout, make
an outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other sound device, including
any loud speaking radio or amplifying system, upon any of the streets,
alleys, parks or other public areas of the Township of Whitehall, or upon
any private premises in the Township where sound of sufficient volume is
emitted or produced therefrom capable of being plainly heard upon the
streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public areas of the Township or
inside any residential dwelling unit in the Township for the purpose of
attracting attention to any goods, wares, merchandise or services which
such license proposes to sell.
§ 13-38. Records.
The Township Treasurer shall maintain all records associated with the
requirements of this article and shall dispose of outdated records only in
accordance with Township record destruction policy.
§ 13-39. Promoter's license.
A. Applicants for a promoter's license required under § 13-34B of this
article shall file a written, certified application with the Township
Treasurer, in a form approved by the Township Treasurer, not less than
10 days prior to commencing any activities to organize, coordinate or
sponsor a promotion within the Township.
B. If the applicant is an individual, the application shall be signed by the
applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall be
signed by a majority of the general partners or any designated
managing partner of the partnership. If the applicant is a corporation,
the application shall be signed by the president of the corporation. If
the applicant is another type of entity, the application shall be signed by
person who, individually or collectively, have authority to bind the
entity.
C. The application shall include all of the following information:
(1) The local address of the applicant while engaged in the promotion
activities.
(2) The permanent address of the applicant.
(3) The name(s) of the individual(s) having the management or
supervision of the promotion or the activities or organizing,
coordinating or sponsoring the promotion.
§ 13-36 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-39
12:450
(4) The capacity in which such individual(s) will act (e.g., as proprietor,
agent, etc.).
(5) If the applicant is a corporation, the jurisdiction under whose laws
the applicant is incorporated and the type of corporation (e.g.,
business, nonprofit, etc.).
(6) The place(s) in the Township where the applicant intends to stage
the promotion.
(7) The period of time during which the applicant intends to stage the
promotion.
(8) The names and addresses of any specific transient businesses that
the applicant will have participating in the promotion and all other
information required on transient merchant license together with a
completed copy of the transient merchant license form.
(9) Written permission or copy of the rental contract, given by the
owner of the property where the promotion is to be conducted (or
his authorizing agent) which authorizes the applicant to organize,
coordinate or sponsor a promotion on his property.
(10) Such other reasonable information relating to the identity of the
person(s) having the management or supervision of the promotion,
the applicant, as the Township Treasurer may deem proper to fulfill
the purposes of this article.
D. The application shall be accompanied by cash or a check or money
order in an amount established, from time to time, by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners, as a nonrefundable license fee and application
fee, except for those applicants exempt from the payment of the license
fee and application fee under § 13-40 or by reason of having a current
business privilege license. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
E. The application shall be accompanied by an instrument nominating and
appointing the Township Treasurer (or his designee or any acting
Township Treasurer), as the applicant's true and lawful agent with full
power and authority to acknowledge service of process for and on
behalf of said applicant in respect to any matters connected with or
arising out of the promotion conducted under said license, and waiving
all claim or right or error by reason of such acknowledgment of service
or manner of service. Immediately upon receipt of process upon the
Township Treasurer under this section, the Township Treasurer shall
send a copy of said process to the promoter by registered or certified
mail to his last known address.
F. Upon receipt of an application for a promoter's license under this
section, the Township Treasurer may cause such investigation to be
made to determine whether any taxes are in arrears and to verify
information contained on the application. Each license shall contain the
number of the license, the date of its issuance, the amount of the license
§ 13-39 LIBRARIES § 13-39
12:451
§ 13-40. Exemptions.
fee paid, the place(s) where the promotion may be conducted, the
date(s) on which the promotion may be conducted and the name(s) of
the person(s) authorized to act on behalf of the promoter in connection
with the promotion.
G. A separate promoter's license shall be required for each promotion that
the promoter desires to conduct.
H. Nothing in this section shall relieve the recipient of a promoter's license
of the obligation to obtain a transient merchant license under this
article if he desires to operate a transient business in connection with
his promotion or otherwise or to pay the transient merchant fee for
each transient merchant who does not have a business privilege
license. The licensee shall also be required to pay the business privilege
tax (Chapter 24, Taxation, Article I).
A. The following persons shall be exempt from the requirements of paying
the transient merchant license fee, but shall still be required to file the
information and forms required at nonexempt entities.
(1) Pennsylvania state sales tax exempt entities, as evidenced by a
copy of the exemption certificate issued by the Commonwealth or
an entity listed as exempt under a Whitehall Township Business
Privilege License Ordinance.
(2) A merchant selling goods, wares, merchandise or services donated
by the owner or provider thereof, provided that the proceeds of the
sale are to be applied to a public charity or philanthropic purpose
as such is defined by state statute.
(3) A merchant selling goods, ware, merchandise or services as part of
a promotion organized, coordinated or sponsored by a purely
public charity exempt from business privilege, sales and local
property tax, provided that the value of the total amount of goods,
wares, merchandise or services sold at the promotion by the
merchant does not exceed $1,000 within a one-year tax period.
(4) An agency, authority or political subdivision of the government of
the United States or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including
a school district.
B. The following persons shall be exempt from requirements of this article
to pay a fee for a promoter's license, to the extent described below, but
are not exempt from the requirement to obtain a promoter's license:
(1) Pennsylvania state sales tax exempt entities, as evidenced by a
copy of the exemption certificate issued by the Commonwealth or
an entity listed as exempt under a Whitehall Township Business
Privilege License Ordinance.
§ 13-39 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-40
12:452
§ 13-41. Revocation of licenses.
The Township Treasurer may revoke any license issued under this article if
the licensee fails to comply with the provisions of this article or violates any
laws, court orders, regulations or Township ordinances in connection with
the transient business or promotion covered by his license.
§ 13-42. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or shall
willfully file a false application or statement under this article and any
officer, member, general partner, trustee or similar official of an entity
which shall violate any of the provisions of this article, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense. The Township shall also retain
all other legal and equitable remedies available to enforce the provisions of
this article.
(2) An agency, authority or political subdivision of the government of
the United States of Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including a
school district.
(3) Any person organizing, coordinating or sponsoring a promotion
which includes only merchants who are exempt under Subsection
B(1) from the requirement to obtain a transient merchant license.
§ 13-40 LIBRARIES § 13-42
12:453

ARTICLE IV
Transportation of Personal Property and Household Goods
[Adopted 2-10-1964 by Ord. No. 736]
§ 13-43. Definitions.
The following words when used in this article shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning:
LESSOR OR LANDLORD — One who grants a lease or rents real estate to
another either for business or dwelling purposes.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation. The singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
PERSONAL PROPERTY OR HOUSEHOLD GOODS — Any tangible property
that is the subject of ownership and is possible of being moved and which is
generally used in the operation of a business or for the maintenance of the
household.
TRANSPORTATION — The moving of personal property or household goods
by way of public streets or highways.
§ 13-44. Permit required to move or transport personal property or
household goods in bulk. [Amended 7-11-1983 by Ord. No. 1435]
No person shall move or transport, or cause to be moved or transported,
from place to place within the Township of Whitehall to another place
therein, or to or from places beyond the limits thereof, any personal
property or household goods, in bulk, without first securing from the
Township Treasurer of the Township of Whitehall a permit for such moving
or transportation.
§ 13-45. Application for permit. [Amended 12-8-2008 by Ord. No.
2758]
Any person desiring such a permit for the removal and transportation of
personal property or household goods in the manner herein described shall
make application to the Treasurer of the Township of Whitehall, which shall
include the following information:
A. Name of every occupant of dwelling.
B. The social security number for each occupant over 18.
C. The address of the applicant's former residence.
D. The address of the applicant's new dwelling within the Township or the
new address where the applicant(s) will reside if moving from the
Township.
§ 13-43 LIBRARIES § 13-45
12:455
§ 13-46. Issuance of permit. [Amended 1-14-1974 by Ord. No. 1125;
10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 1252]
The Treasurer of the Township of Whitehall shall, upon application, issue
a permit for which a charge, as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners, will be made, setting forth the name of the
permittee as well as the name or names of the owners of the personal
property or household goods to be moved or transported and the address
from which the personal property or household goods are to be moved, and
the address to which the personal property or household goods are to be
delivered. A copy of said permit shall be delivered to the Township Bureau
of Police, if deemed necessary by the Township Treasurer.
§ 13-47. Notice by lessor or landlord. [Amended 7-11-1983 by Ord.
No. 1435]
Any lessor or landlord leasing or renting any premises, or part thereof,
within the Township of Whitehall to another person for the purpose of either
a business or as a dwelling shall give the Township Treasurer at least 24
hours notice of the intention of the lessee or tenant to move in or vacate the
leased or rented premises.
§ 13-48. Duty of movers. [Amended 7-11-1983 by Ord. No. 1435]
Any person who is in the business of transporting or moving personal
property or household goods in bulk from one location to another, as
hereinbefore described, shall be obligated to verify that the proper permit
has been issued, prior to the moving or transporting of any personal
property or household goods either within the Township of Whitehall or to
or from a point outside the Township of Whitehall.
§ 13-49. Conditions for issuance of permit.
The Treasurer of the Township of Whitehall shall not issue any permit until
after the applicant for a permit has paid all taxes and fees levied, with the
exception of real estate taxes.
§ 13-50. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-17-1995 by Ord. No.
1944; 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
Any person, lessor or landlord violating any of the provisions of this article
or furnishing false information to the Township Treasurer or using false
names or address, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
E. If applicant is moving into a rental unit, a copy of the lease agreement
that reflects the applicant's name(s) as the primary lessee.
F. A copy of a deed or an agreement of sale that reflects the applicant's
name(s) if moving into an owner-occupied dwelling.
§ 13-45 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-50
12:456
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 13-50 LIBRARIES § 13-50
12:457

ARTICLE V
User-Activated Amusement Devices
[Adopted 10-13-1997 by Ord. No. 2048]
§ 13-51. Definitions.
The following words when used in this article shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning:
AMUSEMENT GAME(S) — Any automatic, mechanical, electric or
electronic machine or device used or designed to be operated for
entertainment or amusement, when such device is activated by the insertion
of a coin, token, money or other article or by the payment of money to have
it activated. The term "amusement game" shall also include, but shall not
be limited to, coin or token operated rides, skee ball or similar games as
well as merchandise machines which involve the successful completion of a
skill or a change in winning (i.e., "claw" machines). This definition shall not
include the following:
ESTABLISHMENT — The site where the amusement games are located.
LICENSEE — The owner of the establishment.
MERCHANDISE MACHINE — Any automatic, mechanical, electric or
electronic machine or device used or designed to be operated to provide
food and/or services to the user and not to provide entertainment or
amusement. The term merchandise machine includes, but are not limited
to:
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Whitehall.
§ 13-52. License required.
No person, firm, association, corporation or other entity shall place,
possess, keep, maintain, exhibit, use or operate or permit to be placed,
possessed, kept, maintained, exhibited, used or operated any amusement
game in or upon any establishment without first obtaining a license therefor.
A. A jukebox.
B. Bowling alleys.
C. Merchandise machines (except as outlined above).
Any game or device maintained within a residence for the sole use of
the occupants thereof and their guests.
D.
E. Any game or device maintained within a private club.
A. Coin-operated washing or drying machines.
B. Food or beverage vending machines.
C. Machines that provide personal items.
§ 13-51 LIBRARIES § 13-52
12:459
All licenses so issued shall be issued to the establishment owner, not the
operator or vendor of the machine(s).
§ 13-53. Application for amusement game licenses.
§ 13-54. Issuance of amusement game licenses, fee, display.
A. Application for any amusement game license shall be made to the
Township Treasurer, or the Treasurer's authorized representative, on
forms to be prescribed by the Treasurer which shall set forth, among
other information deemed to be required and prescribed by the
Treasurer, the following:
(1) If an individual, the name, residence and business address of the
applicant; if a partnership, association or other entity, the name,
residence and business address of entity; and, if a corporation, the
address of its registered office and principal place of business and
the names, residences and business address of each of its officers
and directors.
(2) The manufacturer, name, dimensions, serial number and a general
description, including a statement of ownership, of the amusement
game.
(3) The address of the establishment and location where the
amusement game is to be placed, possessed, kept, maintained,
exhibited, used or operated within the establishment.
(4) Authorization for duly authorized Township personnel to inspect
the building premises, store or other public or quasi-public place
for which the application is sought.
(5) Compliance with all requirements of Chapter 27, Zoning.
B. An annual listing of all licenses shall be transmitted to the Chief of
Police, Zoning Officer, Fire Chief and others as the Mayor deems
appropriate in order to verify the accuracy of the information submitted
on the application and compliance with all local ordinances, state and
federal laws. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
A. Upon approval of an application, and payment of the proper fee, the
Township Treasurer shall issue a license to the applicant for the
location and placement of amusement games in, on, at or upon the
establishment. [Amended 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 2100]
B. The fee for each license shall be established, from time to time, by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners, per amusement game in the
establishment. In the event that additional amusement games are
added to the establishment (and no amusement game is simultaneously
removed), then, in such event, the licensee shall advise the Township of
the placement of such additional amusement games and shall pay an
§ 13-52 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-54
12:460
§ 13-55. Physical area and location requirements for amusement
games.
§ 13-56. Operation of amusement games.
§ 13-57. License termination, suspension or revocation.
addition fee as shall be established, from time to time, by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners, per amusement game. Upon payment of
the additional fee, the Township shall reissue the license and indicate
the new total number of amusement games licensed for the
establishment. Said license, or reissued license, shall be issued for the
fiscal year commencing July 1 and expiring June 30. Said license, or
reissued license, shall be renewed annually on or before June 30 by
the filing of a written renewal application, accompanied by the license
fee for renewal. The renewal fee shall be based upon a fee established,
from time to time, by resolution of the Board of Commissioners, per
machine located or used at the establishment. The fee for any license
issued, or reissued (because of amusement games added at an
establishment), after December 1 (for the fiscal year ending June 30
of the immediately succeeding year) shall be 1/2 of the annual fee.
[Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
C. The amusement game license shall be displayed in a manner approved
by the Township. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
A. There shall be not less than 30 square feet of usable floor space in the
establishment for each amusement game.
B. The licensee may locate the amusement games within the
establishment as the licensee wishes, subject to the approval of the
Township in insure safe and adequate ingress and egress.
A. The licensee shall comply with all provisions of law, ordinance, rule or
regulation applicable thereto and relating to the conduct of business in
connection with which the amusement game is used and the uses and
maintenance of the establishment.
B. The licensee shall maintain adequate supervision of the establishment
at all times during which the amusement games are in operation.
C. The licensee shall maintain a minimum light level of not less than 10
footcandles at the location of the amusement games within the
establishment.
A. A license issued pursuant to the provision of this article shall be
automatically and immediately terminated by any of the following
occurrences:
(1) Discontinuance of licensee's business.
(2) Removal of permitted amusement games from the establishment.
§ 13-54 LIBRARIES § 13-57
12:461
(3) Transfer or sale of the licensee's business to another individual,
partnership, corporation or other entity.
B. All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this article are subject
to suspension or revocation by the Township upon any of the following
conditions:
(1) Any willful misrepresentation made by the licensee or the
licensee's agent in applying for the license.
(2) Conviction of the licensee for any felony or misdemeanor involving
force, violence, moral turpitude or involving any violation of this
article or other provision of the Township's Code of Ordinances or
other state or federal laws pertaining to business operation.
(3) The existence of a nuisance to the general public, to persons
residing in the vicinity resulting from loitering by persons on or
near the establishment caused by the said amusement games or
person operating the said amusement games.
(4) The violation of § 13-63 hereof.
(5) Adding additional amusement games (and no amusement games
are simultaneously removed) without paying an additional fee as
required by § 13-52 hereinabove. [Amended 5-11-1998 by Ord.
No. 2100]
§ 13-57 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-57
12:462
ARTICLE VI
Community Antenna Television Systems (CATV)
[Adopted 6-6-1966 by Ord. No. 817]
§ 13-58. Title.
This article shall be known as "Whitehall Township Community Antenna
Television Systems (CATV) Ordinance."
§ 13-59. Definitions.
The following words or phrases when used in this article shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section, except when the context indicated
to them a different meaning:
COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISIONS SYSTEMS (CATV) — An
arrangement or combination of apparatus whereby television signals
broadcast over the air are received at one or more towers, antennas or
other devices from television stations licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission and which for a consideration are transmitted
by means of coaxial cable or other suitable device to television receiving
sets of subscribers to such service.
GROSS REVENUES — All cash, credits, property of any kind or nature
or other consideration derived directly or indirectly by a person operating
a cable antenna television system in Whitehall Township including such
person's affiliates and subsidiaries arising from or attributable to operation
of cable antenna television system in the Township of Whitehall including,
but not limited to:
GROSS REVENUES — Shall include, value at retail price levels, the value of
any goods and services received by the operator or others described above
of any advertising or other services in connection with the cable television
systems.[Amended 11-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1704]
PERSON and APPLICANT — Any individual or individuals, partnership,
firm, limited partnership, association, corporation, company or organization
of any kind.
Revenue from all charges for services provided to subscribers of
entertainment and nonentertainment services (including leased access
fees).
A.
Revenue from all charges for the insertion of commercial
advertisements upon the cable antenna television system.
B.
Revenue from all charges for the installation, connection and
reinstatement of equipment necessary for the utilization of the cable
antenna television system and the provision of subscriber and other
services.
C.
The sale, exchange or use of cablecast of any programming developed
for community use or institutional users.
D.
§ 13-58 LIBRARIES § 13-59
12:463
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any person or corporation now or hereafter owning
or operating in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania equipment or facilities
or producing, generating, transmitting, distributing or furnishing electricity
for the production of light, heat or power, to or for the public for
compensation, or conveying or transmitting messages or communications
by telephone or telegraph for the public for compensation, or conveying
passengers or property or both by railroad or railway for public use and the
facilities thereof.
STREETS — All public streets, alleys, rights-of-way, roads, highways and
utility areas within the Township of Whitehall, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Whitehall, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
§ 13-60. Registration; requirements and conditions.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the Township of Whitehall, Lehigh
County, Pennsylvania, to engage in the business of community antenna
television systems (CATV) without first registering with the said Township
for such privilege and fully complying with the terms, conditions, fees and
penalties accompanying the grant of privileges to engage in such activities
as hereinafter set forth.
§ 13-61. Installation of facilities regulated. [Amended 5-13-1976 by
Ord. No. 1187; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
On and after the effective date of this article no poles, cables, equipment,
apparatus or wires for the construction, maintenance and operation of
community antenna television systems (CATV) shall be installed on, in or
upon any streets within the confines of Whitehall Township unless it be
upon poles and rights-of-way of a public utility presently operating within
the said Township, and there be filed in the office of the Mayor of Whitehall
Township, Pennsylvania, proper written permission therefor from the said
public utility.
§ 13-62. Public utilities only to erect poles.
Only public utilities shall be permitted to erect poles upon any of the streets
and rights-of-way of Whitehall Township, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania and
any poles as well as any and all wires, cables, apparatus or equipment
thereon shall be deemed to be under the license, operation and control of
the public utility owning the said poles.
§ 13-63. Registration and filing of application required. [Amended
5-13-1976 by Ord. No. 1187; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
Any person or applicant desiring to operate community antenna television
systems (CATV) in Whitehall Township shall file an application for this
privilege with the Mayor, which application shall contain the following
information, and be accompanied by the following documents:
§ 13-59 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-63
12:464
A. A detailed list of the names and residences and business addresses of
the owners and, if applicant is a corporation, the names and residences
and business addresses of all officers, directors and shareholders.
B. Written authorization from appropriate public utilities for the applicant
to use any public utility poles and a license and evidence of written
approval of applicant's installation thereon of all cables, wires,
apparatus, equipment and facilities.
C. Certified copies of any and all certificates, approvals and licenses from
the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission and the Federal
Communications Commission and contracts by and between applicant
and any other public utilities.
D. Written assurance that applicant agrees:
(1) To comply with any and all future regulations of CATV operations
by the Federal Communications Commission and the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission.
(2) That all wires, cables, equipment, apparatus and facilities shall be
at such minimum heights, quality and specifications as are or may
be required by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission and the
Pennsylvania Department of Highways.
(3) To file and keep current with the Township a map or plan showing
the location within the Township of its lines and other facilities; a
schedule of uniform tariffs covering installation and hookup
charges for both commercial and residential buildings and services
charges relating thereto and any subsequent changes in said maps,
plans and tariffs.
(4) Not to sell, transfer or assign the privilege certificate without the
written approval of Township
E. A bond with good and sufficient surety to be approved by the Township
in the amount of $100,000 and conditional upon said person or
applicant paying or causing to be paid any sums which may become due
and payable because of failure:
(1) To install and maintain in good, proper and safe order and
condition its cables, wires, equipment, apparatus or facilities
within the Township.
(2) To remove its cables, wires, equipment, apparatus or facilities in
the event that either the said business should be discontinued or
that the privilege to conduct such business under this article shall
be revoked by the Township.
(3) To comply with any and all of the terms of this article under which
the privilege certificate is issued.
§ 13-63 LIBRARIES § 13-63
12:465
§ 13-64. Issuance of certificate of privilege. [Amended 5-13-1976 by
Ord. No. 1187; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
Upon compliance with all of the foregoing registration requirements, the
Mayor is authorized to issue a certificate of privilege to the applicant.
§ 13-65. Levy of Township privilege fee.
§ 13-66. Books and records.
The following regulations shall apply to operators who have received a
certificate of privilege:
F. A comprehensive liability insurance policy of maximum limits fully
protecting the Township of Whitehall from any and all claims for
damage to property and/or personal injury, including death which may
occur from the operation of CATV within the Township.
A. A privilege fee is herewith levied on each person operating a cable
antenna television system within the Township of Whitehall. Such
franchise fee is in the amount of 5% of such operator's annual gross
revenues, as defined herein, accrued during each calendar year in
which such operator holds a certificate of privilege from the Township
of Whitehall.
B. Such privilege fee is payable to the Township of Whitehall within 90
days after the close of each calendar year for which annual gross
revenues are calculated. With payment of such franchise fee, each such
operator shall submit to the Mayor a verified statement of such annual
gross revenues, unqualified and certified by such operator's chief
financial officer or an independent certified public accountant
acceptable to the Township, showing with particularly each item
comprising such annual gross revenues. Such annual statement shall be
prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting standards
as established by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB).
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
C. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the
amount paid is, in fact, the correct amount nor shall such acceptance of
payment be construed as a release of any claim which the Township
may have for further or additional sums payable under the provisions of
this section.
A. Each operator shall keep and render its books and records in a manner
which will readily disclose each item comprising gross revenues with
particularity.
B. For purposes of calculating gross revenues as defined in § 13-59 above,
the phrase "arising from or attributable to operation of the cable
antenna television system" as used in such subsection shall include, but
not be limited to:
§ 13-63 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-66
12:466
§ 13-67. Forfeiture of provisions.
Any failure of the applicant to comply with the provisions contained in this
article shall be deemed to constitute a forfeiture of any of the privileges that
may have been granted to the applicant by the Township.
§ 13-68. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-17-1995 by Ord. No.
1944; 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(1) Any activity, product or service which generates revenue of any
type whatsoever and which is offered to the subscribers of the
system by means of the system or any related service.
(2) Any activity, product or service which is revenue producing and is
offered to the subscribers of the system by any medium other than
the system but not limited to direct mail and home delivery if the
system's subscriber list or any portion thereof is utilized for
purposes of solicitation.
(3) Any activity, product or service in the production or provision of
which any of the assets of the system including, but not limited to,
cable, production facilities and administrative facilities, are
included, unless reasonable consideration is paid to the system for
such utilization.
(4) Any television programming or other services offered to the
citizens of Whitehall Township within the term of the franchise by
means of delivery whatsoever where such programming or services
are or could be offered by means of the system.
C. Each operator shall permit the Township Auditors or any independent
accountant retained by Whitehall Township, or any other Township
representative, at all reasonable times with 72 hours prior notice to
inspect the books and records of such operators, including all records
pertaining to the calculations of gross revenues.
§ 13-66 LIBRARIES § 13-68
12:467

ARTICLE VII
Police and Fire Emergency Alarm Systems
[Adopted 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 2029]
§ 13-69. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as "Whitehall Township Police
and Fire Emergency Alarm Ordinance."
§ 13-70. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this article:
ALARM — Any siren, bell, horn or other device which is attached to the
interior or exterior of a structure and emits a warning signal audible outside
the structure or transmits a prerecorded voice alarm or other signal and
is designed to attract attention, or transmits a message to an Emergency
Communication Center, whether that of Whitehall Township or otherwise,
when activated by a criminal act or other emergency requiring police or
firemen to respond.
ALARM REGISTRATION — Documentation pertaining to any alarm system,
other than a residential sensory device, which identifies the owner or lessee
of the system, the address of the property which is protected by the system,
the identity of individuals authorized to respond to the alarm in order to
gain access to the property and deactivate the system, the identity of the
firm or individual who installed the system and can provide emergency
repair service and any other data required by the Whitehall Township Police
of Fire Chief.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE — An electrically operated instrument
composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which automatically
transmits a prerecorded voice alarm or other similar message over
telephone line, by direct or indirect connection to an Emergency
Communication Center, upon receipt of a stimulus from sensory apparatus
that has detected a physical force or other stimulus inherently
characteristic of a fire or intrusion.
EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION CENTER — A protection system or group
of such systems, operated privately for customers or publicly by a person,
firm, corporation or governmental entity which maintains, supervises or
accepts recorded messages from automatic protection devices at a central
station having operators that have the duty to take appropriate action upon
receipt of a signal or message.
FALSE ALARMS — Any alarm or signal activated by an automatic protection
device, or any other kind of direct or indirect signal given to an Emergency
Communication Center, or any signal given from a residential sensory
device, to which police or firemen respond, which is not the result of
weather extremes, burglary, fire, robbery or similar emergency.
§ 13-69 LIBRARIES § 13-70
12:469
INSTALLER — Any company, corporation or individual which has contracted
to engage or engaged in the act of installing fire, intrusion, water alarm or
medical systems, where the system is designed to require a response from
any emergency service.
KEY — To use a telephone line and equipment for transmitting a message
either directly or indirectly by an automatic protection device.
RESIDENTIAL SENSORY DEVICE — A device attached to the interior of
a residential structure which is not tied to an Emergency Communication
Center nor intended to be audible on the exterior of the structure to which
it is attached.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Whitehall, County of Lehigh, Pennsylvania.
§ 13-71. Alarms; installation requirements.
A. Within 60 days from the effective date of this article, every owner and
lessee of an alarm, other than a residential sensory device, shall
register same with the Police Department of Whitehall Township. Such
registration shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
following information:
(1) The name, residence and telephone number of the owner or lessee.
(2) The address where the device is installed and the telephone
number of that address.
(3) The names, address and telephone numbers of at least two persons
who are authorized to respond to an alarm and gain access to the
address where the device is installed.
(4) The name, address and phone number of the installer which
installed the alarm.
B. After the enactment of this article, all alarms (other than residential
sensory devices) shall be equipped with timing mechanisms that will
disengage the alarm after a maximum period of 15 minutes from the
time that the alarm is engaged. Alarms (other than residential sensory
devices) without such timing mechanism shall be unlawful in the
Township and must be equipped with a timing mechanism or
disconnected within 60 days from the effective date of this article. All
alarms and the installation thereof shall:
(1) Comply with all other Township ordinances, rules and regulations
including, but not limited to, the Township Building, electrical and
property maintenance codes.
(2) Be installed by a certified installer.
C. Within 60 days after the effective date of this article all persons owning
or operating existing or new automatic protection device that transmits
recorded message directly to an Emergency Communication Center
§ 13-70 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-71
12:470
§ 13-72. Alarm operation requirements.
Alarms installed in the Township that are keyed to an assigned truck line
in the Lehigh County Emergency Communication Center or alarms installed
in the Township that provide communication with the Whitehall Township
Communications Center, with or without an intermediary, shall meet the
following requirements:
§ 13-73. Automatic protection devices; technical information.
Each installer who sells or leases an automatic protection device in the
Township after the effective date of this article which is keyed to an
Emergency Communication Center or intermediary shall furnish to the
owner or lessee: operating instructions, a circuit diagram, a maintenance
manual and written information as to how service may be obtained,
including the telephone number of the installer or agent responsible for
service.
§ 13-74. Automatic protection devices; repair service.
shall contact the Whitehall Township Emergency Communication
Center for the proper transmission procedure.
D. All information furnished pursuant to these sections shall be kept
confidential and shall be solely for the use of the Whitehall Township
Police Department.
A. No more than two calls shall be made to the Lehigh County Emergency
Communication Center as a result of a single activation of the
automatic protection device.
B. The sensory mechanism used in conjunction with an automatic
protection device must be adjusted to suppress false indications of fire
or intrusion, so that the device will not actuated by impulses due to
fleeting pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, the
rattling or vibrating of doors and windows, vibrations to the premises
caused by the passing of vehicles, weather extremes or any other
similar force not related to emergencies requiring protection.
C. All components comprising an automatic protection device must be
maintained by the owner or lessee in good repair to assure maximum
reliability of operation.
D. Each owner or lessee of premises in which an automatic protection
device is installed shall be required to provide external visible and
legible identification of the installer on the protected structure on or
near the main entrance. This identification shall include a twenty-fourhour
emergency telephone number where someone can be reached to
deactivate the system.
A. Each installer who installs an automatic protection device in the
Township shall make service available to the owner or lessee of same,
§ 13-71 LIBRARIES § 13-74
12:471
§ 13-75. Automatic protection devices; disconnecting.
When messages evidencing failure to comply with the operational
requirements set forth in any section of this article are received by the
Whitehall Township or Lehigh County Emergency Communications Center,
the automatic protection device sending such message shall be
disconnected in order to relieve the particular emergency service from
responding to false alarms.
§ 13-76. Civil penalties and remedies for violation.
§ 13-77. Registration fees; permits.
Fees for installation permits and registration are as set forth in the
Whitehall Township Fee Schedule, as amended from time to time.
directly or through an agent, within 24 hours of a request by such
owner or lessee for repair or service. Such service shall be made
available to such owner or lessee at his/her election and expense.
B. The owner or lessee of an automatic protection device shall be
responsible for having any device rendering a false alarm disconnected
or repaired within one hour of the commencement of the first such false
alarm.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $75 or more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a
separate offense. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
B. In the event that more than three false alarms, as defined in § 13-70
hereof, are received within any given six consecutive months from any
automatic protection device, alarm or residential sensory device, the
owner, lessor or user of such device or alarm shall, upon conviction
before a magistrate, District Justice or court, be fined such amount as
set forth in the Whitehall Township fee schedule, as amended from time
to time, for each offense (residential establishment) and such amount as
set forth in the Whitehall Township fee schedule, as amended from time
to time, for each offense (nonresidential establishment). Each false
alarm in excess of three within six consecutive months shall constitute a
separate violation and shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. The provisions of this section shall be waived for a period of 15 days
from the date that the Township receives written notice of the initial
installation of an alarm, automatic protection device or residential
sensory alarm.
§ 13-74 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-77
12:472
ARTICLE VIII
Motion Picture Theaters or Public Places of Entertainment
[Adopted 4-7-1983 by Ord. No. 1428; amended in its entirety
4-11-1983 by Ord. No. 1429]
§ 13-78. Projections required.
Any theater or public places of entertainment exhibiting motion pictures,
whether of motion picture film or substitute thereof, shall be required to
have a Class A licensed motion picture projectionist (professional theatrical)
operating the motion picture machines, projectors or other such machines,
devices or equipment required to project or exhibit motion picture film
or substitute thereof. Such projectionist shall be required to be present
in the projection room or other area so designed to house the projection
equipment at all times during the operation of the theater or when
projection equipment is being operated, maintained or serviced.
§ 13-79. Safety devices.
Any theater which simultaneously exhibits more than one motion picture
film, such as multiple auditorium theaters, and one continuous projection
room is utilized; one projectionist shall be permitted to operate all
projection equipment within, provided: such equipment must be equipped
with fail safe devices which in the event of a film break or equipment
malfunction will cause the projector to stop, the projection lamp to be
turned off and an alarm to sound. Also, in any multiple theater complex
where the projection equipment for each auditorium is separated by more
than 36 feet, or their observation is obscured from any given point in the
projection room, cross signal systems or remote status indicator and alarm
systems shall be installed, so as to immediately alert the projectionist of the
exact location of any equipment malfunction and as to the condition status
of the operations of the equipment.
§ 13-80. Jurisdiction of Fire Chief and Marshal.
Enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be the jurisdiction of the
Fire Department Chief and/or Marshal. Any projection room that has been
approved by the department shall be maintained in the condition in which it
was approved. Any modifications or alterations to the projection room must
have departmental approval, and any malfunctioning cross signal systems
or alarm systems must be corrected immediately. The Fire Department
Chief and/or Marshal shall have the power to inspect and enforce the
provisions of this article at any time.
§ 13-81. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
§ 13-78 LIBRARIES § 13-81
12:473
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 13-81 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-81
12:474
ARTICLE IX
Adult Arcade Viewing Booths
[Adopted 12-8-1986 by Ord. No. 1566]
§ 13-82. Definition of terms.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — Any premises to which members of any club, group or
association are admitted and permitted to use one or more arcade devices.
ARCADE DEVICES — Any coin or slug operated or electronically or
mechanically controlled machine or device that dispenses or effectuates the
dispensing of entertainment that is intended for viewing in exchange for any
payment of any consideration.
ARCADE DEVICE BOOTH — Any enclosure containing an arcade device
and constructed so as to permit exclusive and/or private viewing of the
entertainment produced by said arcade device for less than all patrons
entering the adult arcade device for less than all patrons entering the adult
arcade at any point in time.
ENTERTAINMENT — Any live entertainment, display or performance or
any still pictures or motion pictures, whether mechanically, electronically or
electrically displayed, or any combination of the foregoing.
§ 13-83. Booth separations.
§ 13-84. Warning signs.
The owner of the adult arcade shall post at the entrance of said arcade
and at the entrance of each arcade device booth the following warning:
"All sexual acts are forbidden within the premises to reduce the risk of
communicable disease transmission."
§ 13-85. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Whitehall Township Police Department to enforce
this article.
A. Each arcade device booth in an adult arcade shall be separated from all
other arcade device booths by solid, uninterrupted partitions. No
partitions or walls of an arcade device booth shall contain any hole, gap
or opening except for an entrance door which shall provide entrance to
only one arcade device booth.
B. The owner of said adult arcade shall permit no more than one occupant
per arcade device booth at any one time. The owner of an adult arcade
shall properly staff the adult arcade and position adult arcade device
booths to insure this occupancy limit is met.
§ 13-82 LIBRARIES § 13-86
12:475
§ 13-86. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 13-86 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-86
12:476
ARTICLE X
Licensing and Regulation of Cigarette Vending Machines
[Adopted 8-12-1991 by Ord. No. 1737]
§ 13-87. Definition of terms.
As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINE — Any automatic vending machine use
for the sale of cigarettes and matches and controlled by the insertion of
legal tender. It shall not include machines or devices used solely for the
vending of service, beverages, food or confections.
PERSON — Any person, partnership, firm, corporation or association,
whether for-profit or nonprofit, which either:
§ 13-88. Sticker required.
A. Owns any cigarette vending machine.
Owns, occupies or operates the place of business in which any cigarette
vending machine is placed for use by the public.
B.
C. Has control over a cigarette vending machine.
A. Any person who either displays for public patronage, or keeps for
operation, any cigarette vending machine as defined by § 13-87 herein
shall be required to obtain an annual sticker for each and every such
cigarette vending machine from the Township Treasurer of the
Township of Whitehall upon payment of the annual sticker fee.
B. Only one cigarette vending machine shall be operated under each such
sticker and a separate, individual sticker shall be obtained for each
cigarette vending machine.
C. No sticker shall be issued to any person unless that person, when
applicable, and the individual natural person submitting the sticker
application are each over 21 years of age and a citizen of the United
States.
D. If any person who owns or controls a cigarette vending machine, or who
owns, occupies or operates the place of business, obtains a sticker and
pays the sticker fee for a particular cigarette vending machine, then all
persons who own or control that cigarette vending machine and who
own, occupy or operate the place of business in which that cigarette
vending machine is located, shall be deemed to have complied with the
requirements of this article to obtain that sticker for the particular
cigarette vending machine, for as long as that sticker remains valid and
in effect.
§ 13-87 LIBRARIES § 13-89
12:477
§ 13-89. Licensing procedures.
The application for the sticker shall be made to the Treasurer of Whitehall
Township upon a form supplied by the Treasurer for that purpose. The
application shall contain the following information:
§ 13-90. Sticker fees.
§ 13-91. Display of sticker; transfer.
A. Name and address of the person applying for the sticker.
B. Age and date and place of birth of the individual natural person who is
submitting the application and the person who will hold the sticker, if
applicable.
C. Location where the cigarette vending machine is to be displayed or
operated.
D. Business conducted at that location.
E. Description of the cigarette vending machine for which the sticker will
be issued including, but not limited to:
(1) Mechanical features.
(2) Name of manufacturer.
(3) Serial number.
A. Every person, before being granted an annual sticker, shall pay the
annual sticker fee for the privilege of operating, maintaining for
operation, controlling or displaying each cigarette vending machine.
The annual sticker fee shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners of Whitehall Township, from time to time, and shall be
included in the Fee Schedule established in the Township Code.
B. Every annual sticker shall expire on December 31 of each calendar
year.
A. The sticker required by this article for each cigarette vending machine
shall be posted permanently and conspicuously in the premises wherein
the cigarette vending machine is to be operated, maintained for
operation or displayed, affixed to that cigarette vending machine.
B. The sticker may be transferred from any one cigarette vending machine
to another similar substitute cigarette vending machine, or to another
location in Whitehall Township in the event of a relocation of the place
of business, but only upon submission and approval of a new application
to the Township Treasurer giving the same information for the
substitute cigarette vending machine as for any initial application for a
sticker. No payment of an additional fee shall be required for the
remainder of the calendar year for which the initial sticker was issued.
§ 13-89 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-91
12:478
§ 13-92. Prohibitions and restrictions.
§ 13-93. Revocation of sticker.
C. A sticker for a cigarette vending machine shall not be transferable from
person to person nor place to place and shall be usable only by the
person and at the place designated in the initial sticker application.
A. No person holding a sticker under this article shall permit any
individual natural persons under 18 years of age (hereinafter "minor")
to operate or obtain cigarettes from the cigarette vending machine for
which that person holds the sticker.
B. No cigarette vending machine shall be located, displayed, operated or
maintained at any location or place of business which is accessible by
the public, such as customers or visitors, except as further provided in
this section.
C. If a location or place of business restricts access by minors, by either
prohibiting minors from its premises, permitting minors only with adult
supervision or by virtue of other characteristics which effectively
exclude minors as expected customers or visitors, then those locations
or places shall be exempted from Subsection B of this section. Places of
business that restrict access by minors in accordance with this
subsection include, but are not limited to, bars, restaurants with liquor
licenses and beer distributors.
D. No person or applicant for a sticker shall knowingly make any false
statement or representation in or on any application, record, report,
sticker or other document which is filed, submitted, maintained or used
for purposes of compliance with this article, relating to cigarette
vending machines, stickers or fees; the ownership, location, display,
operation, maintenance or control cigarette vending machines or the
ownership, occupancy or operation of any place of business in which
any cigarette vending machine is placed.
A. Every sticker issued pursuant to this article is subject to the right of the
Township to revoke that sticker, without any refund of the annual
sticker fee, which right is hereby expressly reserved, if the cigarette
vending machine is operated, maintained, controlled or displayed in
violation of the provisions of this article, any of the other ordinances of
the Township of Whitehall or any of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. The sticker may be revoked by the Mayor after written notice to the
person holding that sticker. The notice shall specify the violations of this
article or other laws which are alleged. The cigarette vending machine
for which the revoked sticker was issued shall be removed from that
location forthwith, without any refund of the annual sticker fee.
Thereafter, no cigarette vending machine shall be placed in that
location for a period one calendar year. Provided, that any such
§ 13-91 LIBRARIES § 13-93
12:479
§ 13-94. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-11-1991 by Ord. No.
1746; 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
revocation or removal shall be stayed upon filing of a written dispute of
the revocation, as hereinafter provided. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
C. If the sticker holder disputes the revocation of the sticker in writing
within 30 days of notice of revocation, then the sticker holder shall be
entitled to and given at least 10 days notice of a hearing on the
revocation to be held before the Township's Board of Commissioners.
D. At the hearing such person and his attorney may present witnesses and
submit evidence in defense of the allegation.
E. If the hearing concludes that such violations are found to have
occurred, then the sticker shall be revoked and returned to the
Township and the cigarette vending machine shall be removed from
that location forthwith, without any refund of the annual sticker fee.
F. Any such finding or sticker revocation shall be appealable under the
Local Agency Law (2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105 et seq.)
§ 13-93 WHITEHALL CODE § 13-94
12:480
Chapter 14
RESERVED
Chapter 15
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 13-94 RESERVED § 13-94
14:481

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 15-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 15-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 15-3. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 15-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
parts to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in The Vehicle Code, the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162 No. 81, as amended, except that in this chapter the word
"street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway," and
shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in the
Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Chief of Police shall have the following powers to regulate traffic
and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
§ 15-1 RESERVED § 15-4
14:483
§ 15-5. Experimental regulations.
The Board of Commissioners may, from time to time by resolution, designate
places upon and along the highways in the Township of Whitehall where,
for a period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking
regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and
shall designate such locations by proper signs and markings. Such
regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective as if they had
been specified in this chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or
tractor in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no
person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected,
posted or made by authority of this section. Any person who shall violate
any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation
of such nature, and in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is
set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25 together with costs of prosecution; provided, the purpose of this section
is to allow for the test and experimental determination of the feasibility
and desirability of permanent changes in the ordinances of the Township of
Whitehall relative to traffic and parking.
§ 15-6. Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance or special events.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation, shall upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25 together with costs of prosecution.
A. The Board of Commissioners shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station police officers at each end of the closed portion, while
construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is
being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Board of Commissioners shall have authority to establish a
restricted traffic area upon any street where construction or
maintenance work is under way and to station flagmen at each end of
the restricted portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such restricted traffic area at any time when the
flagman is displaying a sign directing that vehicle to stop, or is
signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other device, not to proceed.
§ 15-4 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-6
14:484
§ 15-7. Use of streets by processions and assemblages.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
D. Road closing procedures. Prior to the closing of any public right-of-way
in the Township by individuals other than Township personnel for any
purpose, with the sole exception of emergency closures, the procedures
listed in the attached Exhibit A, Whitehall Township Road Closing
Procedures,73 must be followed. [Added 2-13-2006 by Ord. No.
2604]
A. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles, which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Chief of Police, which shall be issued
without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one week
in advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held,
but in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be
used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall state the place where and the date
when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the assemblage may
convene and the hour by which it shall have been completely dispersed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any
assemblage unless the permit has been granted, or at any time or place
other than that authorized by the permit.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Chief of Police, which shall be issued
without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks
in advance of the day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in
any case where the state-designated highway is proposed to be used,
application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall specify the date on which the
procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the procession, the
hour when and place where participants may commence to assemble
and form before the procession is under way, the time when the
procession may commence to move along its route, and the time by
73.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-6 RESERVED § 15-7
14:485
§ 15-8. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Township are hereby authorized to direct traffic on
the highways of the Township of Whitehall and at intersections thereof and
to otherwise enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 15-9. Authorization for use of speed timing devices.
§ 15-10. Preemption equipment.
which the end of the procession shall have reached the end of the route
of the procession and the procession shall have been disbanded. It shall
be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any procession
unless the permit shall have been granted, or under any conditions as
to time or route or otherwise than those stated in the permit.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The Township of Whitehall Police Department is hereby authorized to
use all speed timing devices for the determination of speed of a motor
vehicle as are approved or will be approved by the Department of
Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance
with Title 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3368.
B. This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within
the Township be they Township, county or state highways, and does
also hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to "local authorities"
under the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 6101 et seq., (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented,
modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
A. At such time as any traffic signal located within the Township is
constructed, reconstructed or in any way modified such construction,
reconstruction or modification shall include equipment which shall
change the traffic light to green in the direction of travel of oncoming
emergency vehicles (hereinafter referred to as "preemption
equipment").
B. Preemption equipment shall:
(1) Be designated by and approved by the Whitehall Township Fire
Chief.
(2) Be installed on the traffic signal or mast arm thereof in each
direction of travel.
(3) Be installed under the supervision of the Township Fire Chief or
Township Engineer.
(4) Be installed at the sole cost and expense of the individual, firm,
entity, political subdivision or authority or similar entity
§ 15-7 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-10
14:486
responsible for the construction, reconstruction or modification of
the traffic signal.
(5) Include switches to be installed or otherwise used in each
emergency vehicle (in such numbers as approved by the Township
Fire Chief), white confirmation lights to be installed of the traffic
signal or mast thereof, control boxes and cards to be installed at
the traffic signal control box and such other accessory or incidental
equipment as required by the Township Fire Chief to ensure the
proper installation of, access to and operation of the preemption
equipment.
(6) Dedicated to the Township after the installation thereof and all
warranties related thereto shall, to the extent possible, be assigned
to the Township.
§ 15-10 RESERVED § 15-10
14:487

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 15-11. Maximum speed limits established on certain streets.
A. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets,
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, on
any part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies, at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
Ash Street Columbia Street and
North Ruch Street
25
Augusta Drive Schadt Avenue (SR 1008)
and Halleck Drive
25
Carbon Street
(Hokendauqua Area)
[Amended 1-8-2007
by Ord. No. 2663]
South Ruch Street and
Parkview Drive
25
Catasauqua Avenue Kimmet Street and
Township line
25
Catasauqua Road Third Street and Lehigh
Avenue
25
Center Street Second Avenue and Fifth
Avenue
25
Center Street MacArthur Road and
Ruch Street
25
Chestnut Street West Coplay Road and
MacArthur Road
35
Chestnut Street Sixth Avenue and Ruch
Street
25
Chestnut Street South Church Street and
MacArthur Street
25
Columbia Street MacArthur Road and
Ruch Street
25
Columbia Street MacArthur Road (SR
145) and Ash Street
25
Congress Street North 11th Street and
Pennsylvania Street
30
Coplay Road (west) Coplay Road and
Chestnut Street
35
Coplay Road Main Street and Coplay
Cement Company
35
§ 15-11 RESERVED § 15-11
14:489
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
Eberhart Road MacArthur Road and
Water Street
35
Eleventh Street Highland Street and
Sumner Avenue
25
Ellsworth Drive [Added
10-10-2011 by Ord.
No. 2878]
West Union Street and
Orchard Drive
25
English Lane Augusta Drive and
Halleck Drive
25
Fairmont Avenue
[Added 10-12-2015
by Ord. No. 3028]
Fifth Street and
Fullerton Avenue/
SR1015
35
Fairmont Avenue Virginia Avenue and
MacArthur Road
25
Fernhill Lane Virginia Avenue and Kay
Drive
25
Fifth Street Park Street and
Allentown City line
25
Fifth Street West Union and Fuller
Street
25
First Avenue Fuller and Pine Street 35
Fornaciari Drive
[Amended
12-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 3066]
MacArthur Road/SR 145
and Main Street/SR 329
25
Fourth Street Hokendauqua Street and
Iron Street
25
Franklin Street Front Street and Lehigh
Street
25
Front Street Hokendauqua Street and
Lehigh Street
35
Front Street Second Street and Main
Street
25
Fullerton Avenue Park Street and Sumner
Avenue
35
Gallagher Road [Added
5-11-2015 by Ord.
No. 3011]
Mauch Chunk Road/SR
1017 and Presidential
Drive
25
Grape Street Front Street and
MacArthur Road
35
§ 15-11 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-11
14:490
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
Halleck Drive Augusta Drive and
English Lane
25
Hampshire Drive American Street and
Schadt Avenue
25
Highland Street Ninth Street and Twelfth
Street
25
Hoffman Drive Lehigh Street and North
Church Street
25
Hokendauqua Street Ruch Street and Front
Street
35
Jefferson Street Sixth Street and Midway
Road
25
Jordan Boulevard West Union Street and
Jefferson Street
25
Jordan Parkway Pennsylvania Street and
Mickley Road
30
Lehigh Street Front Street and Sixth
Street (westbound only)
35
Lehigh Street Sixth Street and
Hokendauqua Bridge
(eastbound only)
35
Lehigh Street Sixth Street and
MacArthur Road
40
Lenhart's Road Mickley Road and South
Whitehall line
35
Limestone Drive Columbia Street and end
at Circle
25
Linden Lane Belleview Drive and
Mauch Chunk Road
25
MacArthur Road Mechanicsville Road and
south Township line
40
Main Street Cementon Bridge and
Second Street
25
Main Street Lehigh Street and
Mickley Avenue
35
Main Street MacArthur Road and
Second Street
35
Mechanicsville Road MacArthur Road and
Rural Drive
40
§ 15-11 RESERVED § 15-11
14:491
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
Mickley Road Its northwestern
intersection with
MacArthur Road to it
southwestern
intersection with
MacArthur Road
25
Mickley Road MacArthur Road and
Schadt Avenue
25
Mickley Avenue Mickley Road and Schadt
Avenue
25
Mickley Avenue Schadt Avenue and
entrance to Two Guys
Store
25
Miller Lane Fifth Street and Orchard
Drive
25
North Church Street Main Street and Adams
Street
25
North Coplay Road Coplay Road and Coplay
Road
25
North Sixth Street Michigan Avenue and
Jordan Parkway
20
North Third Street
[Added 2-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 3136]
South Street and
Hokendauqua Street
25
Orchard Drive Mickley Road and Third
Street
25
Orchard Drive Third Street and Lehigh
Avenue
25
Overlook Road Mickley Road and
Fourteenth Street
25
Park Street Third Street and Fifth
Street
25
Parkview Drive Fifth Street and
Hokendauqua Street
25
Pennsylvania Street North 13th Street and
Mickley Road
25
Pennsylvania Street Poplar Street and Jordan
Parkway
30
Pennsylvania Street Sixth Street and Virginia
Avenue
25
§ 15-11 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-11
14:492
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
Pershing Boulevard Fullerton Avenue and
Fifth Street
25 (when not
flashing for 15
mph school zone
times)
Pine Street First Avenue and Main
Street
35
Portland Drive Columbia Street and
Limestone Drive
25
Presidential Drive Harding Circle to
Eisenhower Circle
25
Presidential Drive Township boundary with
South Whitehall
Township and Mickley
Road
35
Reliance Street Bridge Street and Main
Street
25
Robert Street Andrew Drive and
Peachtree Circle
25
Roosevelt Street Main Street and Spring
Street
35
Roosevelt Street Spruce Street and North
Whitehall line
25
Ruch Street Ash Street and
Hokendauqua Street
35
Ruch Street Oak Street and Ruch
Street Bridge
25
Schadt Avenue Mickley Road and
Scherersville Road
35
Second Street Front Street and Center
Street
25
Second Street Leisenring and Roosevelt
Street
35
Seiples Station Road Seiples Station and L.R.
39037
25
Sixth Avenue Center Street and
Chestnut Street
25
Sixth Street Union Street and New
York Avenue
25
Somerset Road Schadt Avenue and (SR
1008) and Halleck Drive
25
§ 15-11 RESERVED § 15-11
14:493
§ 15-12. Maximum speed limits established on certain bridges and
elevated structures.
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
South Third Street
[Amended 2-11-2019
by Ord. No. 3136]
South Street and Barkley
Street
25
Spruce Street Spring Street and Main
Street
35
St. Paul Street Lehigh Valley Mall and
Fifth Street
25
Sumner Avenue Florida Avenue and
Fullerton Avenue (SR
1015)
30
Third Street Fuller Street and Park
Street
25
Third Street Kemmerer Street and
Main Street
25
Third Street Orchard Drive and Fuller
Street
25
Water Street
[Amended
12-14-2015 by Ord.
No. 3037]
Eberhart Road/SR 1010
and Lehigh Street/SR
1014
25
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges
and elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure, at a higher speed
than the maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
Bridge or Elevated
Structure Location
Maximum
Speed Limit
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
§ 15-11 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-13
14:494
§ 15-13. Maximum speed limits established for certain vehicles on
hazardous grades.
§ 15-14. Maximum speed limits established in parks.
§ 15-15. Traffic signals at certain locations.
A. The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and, upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle, having a gross weight
in excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction stated for
that grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for
that grade, and, if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every
such vehicle shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:
Street Between
Direction
of Travel
Maximum
Gross
Weight
Maximum
Speed
Limit
Required
to Stop
Before
Proceeding
Downhill
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over
the maximum speed limit.
A. A speed limit of 15 miles per hour is established on all streets and
roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the Township,
except in the following locations, where the lower maximums, as
specified, shall apply:
Park Street Location
Maximum
Speed Limit
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
Location Type of Signal
MacArthur Road and Eberhart Road
MacArthur Road and Fairmont Avenue
MacArthur Road and Grape Street
§ 15-13 RESERVED § 15-15
14:495
§ 15-16. Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal.
§ 15-17. One-way streets established.
Location Type of Signal
MacArthur Road and Jordan Parkway
MacArthur Road and Mechanicsville Road
MacArthur Road and North Sixth Street
MacArthur Road and Route 329
MacArthur Road and Schadt Avenue
Third Street and Grape Street
B. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection Vehicles Traveling
On
Facing
(Reserved)
B. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other
than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Bank Street Main Street Hillcrest
Avenue
Southbound
Bridge Street (SR
1005, West
Catasauqua Area)
South First
Avenue SR
1015
South Lehigh
Avenue
Eastbound
Front Street Main Street Second Street Northbound
Fourth Street Main Street (SR
0329)
Laurel Lane
(alley)
Northbound
Lehigh Avenue Cherry Street Main Street Southbound
Maryland Circle No.
2
The Beginning
of Maryland
Circle
A point 523
feet north
thereof
Southbound
§ 15-15 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-17
14:496
§ 15-18. Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted.
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
North Coplay Road
[Added 5-11-2006
by Ord. No. 2630]
Foxdale Drive Foxrun Lane Northwestbound
Old Sixth Street
Extension
Summer
Avenue
MacArthur
Road
Northbound
Quarry Street
(Hokendauqua)
Lehigh Street Church Street Northbound
Stanley Street
(Egypt)
Hillcrest Lane Main Street Northwestbound
Third Street Orchard Drive Fuller Street Northbound
Unnamed alley
between Front
Street and Second
Street
Whitehall
Street
Main Street Southbound
Unnamed alley
(East of Cemetery
Street)
Main Street
(Egypt)
Fairview Alley Northbound
Unnamed alley
(West of Cemetery
Street)
Main Street
(Egypt)
Fairview Alley Southbound
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated,
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to
make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Vehicles
Traveling
On
Direction
of Travel
Not to
Make
Turn Into When
Type of
Vehicle
Applicable
To
A Ramp Left MacArthur
Road
All
Glenside
Drive
West Left MacArthur
Road (SR
145)
All times All
§ 15-17 RESERVED § 15-18
14:497
§ 15-19. Right turns prohibited at certain intersections.
§ 15-20. U-turns prohibited at certain locations.
Vehicles
Traveling
On
Direction
of Travel
Not to
Make
Turn Into When
Type of
Vehicle
Applicable
To
Lehigh
Street
Left MacArthur
Road
All
MacArthur
Road
North Left Lehigh
Street
All
MacArthur
Road
North Right Jordan
Parkway
All
MacArthur
Road
South Left Jordan
Parkway
All
MacArthur
Road
South Left North Sixth
Street
All
Third Street South Left First
Avenue
All
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a left turn, at any
time stated, both right turns and straight-across traffic being
prohibited:
Vehicles Traveling
On
Direction of
Travel Times
Not To Make
Right Turn Into
or Travel
Straight Across
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon any of
the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
Street Portion
Direction of
Travel
(Reserved)
§ 15-18 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-20
14:498
§ 15-21. No passing zones established.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as no passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no passing
zone:
Street Direction of
Travel
Between
Catasauqua Road Both Third Street and Lehigh Street
Chestnut Street Both Sixth Avenue and Ruch Street
Chestnut Street Both South Church Street and
MacArthur Street
Columbia Street Hobson Street and MacArthur
Road
Coplay Road Main Street and Coplay Cement
Company
Dewey Street Fornaciari Drive and Washington
Street
Eberhart Road MacArthur Road and Water
Street
First Avenue Pine Street and Third Street
Fornaciari Drive Main Street and MacArthur
Road
Front Street Hokendauqua Street and Lehigh
Avenue
Hokendauqua
Street
Ruch Street and Front Street
Lehigh Street Catasauqua Road and Bridge
Street
Main Street Lehigh Street and Mickley
Avenue
Main Street MacArthur Road and North
Whitehall Township line
Main Street MacArthur Road and Railroad
Street
Mickley Road MacArthur Road and Schadt
Avenue
Orchard Drive Third Street and Mickley Road
Park Street Third Street and Fifth Street
§ 15-20 RESERVED § 15-21
14:499
§ 15-22. Through highways established.
§ 15-23. Stop intersections established.
Street Direction of
Travel
Between
Pine Street First Avenue and Main Street
Ruch Street Ash Street and Hokendauqua
Street
Schadt Avenue Mickley Road and Scherersville
Road
Second Street Main Street and Roosevelt Street
Sixth Street Center Street and Chestnut
Street
Spruce Street Main Street and Spring Street
Third Street Orchard Drive and Park Street
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway except for those
intersections with traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as
indicated below. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield
sign authorized by this section shall stop the vehicle or yield right-ofway
as required by §§ 3323(b) or 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code, as the
case may be, and shall not proceed into or across the through highway
until he has followed all applicable requirements of that section of the
law:
Highway Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 15-22) are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting or through street) on the firstnamed
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first-named or stop street, in the direction indicated
in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(b) of the
Vehicle Code, and shall not proceed into or across the second-named or
§ 15-21 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-23
14:500
intersecting or through street until he has followed all applicable
requirements of that section of the law.
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Adams Street Cairo Drive Westbound
Adams Street Church Street North Eastbound
Adams Street Church Street North
#844
Westbound
Adams Street Spruce Street Eastbound
Albert Street Schadt Avenue Northbound
Albert Street Wolf Street Southbound
Alberta Drive Georgia Drive Northbound
Alley
(Strawberry)
Main Street SR329 Southbound
Alley off North 6th Street Sixth Street North
Extension
Westbound
Alley south Park Street Eastbound
Alley south Peters Lane Westbound
Allison Street First Street Eastbound and
westbound
Allison Street Fullerton Avenue
SR1015
Eastbound and
westbound
Allison Street Second Street Eastbound and
westbound
Allison Street Windsor Street Eastbound and
westbound
Alta Drive Estates Drive Southbound
Alta Drive MacArthur Road
SR145
Eastbound
American Legion Drive Front Street North Westbound
American Street Broad Street Eastbound and
westbound
American Street Catasauqua Road Eastbound
American Street
(Fullerton)
Jordan Boulevard Westbound
American Street MacArthur Road
SR145
Westbound
American Street Mickley Road Eastbound
§ 15-23 RESERVED § 15-23
14:501
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
American Street
(Fullerton)
Seventh Street Eastbound and
westbound
American Street Sixth Street Eastbound
American Street Third Street SR1015 Westbound
American Street
(Fullerton)
Unnamed alley at
American Street
jughandle
Westbound
Ammon Way Phillip Street Eastbound
Andrew Drive Presidential Drive Southbound
Apple Street Cherry Street Northbound and
southbound
Apple Street Church Street Northbound and
southbound
Apple Street Main Street Northbound and
southbound
Apple Street Wood Street Northbound and
southbound
Ash Street Ruch Street North Eastbound
Athens Drive Olympic Circle North Westbound
Bank Street Main Street SR329 Southbound
Belleview Circle Belleview Drive Eastbound
Belleview Drive Belleview Circle Northbound and
southbound
Belleview Drive Schadt Avenue
SR1008 East
Northbound
Belleview Drive Schadt Avenue
SR1008 West
Northbound
Belleview Drive Somerset Road Eastbound and
westbound
Beryl Avenue MacArthur Road
SR145
Westbound
Beryl Avenue Schadt Avenue
SR1008
Southbound
Black Drive Hoffman Drive Southbound
Black Drive Jay Street Eastbound
Bridge Street Church Street South
SR1023
Eastbound
Bridge Street Columbia Street Southbound
§ 15-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-23
14:502
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Bridge Street Giant Road PR1 Northbound and
southbound
Bridge Street Ruchsville Road
SR4003
Northbound and
southbound
Bridge Street SR1015 First Avenue Westbound
Broad Street American Street #955 Northbound and
southbound
Broad Street Catasauqua Road Eastbound
Broad Street Orchard Drive Northbound
Broad Street Union Street East Northbound
Broad Street Union Street East
#955
Southbound
Cairo Drive Nile Drive Southbound
Cairo Drive Pharaoh Drive Southbound
California Avenue Minnesota Drive Eastbound
California Avenue Union Street West Southbound
Calvert Street Fifth Street Westbound
Carbon Street Fifth Avenue South Westbound
Carbon Street Fifth Street North
#793
Eastbound
Carbon Street Fourth Street North Westbound
Carbon Street Parkview Drive #793 Westbound
Carbon Street Ruch Street Westbound
Carbon Street Second Avenue South Eastbound
Carbon Street Second Street North Eastbound
Carbon Street Third Street North Eastbound and
westbound
Carbon Street Parkview Drive Eastbound
Carolina Avenue Fernhill Lane Southbound
Carolina Avenue Kansas Avenue Eastbound
Carolina Avenue Maryland Street
#1080
Northbound
Carolina Avenue 2-Way Stop Eastbound
Catasauqua Avenue Kimmett Street Northbound and
southbound
Catasauqua Avenue Pershing Boulevard Northbound and
southbound
§ 15-23 RESERVED § 15-23
14:503
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Catasauqua Road Front Street Eastbound and
southbound
Catasauqua Road Third Street SR1015 Westbound
Cedar Alley Main Street Southbound
Cedar Alley School Street Northbound and
southbound
Center Alley Main Street SR329 Northbound and
southbound
Center Street Fifth Avenue South Eastbound and
westbound
Center Street Fourth Street North Eastbound and
westbound
Center Street Front Street North Eastbound
Center Street Main Street Southbound
Center Street Parkview Drive Westbound
Center Street
(Stiles)
Ruch Street* Eastbound
Center Street Second Street North Eastbound and
westbound
Center Street Sixth Avenue South Westbound
Center Street Third Street SR1015 Westbound
Center Street Third Street North Eastbound and
westbound
Center Street
(alley)
Union Street Northbound and
southbound
Cherry Alley
(Fullerton)
Fifth Street Eastbound and
westbound
Cherry Alley
(Fullerton)
Fourth Street Eastbound and
westbound
Cherry Alley
(Fullerton)
Seventh Street Eastbound and
westbound
Cherry Alley
(Fullerton)
Sixth Street Westbound
Cherry Street First Avenue Westbound
Cherry Street Lehigh Avenue North Eastbound
§ 15-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-23
14:504
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Chestnut Street Church Street South
n. SR1023
Northbound
Chestnut Street Church Street South
s. SR1023
Southbound
Chestnut Street Church Street South
(Egypt)
Westbound
Chestnut Street Fourth Street Westbound
Chestnut Street Front Street Eastbound
Chestnut Street Ruch Street South Eastbound
Chestnut Street Ruch Street North/
West Coplay Road
Eastbound
Chestnut Street Second Street Eastbound and
westbound
Chestnut Street Sixth Avenue North Westbound
Chestnut Street Third Street SR1015 Eastbound and
westbound
Christina Drive Cairo Drive Southbound
Church Street First Avenue Eastbound and
westbound
Church Street Pine Street Westbound
Church Street Second Avenue Eastbound and
westbound
Church Street East Front Street South Westbound
Church Street North Adams Street #676 Northbound and
southbound
Church Street North Hoffman Drive Northbound and
southbound
Church Street North Main Street SR329 Southbound
Church Street North Spring Street Northbound
Church Street South
SR1023
Main Street SR329 Northbound
Clay Street Carbon Street Northbound and
southbound
Clay Street Fifth Street North Southbound
Clay Street Hokendauqua Street Northbound
Clear Stream Drive
(Stiles)
Carbon Street Northbound
§ 15-23 RESERVED § 15-23
14:505
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Clear Stream Drive
(Stiles)
Ruch Street Westbound
Columbia Avenue Bridge Street SR1015 Northbound and
southbound
Columbia Avenue Main Street Northbound
Columbia Avenue Miller Street Northbound and
southbound
Columbia Avenue Orchard Drive Southbound
Columbia Street*
(Stiles)
Ash Street Eastbound
*Two way stop for North Hobson Street (also known as "North Second
Street") and Columbia Street at the intersection with Ash Street
Columbia Street*
(Stiles)
MacArthur Road
SR145
Eastbound and
westbound
Columbia Street*
(Stiles)
Ringer Road Eastbound and
westbound
Congress Street Pennsylvania Street Westbound
Congress Street Thirteenth Street
North
Westbound
Coplay Lane Birch Circle East Southbound
Coplay Lane
(Hokendauqua)
Birch Circle West Westbound and
eastbound
Coplay Road North,
north
Coplay Road Northbound
Coplay Road North,
south
Coplay Road Westbound
Coplay Road West Coplay Road Eastbound
Coplay Street Fourth Street Westbound
Coplay Street Fourth Street South Westbound
Coplay Street Second Street South Westbound
Coplay Street Third Street South Eastbound and
westbound
Corinth Drive Olympic Circle North Northbound
Corinth Drive Overlook Road Southbound
Cornerstone Place Presidential Drive Northbound
§ 15-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-23
14:506
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Cornerstone Place Shiloh Court Westbound
Creekside Road
(Fullerton)
Alta Drive Eastbound
Crescent Court East Seventh Street Westbound
Crescent Court West Seventh Street Eastbound
Crest Drive Florida Avenue Southbound
Davis Drive Hampshire Drive Westbound
Dawn Circle Elmhurst Drive South Southbound
Delphi Drive Mickley Road Eastbound
Dewey Street Fornaciari Drive #564 Northbound
Dewey Street Grant Avenue Northbound and
southbound
Dewey Street Washington Avenue Southbound
Disus Circle Fairmont Street Southbound
Dogwood Drive Mechanicsville Road
SR1012
Southbound
Dogwood Drive Rosewood Lane Westbound
Eberhart Road SR1010 Lehigh Street SR1010 Eastbound
Echo Drive Ellsworth Drive Eastbound
Echo Drive Union Street West Southbound
Egypt Cemetery Road Main Street Northbound
Egypt Road Roosevelt Street Southbound
Eighth Street Hillside Avenue Southbound
Eighth Street
(Fullerton)
Jefferson Street Southbound
Eighth Street
(Fullerton)
St. Paul Street Northbound
Eisenhower Circle Presidential Drive Northbound
Eleventh Street North Congress Street Northbound
Eleventh Street North Highland Street Southbound
Eleventh Street North Livingston Street Northbound and
southbound
Eleventh Street North Sumner Avenue Southbound
Ellsworth Drive Union Street West Southbound
Ellsworth Drive Wolf Street 823 Northbound
§ 15-23 RESERVED § 15-23
14:507
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Elmhurst Drive
Elmhurst Drive
E, west
Linden Lane Northbound
Elmhurst Drive
N, east
Linden Lane Southbound
Elmhurst Drive
W, west
Linden Lane Northbound and
southbound
Estates Drive
(Fullerton)
Alta Drive Westbound
Estates Drive
(Fullerton)
MacArthur Road Eastbound
Fairmont Avenue Fifth Street Eastbound and
westbound
Fairmont Avenue Fullerton Avenue
SR1015
Westbound
Fairmont Avenue Sixth Street Eastbound and
westbound
Fairmont Avenue Virginia Avenue Eastbound and
westbound
Fairmont Street
(Fullerton)
Fourteenth Street
North*
Eastbound and
westbound
Fairmont Street
(Fullerton)
Thirteenth Street
North
Eastbound and
westbound
Fairview Alley Alley (Hoffman Drive)
#1517
Westbound
Fairview Alley Lee Street Eastbound and
westbound
Fairview Alley Lehigh Street Westbound
Fairview Alle
(Egypt)
Spruce Street Eastbound
Fairview Street Bridge Street SR1015 Southbound
Fairview Street Lehigh Avenue North Northbound
Fairview Street Second Street SR1027 Northbound
Fernhill Lane Kay Drive Eastbound and
westbound
§ 15-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-23
14:508
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Fernhill Lane MacArthur Road
SR145
Westbound
Fernhill Lane Virginia Avenue Eastbound
Fifth Avenue North Chestnut Street Southbound
Fifth Avenue South Center Street Southbound
Fifth Avenue South Center Street #942 Northbound
Fifth Avenue South Chestnut Street Northbound
Fifth Avenue South Park Street Northbound and
southbound
Fifth Street Fairmont Avenue Northbound and
southbound
Fifth Street Florida Avenue Northbound and
southbound
Fifth Street Fuller Street Northbound
Fifth Street Grape Street Northbound and
southbound
Fifth Street Hillside Avenue Southbound
Fifth Street Jefferson Street Northbound and
southbound
Fifth Street Orchard Drive Northbound and
southbound
Fifth Street Pershing Boulevard Northbound and
southbound
Fifth Street Summit Street Northbound and
southbound
Fifth Street Union Street West Southbound
Fifth Street North Center Street #793 Northbound
Fifth Street North Parkview Drive Eastbound and
westbound
Fifth Street South Lehigh Street SR1014 Northbound
First Avenue Green Street Northbound
First Avenue Pine Street Northbound and
southbound
First Avenue Wood Street Northbound and
southbound
First Street Kimmett Avenue Southbound
First Street Pershing Boulevard Northbound and
southbound
§ 15-23 RESERVED § 15-23
14:509
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Flatrock Drive
(Stiles)
Clear Stream Drive Eastbound
Flatrock Drive
(Stiles)
Ruch Street Westbound
Florida Avenue Crest Drive Eastbound and
westbound
Florida Avenue Fifth Street Eastbound and
westbound
Florida Avenue Oakwood Drive Eastbound
Florida Avenue Seventh Street Westbound
Florida Avenue Sixth Street Eastbound and
westbound
Florida Avenue Sumner Avenue Eastbound and
westbound
Fornaciari Drive MacArthur Road
SR145
Westbound
Fornaciari Drive Main Street SR329 Eastbound
Forrest Drive Hill Drive Eastbound
Forrest Drive Overlook Road Southbound
Fourteenth Street North Fairmont Street Northbound
Fourteenth Street North Fairmont Street
#1061
Southbound
Fourteenth Street North Mauch Chunk Road Southbound
Fourteenth Street North Overlook Road Northbound
Fourth Avenue Main Street Southbound
Fourth Avenue Pine Street Northbound
Fourth Avenue South Center Street Southbound
Fourth Avenue South Chestnut Street #793 Northbound
Fourth Avenue South Park Street Northbound and
southbound
Fourth Street Calvert Street Northbound
Fourth Street Grape Street Northbound and
southbound
Fourth Street Jefferson Street Northbound
Fourth Street Main Street SR329 Southbound
Fourth Street North Hokendauqua Street Northbound
§ 15-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-23
14:510
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Fourth Street South Coplay Street Southbound
Fourth Street South Lehigh Street SR1014 Northbound
Fourth Street South Melrose Lane Southbound
Fourth Street South School Street Northbound and
southbound
Fourth Street South Thomas Street Northbound
Frances Circle South Orchard Drive Northbound and
southbound
Front Street Catasauqua Road Westbound
Front Street Franklin Street Northbound and
southbound
Front Street Grape Street Northbound and
southbound
Front Street Second Street SR1027 Northbound
Front Street Whitehall Street Northbound
Front Street South Lehigh Street SR1014 Northbound and
southbound
Front Street South Quigg Street #1282 Northbound and
southbound
Front Street South Second Street South Westbound
Fuller Street First Avenue SR1015 Eastbound
Gail Lane Fifth Street South Westbound
Gail Lane Thomas Street Southbound
Gallagher Road Mauch Chunk Road
SR1017
Westbound
Gallagher Road Mickley Road Eastbound
Garden Lane Fourth Street Eastbound and
westbound
Garden Lane Third Street SR1015 Eastbound
Garfield Avenue Dewey Street Eastbound
Garfield Avenue Fornaciari Drive Westbound
Garfield Avenue New York Street Eastbound and
westbound
Garfield Avenue Ohio Street Eastbound and
westbound
Gavala Street Coplay Road Southbound
Gavala Street Main Street SR329 Northbound
§ 15-23 RESERVED § 15-23
14:511
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Georgia Drive Presidential Drive Eastbound and
westbound
Glenside Drive MacArthur Road
SR145
Westbound
Glenside Drive Seventh Street Eastbound
Glenside Drive Seventh Street Westbound
Grandview Circle Grandview Drive Eastbound
Grandview Drive Carbon Street Southbound
Grandview Drive Hokendauqua Street Northbound
Grant Avenue Dewey Street Westbound
Grant Avenue Dewey Street #1146 Eastbound
Grant Avenue New York Street Eastbound and
westbound
Grant Avenue Ohio Street Eastbound and
westbound
Grant Avenue Pennsylvania Street Eastbound and
westbound
Grape Street
(Fullerton)
Fifth Street* Eastbound and
westbound
Grape Street
(Fullerton)
Front Street Eastbound
Grape Street
(Fullerton)
Second Street Eastbound and
westbound
Green Street Lehigh Street SR1010 Eastbound
Hampshire Drive American Street Southbound
Hampshire Drive Davis Drive Northbound and
southbound
Hampshire Drive Schadt Avenue Northbound
Hampshire Drive Tyler Street West Northbound and
southbound
Harrison Street Main Street Southbound
Harrison Street Spruce Street Northbound
Hemlock Drive Schadt Avenue
SR1008
Northbound
Highland Street Congress Street Eastbound and
westbound
§ 15-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-23
14:512
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Highland Street Twelfth Street North Eastbound and
westbound
Hill Drive Delphi Drive Northbound
Hillcrest Lane Bank Street Eastbound and
westbound
Hillcrest Lane Center Alley Eastbound and
westbound
Hillcrest Lane Eberhardt Lane Westbound
Hillcrest Lane Kuhns Lane #873 Westbound
Hillcrest Lane MacArthur Road
SR145
Eastbound
Hillside Avenue Main Street SR329 Westbound
Hillside Avenue
(Cementon)
Willow Street Eastbound and
westbound
Hobson Street North Ash Street/Columbia
Street
Northbound
Hobson Street North Chestnut Street Southbound
Hobson Street North Oak Street Northbound and
southbound
Hobson Street North Poplar Street Northbound and
southbound
Hoffman Drive
(Egypt)
Church Street North* Eastbound and
westbound
Hoffman Drive
(Egypt)
Roosevelt Street/Main
Street SR3
Eastbound
Hokendauqua Street Fourth Street North Eastbound
Hokendauqua Street Front Street North Eastbound
Hokendauqua Street Parkview Drive Eastbound
Hoover Lane Madison Lane Northbound
Hoover Lane Presidential Drive Northbound and
southbound
Iron Street Fifth Street North Westbound
Iron Street Fourth Street North
#1258
Eastbound
Iron Street Front Street North
#1171
Eastbound and
westbound
§ 15-23 RESERVED § 15-23
14:513
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Iron Street Second Street North Eastbound and
westbound
Iron Street Third Street North Eastbound and
westbound
Jay Street Adams Street Northbound
Jay Street Truman Street Eastbound
Jefferson Street Fourth Street #769
#1474
Eastbound and
westbound
Jefferson Street Jordan Boulevard Eastbound and
westbound
Jefferson Street Seventh Street Eastbound and
westbound
Jefferson Street Sixth Street Eastbound and
westbound
Jefferson Street Third Street SR1015 Eastbound
Johnson Court Presidential Drive Northbound
Johnson Drive Elmhurst Drive North Northbound
Johnson Drive Linden Lane Southbound
Jordan Boulevard Jefferson Street Southbound
Jordan Boulevard Jefferson Street #853 Northbound
Jordan Boulevard Union Street West Southbound
Jordan Boulevard north Union Street West Northbound
Jordan Boulevard south Union Street West Northbound
Jordan Drive Fairmont Avenue Northbound
Jordan Parkway south Mickley Road Eastbound
Jordan Parkway south Mickley Road #1067 Westbound
Juniper Drive Hemlock Drive Eastbound
Kansas Avenue Carolina Avenue Northbound
Kansas Avenue Fernhill Lane Southbound
Kay Drive Fairmont Avenue Southbound
Kemmerer Street Front Street Eastbound
Kemmerer Street Second Street SR1027 Eastbound and
westbound
Keystone Avenue Fifth Street Westbound
Keystone Avenue Fullerton Avenue
SR1015
Eastbound
Kimmett Avenue Catasauqua Avenue Eastbound
§ 15-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-23
14:514
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Kimmett Avenue Fullerton Avenue
SR1015
Westbound
Kings Road St. Johns Drive Northbound
Kings Road Terrace Drive Southbound
Kline Alley Fourth Avenue Eastbound and
westbound
Kline Alley Main Street Westbound
Kline Alley [Added
2-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2960]
None (at Oak Alley,
which is a "T"
intersection)
Northbound
Knosses Drive Corinth Drive Westbound
Knosses Drive Olympic Circle North Northbound
Knosses Drive East Olympic Circle South Southbound
Kuhns Lane Main Street SR329 Northbound and
southbound
Kuhns Lane Spruce Street Northbound
Laurel Drive Crest Drive Southbound
Laurel Drive Fairmont Street Northbound
Laurel Drive Oakwood Drive Northbound and
southbound
Lee Street alley Hillcrest Lane Southbound
Lee Street alley Main Street SR329 Northbound and
southbound
Legon Street alley Keystone Avenue
#1075
Northbound and
southbound
Lehigh Avenue North Main Street Southbound
Lehigh Avenue South Bridge Street Northbound
Lehigh Avenue South Catasauqua Road Northbound
Lehigh Street Eighth Street Westbound
Lehigh Street Fifth Street Eastbound
Lehigh Street Prospect Street Westbound
Lehigh Street Seventh Street Eastbound
Lehigh Street West Street SR1025 Southbound
Lehigh Street SR1010 Eberhart Road
SR1010
Northbound
Lehigh Street SR1014 MacArthur Drive
SR145
Eastbound
§ 15-23 RESERVED § 15-23
14:515
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Lehigh Street SR1014 MacArthur Road
SR145
Westbound
Lehnert Road Mickley Road #965 Eastbound
Leisenring Street Front Street Eastbound
Leisenring Street Second Street SR1027 Eastbound
Leisenring Street Third Street Eastbound and
westbound
Limestone Drive Columbia Street Southbound
Lincoln Avenue Bridge Street SR1015 Northbound
Lincoln Avenue Dewey Street Eastbound
Lincoln Avenue New York Street Eastbound and
westbound
Lincoln Avenue Ohio Street Eastbound and
westbound
Lincoln Avenue Pennsylvania Street Westbound
Lincoln Plaza lot east Lincoln Plaza Westbound
Lincoln Plaza lot west Lincoln Plaza Westbound
Linden Lane Belleview Drive Eastbound and
westbound
Linden Lane Mauch Chunk Road
SR1017
Westbound
Livingston Street Eleventh Street North Westbound
Livingston Street Eleventh Street North
#968
Eastbound
Livingston Street Poplar Street Westbound
Locust Alley Coplay Court Southbound
Locust Alley Park Street Northbound
MacArthur Road SR145 Schadt Avenue Northbound
MacArthur Road SR145 Schadt Avenue
SR1008
Southbound
Madison Lane Peachtree Circle
South
Eastbound
Main Street
(Fullerton)
Mickley Road* and
Schadt Avenue
Southwest
Main Street SR329
(Egypt)
Roosevelt Street Eastbound
Marathon Drive Fairmont Street Southbound
§ 15-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-23
14:516
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Marathon Drive Overlook Road Northbound
Maryland Court Maryland Street Southbound
Maryland Street Fifth Street Eastbound
Maryland Street Sixth Street Eastbound and
westbound
Maryland Street alley Spruce Alley Eastbound
Mason Lane MacArthur Road
SR145
Westbound
Mauch Chunk Road Pennsylvania Street Westbound
McKinley Avenue Fornaciari Drive #564 Eastbound
Meadow Lane Sodl Lane Southbound
Melrose Lane Barklay Road Southbound
Melrose Lane Third Street South
#793
Eastbound
Memphis Road Adams Street Northbound
Memphis Road
(Egypt)
Third Street Southbound
Michael Drive Peachtree Circle East Northbound
Michael Drive Schadt Avenue
SR1008
Northbound
Michigan Avenue MacArthur Road
SR145
Westbound
Michigan Avenue Sixth Street North
Extension
Eastbound
Mickley Avenue Mickley Road Southbound
Mickley Avenue Royal Avenue Northbound and
southbound
Mickley Avenue Schadt Avenue Northbound and
southbound
Mickley Road Jordan Parkway South Northbound and
southbound
Mickley Road Lehnert Road Northbound and
southbound
Mickley Road Main Street* and
Schadt Avenue
Northeast
Mickley Road Mickley Road Eastbound and
westbound
§ 15-23 RESERVED § 15-23
14:517
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Mickley Road Mickley Avenue Northbound and
southbound
Mickley Road Presidential Drive Eastbound and
westbound
Mickley Road Schadt Avenue Northbound
Mickley Road Union Street West Northbound and
southbound
Midway Circle California Avenue Southbound
Midway Road California Avenue Northbound
Midway Road Minnesota Drive Eastbound
Miller Lane Fifth Street Eastbound and
westbound
Miller Lane Orchard Drive Northbound and
southbound
Miller Street Fifth Street Westbound
Miller Street First Avenue Westbound
Miller Street Third Street Eastbound
Minnesota Drive Union Street West
south
Southbound
Minnesota Drive Wolf Street Northbound
Mundy Lane Catasauqua Avenue Eastbound
Mundy Lane Fullerton Avenue
SR1015
Westbound
Naylor Lane Jay Street Westbound
Naylor Lane Kuhns Lane Eastbound
Naylor Lane Truman Street Eastbound
New York Avenue Fifth Street Eastbound and
Westbound
New York Avenue MacArthur Road
SR145
Westbound
New York Avenue Seventh Street Westbound
New York Avenue Sixth Street North
Extension
Eastbound
New York Avenue Sixth Street Eastbound and
westbound
New York Avenue Sumner Avenue Eastbound
New York Street Fornaciari Drive #564 Northbound and
southbound
§ 15-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-23
14:518
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
New York Street McKinley Avenue Northbound
New York Street Washington Avenue Northbound and
southbound
Nile Drive Lehigh Street Westbound
Nile Drive Memphis Road #1217 Eastbound
North Street Front Street North Eastbound and
westbound
North Street Quarry Street North Eastbound
North Street Second Street North Eastbound and
westbound
North Street Third Street North Westbound
Oak Alley Fourth Avenue Eastbound and
westbound
Oak Alley Third Avenue Eastbound and
westbound
Oak Alley
(West Catasauqua)
Cedar Alley Eastbound
Oak Street Ruch Street North Eastbound
Oakwood Drive Florida Avenue Southbound
Oakwood Drive Sumner Avenue Southbound
Ohio Avenue Delaware Lane Southbound
Ohio Avenue Jordan Parkway South Southbound
Ohio Street Fornaciari Drive #564 Northbound and
southbound
Ohio Street McKinley Avenue Northbound
Ohio Street Washington Avenue Southbound
Old Country Circle Old Country Road Westbound
Old County Road Mechanicsville Road
SR1012
Northbound
Olympic Circle East Overlook Road Southbound
Olympic Circle North Olympic Drive Eastbound and
westbound
Olympic Circle South Corinth Drive Eastbound and
westbound
Olympic Circle South Olympic Circle East Eastbound
Olympic Drive Mickley Road Eastbound
§ 15-23 RESERVED § 15-23
14:519
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Orchard Drive Fifth Street Eastbound and
westbound
Orchard Drive Miller Lane Eastbound and
westbound
Orchard Drive Third Street SR1015 Eastbound and
westbound
Overlook Lane (T-712)
(Egypt)
Spring Street Southbound
Overlook Road Mickley Road Eastbound
Overlook Road Thirteenth Street
North
Eastbound and
westbound
Packer Avenue Catasauqua Road Westbound
Packer Road Echo Drive Southbound
Packer Road Mickley Road Northbound
Park Court Fourth Street Westbound
Park Street Bridge Street Southbound
Park Street Fifth Avenue South Eastbound and
westbound
Park Street Fourth Avenue South Eastbound
Park Street Ruch Street South Eastbound
Park Street Sixth Avenue South Westbound
Parkview Drive Hokendauqua Street Northbound
Peach Bottom Road
(T-712)
(Egypt)
Spring Street Southbound
Peachtree Circle North Michael Drive Eastbound and
westbound
Peachtree Circle South Peachtree Circle West Eastbound and
westbound
Peachtree Circle South Presidential Drive Southbound
Peachtree Circle West Peachtree Circle
South
Southbound
Pennsylvania Street Fifth Street Eastbound
Pennsylvania Street Fornaciari Drive Northbound
Pennsylvania Street Fornaciari Drive #564 Southbound
Pennsylvania Street Sixth Street Eastbound and
westbound
§ 15-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-23
14:520
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Pennsylvania Street Thirteenth Street
North
Eastbound and
westbound
Pennsylvania Street Virginia Avenue Westbound
Pershing Boulevard Catasauqua Avenue
#1258
Westbound
Pershing Boulevard Fifth Street #547 Westbound
Pershing Boulevard Fullerton Avenue
SR1015
Eastbound and
westbound
Peters Lane Hillcrest Lane Northbound
Peters Lane Main Street SR329 Northbound
Pharaoh Drive Adams Street Southbound
Pharaoh Drive Church Street North Eastbound
Phasestos Drive Olympic Circle East Eastbound
Phillip Street Adams Street Northbound and
southbound
Phillip Street Ammon Way Southbound
Phillip Street Church Street North Westbound
Pine Entry Juniper Drive Southbound
Pine Entry Schadt Avenue
SR1008
Northbound
Pine Street First Avenue Eastbound
Pine Street Lehigh Street SR1010 Southbound
Poplar Street Ruch Street North Eastbound
Poplar Street Washington Street Westbound
Poplar Street North Whitehall Street Southbound
Portland Drive Columbia Street Southbound
Presidential Drive Mickley Road Eastbound
Prydun Drive Clear Street Drive Eastbound
Prydun Drive Ruch Street Westbound
Quarry Street Front Street Eastbound
Quarry Street Main Street SR329 Northbound
Quarry Street Second Street Eastbound and
westbound
Quarry Street Third Street SR1015 Westbound
Quarry Street North Hokendauqua Street Northbound
Quarry Street South Lehigh Street SR1014 Northbound
§ 15-23 RESERVED § 15-23
14:521
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Quigg Street Front Street S. #1217 Eastbound and
westbound
Quigg Street Second Street South Eastbound and
westbound
Quigg Street
(Hokendauqua)
Quarry Street Eastbound
Redwood Drive Georgia Drive Eastbound
Redwood Drive Presidential Drive Westbound
Reliance Street Bridge Street Westbound
Reliance Street Giant Road Westbound
Reliance Street Giant Road PRI Eastbound
Reliance Street Main Street Northbound
Reliance Street Main Street SR329 Southbound
Reliance Street West Street Northbound
Ridge Avenue Fairmont Avenue Northbound
Ridge Avenue Sumner Avenue Southbound
Ringer Road Mechanicsville Road
SR1012
Northbound
Robert Street Andrew Drive Eastbound
Robert Street Peachtree Circle
South
Northbound
Robin Street (T-714)
(Egypt)
Spring Street Southbound
Romig Avenue Seiples Station Road Northbound
Ronald Drive Elmhurst Drive East Westbound
Roosevelt Street Egypt Road Northbound and
southbound
Roosevelt Street Hoffman Street Westbound
Roosevelt Street MacArthur Road
SR145
Eastbound and
westbound
Roosevelt Street Second Street SR1027 Eastbound
Roosevelt Street Spruce Street Eastbound and
westbound
Rosewood Lane east Mechanicsville Road
SR1012
Southbound
Rosewood Lane west Mechanicsville Road
SR1012
Southbound
§ 15-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-23
14:522
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Royal Avenue MacArthur Road
SR145
Westbound
Royal Avenue Mickley Avenue Eastbound and
westbound
Ruch Street (Stiles) Chestnut Street* Southbound
Ruch Street South, east Birch Circle North Northbound
Ruch Street South, east Coplay Lane Southbound
Ruch Street South, west Birch Circle North Southbound
Ruch Street South Center Street Northbound and
southbound
Ruchsville Road SR4003 Church Street South
SR1023
Eastbound
Rural Road Mauch Chunk Road
SR1017
Southbound
Rural Road Mechanicsville Road
SR1012
Northbound
Sanibel Drive Spruce Street Eastbound
Schadt Avenue Mickley Road Eastbound
Schadt Avenue SR1008 Mauch Chunk Road
SR1017
Westbound
Scheidys Road SR1025 West Street SR1025 Southbound
School Street Apple Street Eastbound
School Street Cedar Alley Eastbound and
westbound
School Street Fourth Street South Westbound
School Street Second Street North
#537
Westbound
School Street Third Street South Eastbound and
westbound
Second Avenue Main Street Southbound
Second Avenue Pine Street Northbound
Second Avenue Wood Street Northbound and
southbound
Second Avenue South Center Street Northbound
Second Street Catasauqua Road Westbound
Second Street Franklin Street Northbound
Second Street Grape Street Northbound and
southbound
§ 15-23 RESERVED § 15-23
14:523
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Second Street Kimmett Avenue Southbound
Second Street Pershing Boulevard Northbound
Second Street Quarry Street Northbound and
southbound
Second Street Wood Street Southbound
Second Street SR1027 Kemmerer Street Northbound and
southbound
Second Street North Carbon Street Southbound
Second Street North Center Street Northbound and
southbound
Second Street North Hokendauqua Street Northbound
Second Street North South Street Southbound
Second Street North South Street/School
Street
Southbound
Second Street South Lehigh Street SR1014 Northbound and
southbound
Second Street South Quigg Street Northbound and
southbound
Second Street South School Street Northbound
Seiples Station Road Mauch Chunk Road
SR1017
Westbound
Seiples Station Road Mechanicsville Road
SR1012
Northbound
Seventh Street Birth Circle South Northbound and
southbound
Seventh Street Coplay Lane Northbound
Seventh Street Eberhart Road
SR1010
Southbound
Seventh Street Fairmont Avenue Northbound and
southbound
Seventh Street Grape Street Northbound
Seventh Street Hillside Avenue Southbound
Seventh Street Jefferson Street Southbound
Seventh Street Lehigh Street SR1014 Northbound and
southbound
Seventh Street Maryland Street Southbound
Seventh Street Pennsylvania Street Northbound
§ 15-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-23
14:524
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Seventh Street St. Paul Street #759 Northbound and
southbound
Seventh Street Union Street West Northbound
Sheridan Street Keystone Avenue Northbound
Shiloh Court Presidential Drive Northbound
Shiloh Court Shiloh Court Westbound
Sixth Avenue North Chestnut Street Southbound
Sixth Avenue North Fifth Avenue North Westbound
Sixth Avenue South Center Street East Southbound
Sixth Avenue South Chestnut Street Northbound
Sixth Street Birch Circle East Northbound
Sixth Street Fairmont Avenue Northbound and
southbound
Sixth Street Grape Street Northbound and
southbound
Sixth Street Hillside Avenue Southbound
Sixth Street Jefferson Street Northbound and
southbound
Sixth Street Lehigh Street SR1014 Southbound
Sixth Street St. Paul Street Northbound and
southbound
Sixth Street Summit Street Northbound and
southbound
Sixth Street Union Street West Northbound and
southbound
Sixth Street North
Extension
MacArthur Road
SR145
Westbound
Sodl Lane Carbon Street Northbound
Sodl Lane Clay Street Eastbound
Somerset Road Belleview Drive Southbound
Somerset Road Schadt Avenue Northbound
South Street Front Street South Eastbound
South Street Second Street North Westbound
South Street Second Street South Eastbound
South Street Third Street North Westbound
South Street Third Street South
#676
Eastbound
§ 15-23 RESERVED § 15-23
14:525
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Spring Mill Road MacArthur Road
SR145
Eastbound and
westbound
Spring Mill Road Second Street SR1027 Eastbound
Spring Street Roosevelt Street Eastbound
Spring Street Spruce Street Southbound
Spruce Street Adams Street Northbound and
southbound
Spruce Street Main Street SR329 Eastbound
Spruce Street Roosevelt Street Eastbound and
westbound
Spruce Street Alley Maryland Street Alley Northbound and
southbound
St. Johns Drive MacArthur Road
SR145
Westbound
St. Johns Drive Terrace Drive Southbound
St. Paul Street Seventh Street Eastbound and
westbound
St. Paul Street Sixth Street Eastbound and
westbound
Stone Terrace Drive
North
Coplay Road Westbound
Stone Terrace Drive
South
Coplay Road Westbound
Summit Street Fifth Street Eastbound and
westbound
Summit Street Ring Road LV Mall Westbound
Summit Street Seventh Street Eastbound and
westbound
Summit Street Sixth Street Eastbound and
westbound
Summit Street Spring Mill Road Westbound
Summit Street Third Street SR1015 Eastbound and
westbound
Sumner Avenue Fullerton Avenue
SR1015
Eastbound
Suncrest Circle Spring Mill Road Eastbound
Sunset Drive east Presidential Drive Northbound
Sunset Drive west Presidential Drive Northbound and
southbound
§ 15-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-23
14:526
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Tenth Street North Livingston Street Southbound
Terrace Circle Lehigh Street SR1014 Southbound
Terrace Drive
(Stiles)
Joab Road Eastbound and
westbound
Texas Street Fifth Street #547 Eastbound
Thebes Turn Adams Street Northbound and
southbound
Thebes Turn Ammon Way Northbound
Thebes Turn Phillip Street Southbound
Third Avenue Main Street Northbound and
southbound
Third Avenue Pine Street Northbound
Third Avenue North Chestnut Street Southbound
Third Avenue North Poplar Street Northbound
Third Street Church Street North Eastbound
Third Street First Avenue SR1015 Southbound
Third Street Fuller Street Northbound
Third Street Kemmerer Street Northbound
Third Street Main Street SR329 Southbound
Third Street North Carbon Street Northbound and
southbound
Third Street North Center Street Northbound and
southbound
Third Street North Hokendauqua Street Northbound
Third Street South Barklay Road Southbound
Third Street South Coplay Street Northbound
Third Street South Coplay Street #1079 Southbound
Third Street South Lehigh Street SR1014 Northbound and
southbound
Third Street South School Street Southbound
Third Street South School Street #793 Northbound
Third Street South Thomas Street Northbound and
southbound
Thirteenth Street North Fairmont Street Southbound
Thirteenth Street North Fairmont Street #942 Northbound
Thirteenth Street North Overlook Road #1061 Northbound
§ 15-23 RESERVED § 15-23
14:527
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Thirteenth Street North Pennsylvania Street Northbound and
southbound
Thomas Street Third Street South Eastbound
Tremont Circle Eleventh Street North Eastbound
Termont Street Tenth Street North Westbound
Trone Alley Main Street Northbound
Truman Street Hoffman Drive Westbound
Truman Street Spruce Street Eastbound
Twelfth Street North Congress Street Eastbound
Tyler Street West Hampshire Drive Westbound
Tyler Street West Mickley Road Eastbound
Union Street Apple Street Eastbound
Union Street
(West Catasauqua)
Cedar Alley Westbound
Union Street First Avenue Eastbound and
westbound
Union Street Second Avenue Eastbound and
westbound
Union Street East Catasauqua Road Eastbound
Union Street East Third Street SR1015 Westbound
Union Street East Washington Street Eastbound and
westbound
Union Street West Jordan Boulevard
South
Eastbound
Union Street West Mickley Road #920 Westbound
Union Street West Minnesota Drive Westbound
Union Street West Sixth Street Eastbound and
westbound
Union Street West Third Street SR1015 Eastbound
Valleyview Lane Third Street SR1015 Eastbound
Valleyview Lane East Washington Street Eastbound and
westbound
Valleyview Lane East West Alley Westbound
Vermont Street Fifth Street Eastbound
Vermont Street Sixth Street Eastbound and
westbound
§ 15-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-23
14:528
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Virginia Avenue Fairmont Avenue Northbound and
southbound
Virginia Avenue Seventh Street Eastbound
Walnut Street Front Street Eastbound
Walnut Street Hobson Street North Eastbound and
westbound
Walnut Street Prospect Street Southbound
Walnut Street Ruch Street North Eastbound
Walnut Street Second Street Eastbound and
westbound
Walnut Street Washington Street Westbound
Washington Avenue Pennsylvania Street Westbound
Washington Street American Street Northbound and
southbound
Washington Street Catasauqua Road Eastbound
Washington Street Chestnut Street Southbound
Washington Street Oak Street Northbound and
southbound
Washington Street Orchard Drive #1149 Northbound
Washington Street Union Street East
#1061
Southbound
Washington Street Union Street East
#955
Northbound
Water Street Lehigh Street SR1014 Southbound
Water Street
(Darktown)
None, at Coplay Creek
Culvert
Northbound and
southbound
West Alley Orchard Drive Northbound
West Street Main Street SR329
west
Westbound
West Street SR1025 Main Street SR329
east
Eastbound
Whitehall Street Eleventh Street North Eastbound
Whitehall Street Front Street Eastbound
Willow Street Main Street SR329 Southbound
Wilson Street Main Street SR329 Southbound
Wilson Street Spruce Street Northbound
Windsor Street Kimmett Avenue Southbound
§ 15-23 RESERVED § 15-23
14:529
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Windsor Street Pershing Boulevard Northbound
Wint Lane Garden Lane Northbound and
southbound
Wolf Street Ellsworth Drive Eastbound and
westbound
Wolf Street Mickley Road Eastbound and
westbound
Wolf Street Schadt Avenue Eastbound and
westbound
Wood Street First Avenue Eastbound and
westbound
Wood Street Lehigh Avenue North Eastbound
Wood Street Second Avenue #910 Eastbound and
westbound
Wood Street Third Avenue Eastbound and
westbound
Wood Street Third Avenue SR1015 Westbound
Woodbury Lane Fairmont Avenue Southbound
Woodlawn Street Thirteenth Street
North
Eastbound and
westbound
Wright Lane Kuhns Lane Eastbound and
westbound
*Multi-way stop
Brynwood Subdivision (Mickleys)
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Brynwood Drive Mechanicsville Road
(SR 1012)
Northbound
Brynwood Drive (East) Brynwood Drive
(North and South)
Westbound
Brynwood Drive (West) Brynwood Drive
(North and South)
Eastbound
Elizabeth Court Brynwood Drive Eastbound
§ 15-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-23
14:530
Chestnut Ridge Estates — Phase 2 (Stiles)
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Carl Drive Limestone Drive Eastbound
Carl Drive Portland Drive Westbound
Portland Drive Limestone Drive Eastbound
Cornerstone Estates, Phase 2 (Fullerton)
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Congress Street North 12th Street Eastbound and
westbound
North Ninth Street Highland Street Northbound
North Twelfth Street Pennsylvania Street Southbound
Poplar Street Congress Street Southbound
Poplar Street Pennsylvania Street Northbound
Eagle Pointe (Home Park Townes) (Home Park)
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Grant Avenue Pennsylvania Street Eastbound
Helen Alley Grant Avenue Southbound and
northbound
Lincoln Avenue Pennsylvania Street Eastbound
Fox Hollow Phase I (Cementon)
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Foxdale Drive North Coplay Road Southbound
Northfield (Mickleys)
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Stecasso Court Ringer Road Westbound
Peachtree Village, Section II (Fullerton)
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Gallagher Road Presidential Drive Eastbound
Harding Circle Presidential Drive Westbound
Jackson Street Harding Circle Northbound
Jackson Street Presidential Drive Westbound
§ 15-23 RESERVED § 15-23
14:531
Peachtree Village, Section II (Fullerton)
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Madison Lane Gallagher Road Southbound
Maple Leaf Lane Madison Lane Westbound and
northbound
Monroe Avenue Madison Lane Westbound
Monroe Avenue Presidential Drive Eastbound
Woodside Alley Jackson Street Eastbound and
westbound
Woodside Alley Presidential Drive Westbound
Peachtree Village Singles (Fullerton)
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Alberta Drive Sunset Drive Westbound
Sunset Drive VanBuren Drive Northbound
Rolling Hills, Section B, Phase 1 (Egypt)
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Hoffman Drive Lehigh Street Westbound
Troxell Drive Hoffman Drive Eastbound and
westbound
Troxell Drive Memphis Road Eastbound
Shanley Estates (Egypt)
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Alice Lane Main Street (SR
0329)
Southbound
Heidi Court Alice Lane Eastbound
Timberidge Phase 1 (Egypt)
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Black Forest Drive Briarwood Drive Northbound
Briarwood Drive Quarry Street Eastbound
§ 15-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-23
14:532
§ 15-24. Yield intersections established.
Wal-Mart Development (West Catasauqua)
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Range Road Eberhart Road
(SR1010)
Northbound
Range Road Schadt Avenue Southbound
Walnut Ridge (Phase I) (Fullerton)
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Amy Way English Lane Southbound
English Lane Halleck Drive Eastbound
English Lane Somerset Road Westbound
Halleck Drive English Drive Northbound
Somerset Road Schadt Avenue
(SR1008)
Southbound
Walnut Ridge Phases 3 and 4 (Fullerton)
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Augusta Drive Schadt Avenue
(SR1008)
Southbound
English Lane Augusta Drive Westbound
English Lane Somerset Road Eastbound
Pecan Drive Augusta Drive Westbound
Pecan Drive Somerset Road Eastbound
Pine Cone Drive Augusta Drive Westbound
Pine Cone Drive Somerset Road Eastbound
Sean Drive English Lane Southbound
Veronica Avenue Augusta Drive Westbound
Veronica Avenue Somerset Road Eastbound
Washington Park Phase I (Stiles)
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Oak Street Washington Street Eastbound
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 15-23 RESERVED § 15-24
14:533
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 15-22) are established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the through street) on the first-named street (the
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(c) of the
Vehicle Code, and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
subsection of the Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Chestnut Street Church Street South n.
SR1012
Eastbound
Church Street South
SR1023
MacArthur Road SR145 Southbound
Coplay Circle Birch Circle West Eastbound
Coplay Lane Birch Circle West Westbound
Creekside Road Alta Drive Eastbound
Dogwood Drive Dogwood Circle Northbound
Echo Circle Echo Drive Westbound
Ellsworth Circle Ellsworth Drive Eastbound
Fairmont Avenue MacArthur Road SR145 Southbound
Hampshire Circle Hampshire Drive Westbound
Joab Road Municipal Drive Southbound
Jordan Drive Jordan Drive Westbound
Juniper Circle Juniper Drive Northbound
Lehigh Street SR1010 Pine Street Southbound and
westbound
MacArthur Road
SR145
Fairmont Avenue Eastbound
MacArthur Road
SR145
Fornaciari Drive Eastbound
Municipal Drive MacArthur Road SR145 Northbound
Oakwood Circle Oakwood Drive Southbound
Orchard Circle Orchard Drive Southbound
Park Street Church Street South
SR1023
Northbound
Park Street Sixth Avenue South Eastbound
Pine Street Main Street Northbound
Poplar Street North Highland Street Northbound
§ 15-24 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-24
14:534
§ 15-25. Operation of motor vehicles restricted on public lands.
§ 15-26. Rotary traffic islands established.
§ 15-27. Play highways established and authorized.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Rosewood Court Rosewood Lane Northbound
Rosewood Place Rosewood Lane Northbound
Tenth Street North Highland Street Northbound
Washington Street Hobson Street North Northbound
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. No motor vehicle including a motorcycle, pedalcycle or minibike shall
be operated on any property owned by the Township of Whitehall or any
other public agency or instrumentality within the Township of Whitehall
without the permission of the property owner and a permit from the
Mayor of the Township. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
B. Any person who violates an provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following locations are designated as rotary traffic islands, and
every vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of the island:
Location
B. Any person who drives a vehicle otherwise than to the right of any
rotary traffic island shall be guilty of a violation of this section, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following areas upon the streets in the Township of Whitehall are
established as play highways:
Street Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
B. The Chief of Police is authorized to designate as play highways,
whenever he deems that action advisable, and for whatever period of
time directed by him, any part of any street in the Township where
sledding and coasting, shall be permitted. That play highway shall be
set apart for the purpose under the direction of the Chief of Police.
C. No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon any play highway at any
time when that street shall be designated as a play highway, except in
case of emergency, with special permission of the Chief of Police or of
§ 15-24 RESERVED § 15-27
14:535
§ 15-28. Snowmobile roads designated.
§ 15-29. Restrictions on use of pushcarts.
the police officer in charge, who shall first clear that play highway of all
persons using it for the purpose for which it was set aside. Any person
who violates any provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following roads and streets within the Township of Whitehall are
designated as special snowmobile roads:
Street or Road Between
Used by
Snowmobiles
Only When
Closed to
Vehicular
Traffic
Shared With
Vehicular
Traffic
None
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on any
highway, street or road in the Township of Whitehall other than as
provided above. Provided, nothing in this section shall prohibit any
person from operating a snowmobile on any other street in the
Township:
(1) As authorized by § 7721 of the Vehicle Code for emergency and
bridge crossings and for direct crossing of streets or two-lane
highways; or
(2) For special snowmobile events where authorized in advance and
the street is blocked off as provided in § 7723 of the Vehicle Code.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to the penalties prescribed in § 7752(a) of the Vehicle Code.
A. The word "pushcart," as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle, other
than a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power and used or
intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods,
wares or merchandise.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the
pushcart to a location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from
which goods, wares or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under
permit from Board of Commissioners as provided in Subsection C of this
section.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any sidewalk
except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit from Board of
Commissioners. Every such permit shall be issued to the person making
§ 15-27 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-29
14:536
§ 15-30. Skates, coasters, sleds and other toy vehicles.
application for the permit, upon payment of a fee, which shall be for
the use of the sidewalk, $100 for any calendar year, $50 for any six
month period or $25 for any three month period. The permit shall be
granted to the applicant, upon payment of the fee, and upon his signing
an agreement with Board of Commissioners that he shall be bound by
the conditions imposed by Board of Commissioners and made a part of
the permit, dealing with the following matters:
(1) Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more
stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at
each location.
(2) Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations
carried on.
(3) Requiring that there be no violation of any law, ordinance or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food
or drink.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any condition
of any permit granted under this section, shall be guilty of a summary
offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a sled upon any sidewalk in
the Township of Whitehall, or upon any roadway unless that roadway is
on a portion of a street blocked off for sledding by authority of § 15-5 of
Article I or § 15-27 of Article II of this chapter. Provided, nothing in this
subsection shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a sled, with or
without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roller skating or to ride
upon or propel any coaster or other toy vehicle upon:
(1) Any street except in order to cross the roadway.
(2) Any sidewalk located in a business district, except that nothing in
this paragraph shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a coaster or
other toy vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
§ 15-29 RESERVED § 15-30
14:537

ARTICLE III
Restrictions on Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle and Load
§ 15-31. Vehicle weight limits established on certain streets and
bridges.
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a gross
weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge or
street or part of street, as the case may be:
Street or Bridge Between
Maximum
Gross
Weight
Belleview Drive Entire length between its
westerly and easterly
intersection with Schadt
Avenue (SR 1008)
5 tons
Center Street MacArthur Road (SR 0145) and
Sixth Avenue
5 tons
Center Street Sixth Avenue and Ruch Street 5 tons
Chestnut Street Sixth Avenue and Ruch Street 5 tons
Columbia Street Ringer Road and MacArthur
Road (SR 145)
5 tons
Congress Street 13th Street North and
Pennsylvania Street
5 tons
11th Street North Sumner Avenue and Congress
Street
5 tons
Florida Avenue Fifth Street and Sumner
Avenue
5 tons
Gallagher Road Mauch Chunk Road (SR 1017)
and Presidential Drive
5 tons
Highland Street 12th Street North and the
turnaround east of 9th Street
North
5 tons
Jordan Parkway Mickley Road and Pennsylvania
Avenue
5 tons
Lehnert Road Township boundary with South
Whitehall Township and
Mickley Road
5 tons
Linden Lane Mauch Chunk Road (SR 1017)
and Belleview Drive
5 tons
New York Avenue Fifth Street and Sumner
Avenue
5 tons
§ 15-31 RESERVED § 15-31
14:539
§ 15-32. Restrictions on size of vehicles on certain streets and
bridges.
Street or Bridge Between
Maximum
Gross
Weight
Overlook Road Township boundary with South
Whitehall Township and
Mickley Road
5 tons
Peachtree Road Township boundary with South
Whitehall Township and
Columbia Street
5 tons
Pennsylvania Street 13th Street North and
Congress Street
5 tons
Presidential Drive Township boundary with South
Whitehall Township and
Mickley Road
5 tons
Ringer Road Mechanicsville Road (SR 1012)
and Columbia Street
5 tons
Ruch Street West Coplay Road and Center
Street on the westerly half
within Whitehall Township
5 tons
Seiples Station Road Mauch Chunk Road (SR 1017)
and Mechanicsville Road (SR
1017)
5 tons
Sixth Avenue Center Street and Chestnut
Street
5 tons
Somerset Road Between Schadt Avenue (SR
1008) and Belleview Drive
5 tons
Sumner Avenue Fullerton Avenue (SR 1015)
and Florida Avenue
5 tons
12th Street North Highland Street and
Pennsylvania Street
5 tons
Water Street Eberhart Road (SR1010) and
Lehigh Street (SR1014)
5 tons
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus $150 for
each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight, and costs.
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for any
§ 15-31 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-32
14:540
§ 15-33. Restrictions as to weight and size of vehicles on certain
streets and bridges.
§ 15-34. Truck traffic restricted on certain streets.
person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the size
restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $75 and costs.
A. By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
authority granted by § 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful
for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the
restriction prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street.
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§ 4902(b) and 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25
and not more than $100 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Street Between
Andrew Circle Full length
Bridge Street Church Street and L.R. 39111
Columbia Street MacArthur Road and Ash Street
Fifth Street Union Street and Fuller Street
Fifth Street St. Paul Street and Grape Street
Fornaciari Drive Main Street and MacArthur Road
Front Street Main Street and Second Street
Hampshire Drive Schadt Avenue and American Street
Jefferson Street Full length
Jordan Boulevard Grape Street and West Union
Main Street (9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m. only)
Schadt Avenue and Lehigh Avenue
Michael Drive Full length
Mickley Avenue Schadt Avenue and MacArthur Road
§ 15-32 RESERVED § 15-34
14:541
§ 15-35. Buses prohibited on certain streets; exceptions.
Street Between
Mickley Road Schadt Avenue and Mickley Road
Mickley Road Northern intersection with MacArthur
Road and southern intersection with
MacArthur Road
Mulberry Street Quarry Street and Chestnut Street
Orchard Drive Schadt Avenue and Third Street
Park Street South Church Street and Bridge Street
Peachtree Circle Full length
Reliance Street Main Street and Bridge Street
Robert Street Full length
Rural Drive Mechanicsville Road and Mauch Chunk
Road
St. Paul Street Fifth Street and Seventh Street
Sixth Street Grape Street and St. Paul Street
Seventh Street Grape Street and St. Paul Street
Spring Mill Road Spruce Street and MacArthur Road
Spruce Street Main Street and Roosevelt Street
Summit Street Third Street and Seventh Street
Union Street Mickley Road and Sixth Street
B. Provided, nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving
an emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets, or from
driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or other
commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from premises
located along that street or part of a street.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any bus on any of the
following streets, or portions thereof, as herein designated:
Street Between
Andrew Drive Full length
Fifth Street St. Paul Street and Grape Street
Michael Drive Full length
Peachtree Circle Full length
Robert Street Full length
St. Paul Street Fifth Street and Seventh Street
§ 15-34 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-35
14:542
Street Between
Seventh Street Grape Street and St. Paul Street
Sixth Street Grape Street and St. Paul Street
Summit Street Third Street and Seventh Street
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay fine of $25 and costs of
prosecution.
§ 15-35 RESERVED § 15-35
14:543

ARTICLE IV
General Parking Regulations
§ 15-36. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 15-37. Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations.
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Allen Street Both Apple Street and Third Avenue
Allison Street South Fullerton Avenue and Windsor
Street
Alta Drive Both MacArthur Road (SR 145)
westwardly 100 feet
Ash Street (Stiles)
[Added 6-14-2010 by
Ord. No. 2828]
North North Locust Street (alley) and
North Ruch Street
Bank Street Both Main Street to Hillcrest Avenue
Bell Alley South Third Street and West Lane
Birch Street Both Third Street west to dead end
Birch Street Both Second Street and Third Street
Bridge Street West Park Street southwardly 30 feet
Bridge Street East Park Street southwardly 50 feet
Butz Street North 20 feet from South Third Street
Carolina Avenue South Maryland Circle and Kansas Drive
Carolina Avenue North West 210 feet east from file plug
Catasauqua Avenue East Mundy Lane and northerly 60 feet
Cemetery Road (Egypt)
[Added 2-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 2850]
Southwest Main Street/SR 329 and Hillcrest
Lane
Center Street (Stiles)
[Added 2-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 2850]
South A point 250 feet east of South
Fourth Avenue and 270 feet east of
same
Cherry Alley
(Fullerton Area)
North Third Street (SR 1015) and a point
70 feet west
Cherry Street Both Northern terminus and southern
terminus thereof
§ 15-36 RESERVED § 15-37
14:545
Street Side Between
Chestnut Street South Ruch Street and Whitehall Street
Church Street South Front Street and the railroad
Church Street South Hoffman Drive and Main Street
Church Street North East 24 feet from Fairview Alley
Church Street North East Main Street (SR 329) and
northwardly 70 feet
Coplay Road East Gavalla Street and Main Street
Coplay Road West West Coplay Road and a point 80
feet south
Coplay Road North West South from 5504 North Coplay
Road to Coplay Road
Coplay Road North East From House No. 5603 to House No.
5655
Corinth Road West Olympic Circle North and Overlook
Road
Crescent Court East
[Added 3-11-2013 by
Ord. No. 2929]
South The western edge of 3678 Crescent
Court East's driveway and the
eastern edge of 3682 Crescent
Court East's driveway (a distance of
100 feet)
Currant Alley Both Second Street and Third Street
Delaware Lane East 300 feet east from Ohio Avenue
Delaware Lane West 250 feet east from Ohio Avenue
Dewey Street East Fornaciari Drive and Washington
Avenue
East Street Both American Street and Broad Street
Eberhardt Lane (Egypt)
[Added 5-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 2772]
Both Main Street (SR 329) and Hillcrest
Lane
Eberhardt Lane East Main Street and Worman Lane
Edgewood Street South Alpine Street and a point 60 feet
west thereof
Eisenhower Circle
(Presidential Village
Sect. One Development)
West and
East
Presidential Drive south 150 feet to
the circle road
Fairmont Avenue North 132 feet east from MacArthur Road
Fairmont Avenue South 95 feet east from MacArthur Road
Fairmont Avenue South Jordan Drive and a point 66 feet
east thereof
§ 15-37 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-37
14:546
Street Side Between
Fairmont Avenue Jordan Drive and a point 30 feet
west thereof
Fairview Alley Both 120 feet south of Truman Street
Fernhill Drive North Maryland Circle and Kansas Drive
Fifth Street East Center Street and Chestnut Street
Fifth Street West St. Paul Street and a point
northwardly 110 feet
Fifth Street East St. Paul Street and a point
southwardly 110 feet
Fifth Street West St. Paul Street and a point
southwardly 130 feet
First Avenue East Bridge Street and Main Street
First Avenue East Bridge Street and a point 85 feet
south thereof
First Avenue West Main Street and Fuller Street
First Avenue South East Union Street to Bridge Street (SR
1004)
Fornaciari Drive North Main Street and McKinley Avenue
Fornaciari Drive South Dewey Avenue and Main Street
Fornaciari Drive
(Cementon)
South Pennsylvania Street and Dewey
Street
Fourteenth Street West Overlook Road and Fairmont Street
Front Street East Franklin Street and a point 100 feet
south thereof
Front Street West 92 feet south of Kemmerer Street
and a point 150 feet north of
Whitehall Street
Front Street East Whitehall Cement Company and
Kemmerer Street
Front Street East Leisenring Street and a point 25
feet southeast thereof
Front Street West No. 118 Front Street and No. 124
Front Street; No. 126 Front Street
and No. 148 Front Street
Front Street West From a point 165 feet south of
Kemmerer Street to a point 185
feet south of Kemmerer Street
Front Street West From a point 27 feet north of
Whitehall Street to a point 72 feet
north of Whitehall Street
§ 15-37 RESERVED § 15-37
14:547
Street Side Between
Front Street North Leisenring Street and northwardly
22 feet
Front Street South
(Hokendauqua)
East Lehigh Street (SR 1014) and a point
45 feet north
Front Street South
(Hokendauqua)
[Amended 5-14-2012
by Ord. No. 2897]
West Lehigh Street (SR 1014) and 240
feet north
Front Street South
(Hokendauqua)
East Lehigh Street (SR 1014) and
southwardly 70 feet
Fuller Street North South First Avenue (SR 1015) and
westwardly 40 feet
Fullerton Avenue East Kimmet Street and Park Street
Fullerton Avenue
Fullerton; (during
reconstruction)
East Mundy Lane and Kimmett Avenue
Fullerton Avenue West Route 22 Ramp A and Pershing
Boulevard
Fullerton Avenue East Sumner Avenue and Kimmett
Avenue
Garden Lane Both Wint Lane and Fourth Street
Garden Lane Both Third Street and Fourth Street
Gavalla Street East From intersection of Main Street to
a point 112 feet south
Georgia Drive North Ironton Phone Co. building for a
50-foot length
Glenside Drive [Added
6-12-2006 by Ord. No.
2641]
North Seventh Street and 400 feet to the
west
Glenside Drive [Added
6-12-2006 by Ord. No.
2641]
South MacArthur Road and Seventh
Street
Grape Street South 90 feet east of Third Street
Grape Street South MacArthur Road and Third Street
Green Alley Both Lehigh Street and First Avenue
Hall Street (alley) West South Street southwardly 100 feet
Harrison Street East Main Street and Spruce Street
§ 15-37 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-37
14:548
Street Side Between
Helen Alley Home Park
Area
Southwest Grant Avenue and Lincoln Avenue
Hemlock Drive Both From Schadt Avenue (SR 1008)
southwardly 80 feet to a point
Hillcrest South Kuhn Lane eastwardly 385 feet to
the easterly property line of the
Egypt Fire Company
Hillside Avenue North Main Street (SR 0329) and a point
westwardly 65 feet
Jefferson Street North Seventh Street and Jordan
Boulevard
Johnson Court
(Presidential Village
Sect. One Development)
East and
west
Presidential Drive south 120 feet to
the circle road
Jordan Boulevard
(Fullerton) [Added
5-14-2007 by Ord. No.
2675]
Both Grape Street and a point 250 feet
north
Jordan Drive West Fairmont Avenue and the entrance
to the parking lot of Jordan Park
Apartments
Jordan Drive West Fairmont Avenue and a point 75
feet southwardly thereof
Jordan Drive Outside
perimeter
curb
Fairmont Avenue and Jordan Park
Kansas Drive West Carolina Avenue and Fernhill Drive
Kay Drive Both Fairmont Street and Fountain
House Apartments
Kemmerer Street North Church (alley) and westwardly 22
feet
Kemmerer Street
Cementon
North Second Street (SR 1027) and a
point 42 feet west
Kuhn Lane East Hillcrest Lane and Main Street
Lehigh Avenue East To a point 150 feet south of Bridge
Street
Lehigh Avenue South Fairview Street westwardly 150
feet to Trone Alley
Lehigh Street Both No. 1021 Lehigh Street and No.
1022 Lehigh Street
§ 15-37 RESERVED § 15-37
14:549
Street Side Between
Lehigh Street North Front Street and Second Street
Lehigh Street West The property lines north and south
of Residence No. 1092
Lehigh Street Franklin Street and Packer Avenue
Lehigh Street
(Fullerton)
West From House No. 1126 north to a
point on Catasauqua Avenue, a
distance of 1,200 feet
Lehigh Street
(Fullerton)
North and
South
MacArthur Road (SR 1045) and
eastwardly 1200 feet
Leisenring Street Both From unnamed alley east a distance
of 40 feet
Lewis Street (alley)
Fullerton Area
East Southerly side property line of
#309 Fullerton Avenue and
northwardly 30 feet
Lincoln Avenue
West Catasauqua Area
East Miller Street and eastwardly 55
feet
Lincoln Place West and
north
Presidential Drive southwardly and
eastwardly to its dead end
MacArthur Road West From Municipal Drive northwardly
(SR 145) 400 feet to a point
Main Street South MacArthur Road and Township line
Main Street North 30 feet east of Second Street and
30 feet west of Second Street
Main Street North A point 25 feet from Second Street
Main Street North Fourth Street and MacArthur Road
Main Street South Willow Street and Railroad Street
Main Street North MacArthur Road and Fornaciari
Drive
Main Street North Bridge Street and Schadt Avenue
Main Street North Church Street and a point 130 feet
west thereof and a point 110 feet
east thereof
Main Street East and
west
Main Street/Mickley Road/Schadt
Avenue intersection and a point 150
feet north thereof
Main Street
(SR 329)
Egypt Area
North Bank Street (Alley) and eastwardly
30 feet
§ 15-37 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-37
14:550
Street Side Between
Maryland Circle East Fernhill Drive and Carolina Avenue
Maryland Circle A point east of the office parking
area 60 feet west
Maryland Street South Pole No. 62905 and Pole No. 55817
McKinley Avenue Southeast Fornaciari Drive southwestwardly
165 feet
Mechanicsville Road South MacArthur Road and west end of
school property
Melville Street West Pershing Boulevard and
northwardly 100 feet
Mickley Avenue East Royal Avenue and Two Guys
Mickley Avenue Northeast Schadt Avenue and southeasterly
70 feet
Mickley Road Both Orchard Drive and Schadt Avenue
Mickley Road
(Nob Hill, formerly
Forest Hill
Development)
West Overlook Road northwardly 150
feet and from Delphi Drive
northwardly 250 feet and
southwardly 150 feet
Mickley Road
(Nob Hill, formerly
Forest Hill
Development)
East Main Street/Mickley Road/Schadt
Avenue intersection and a point 150
feet south thereof
Mickley Road
(Nob Hill, formerly
Forest Hill
Development)
West Main Street/Mickley Road/Schadt
Avenue intersection and a point 165
feet south thereof
Miller Street
West Catasauqua Area
North Columbia Avenue to Lincoln Avenue
Miller Street
West Catasauqua Area
South Lincoln Avenue and westwardly 80
feet
Mulberry Street Both Quarry Street and Chestnut Street
Municipal Drive Both MacArthur Road and a point
approximately 200 feet east thereof
Municipal Drive [Added
2-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2959]
Both MacArthur Road/SR 145 and Joab
Road
Municipal Drive South Municipal Building Complex access
drive eastwardly 45 feet
§ 15-37 RESERVED § 15-37
14:551
Street Side Between
New Street Both Hokendauqua Street and Center
Street
North Coplay Road Southwest Foxdale Drive and northwardly 220
feet
North Street [Added
5-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2967]
Both North Front Street and Quarry
Street (alley)
Olympic Drive Both Mickley Road and Olympic Circle
Olympic Circle South South 84 feet east from Corinth Road
Olympic Circle South North 289 feet east from Athens Drive
Olympic Circle South Inside
perimeter
curb
Athens Drive and Overlook Road
Orchard Drive Both Minnesota Drive and Mickley Road
Park Street North Fifth Street and a point eastwardly
130 feet
Park Street South Fullerton Avenue and a point
westwardly to the intersection of
Fifth Street
Parkview Drive East Fifth Street and Carbon Street
Pennsylvania Street North Fifth Street and Alpine Alley
Pine Street
(West Catasauqua)
West Fourth Street to a point 556 feet
northeast thereof
Presidential Drive South Mickley Road westwardly 1530 feet
to a point 130 feet west of Shiloh
Court
Presidential Drive North Mickley Road westwardly 1250 feet
to a point 170 feet east of Andrew
Drive
Presidential Drive South 130 feet east to 130 feet west of
Eisenhower Circle
Presidential Drive South 130 feet east to 130 feet west of
Johnson Court
Quarry Street South Mulberry Alley and a point 30 feet
eastwardly thereof
Quarry Street South Third Street (SR 1015) eastwardly
28 feet
Quarry Street [Added
5-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2967]
West 120 feet north of North Street and
375 feet south to its terminus
§ 15-37 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-37
14:552
Street Side Between
Quarry Street (alley)
Hokendauqua Area
Both A point 20 feet south of North
Street's center line and a point 60
feet north of North Street
Quarry Street
(Hokendauqua)
Both Lehigh Street and Church Street
Quarry Street
(Hokendauqua)
West Lehigh Street and dead end
Railroad Street West Main Street and dead end
Reliance Street Both Along the curve starting from a
point 1,000 feet south of Main
Street (SR 329) and extending
southwardly for a distance of 250
feet
Roosevelt Street East Spring Creek and Roosevelt Street
Ruch Street West 72 feet south from Ash Street
St. Paul Street South Fifth Street and a point westwardly
110 feet
Schadt Avenue (SR
1008) [Added
5-14-2012 by Ord. No.
2901]
Both 200 feet west and 200 feet east of
Muslim and Korean Churches
Driveways
Schadt Avenue North Main Street/Mickley Road/Schadt
Avenue intersection and a point 220
feet west thereof
Schadt Avenue South Main Street/Mickley Road/Schadt
Avenue intersection and a point 195
feet west thereof
Scheidy's Road West 250 feet north of West Street
School Street Both Second Street and Fourth Street
School Street Both Third Street and Apple Street
Second Street Both Currant Alley and Quarry Street
Second Street East Leisenring Street and a point 30
feet northwardly thereof
Second Street East Main Street and a point 30 feet
northwardly thereof
Second Street West Front Street and Kemmerer Street
Second Street
(Cementon)
East House No. 5235 and House No.
5243
§ 15-37 RESERVED § 15-37
14:553
Street Side Between
Sixth Street West Union Street and No. 1174 Sixth
Street
Spring Mill Road
[Added 10-12-2015 by
Ord. No. 3029]
Both Starting at a point 350 feet
northeast of Suncrest Circle,
extending 255 feet to the northeast
Spring Mill Road North Wright Lane to MacArthur Road
Spring Mill Road South MacArthur Road, westwardly 100
feet (towards Spruce Street)
Spruce Street South Roosevelt Street and Main Street
Summit Street North Third Street (SR 1015) and a point
westwardly 35 feet
Summit Street South Third Street (SR 1015) and a point
westwardly 35 feet at a driveway
Sunset Drive North and
South
Sunset Drive's public R/W terminus
and south of Presidential Drive,
along its turnaround area for length
of 40 feet
Third Street Both School Street and South Street
Third Street East Park Street and Union Street
Third Street West Grape Street and Quarry Street
Third Street West Grape Street and Catasauqua Road
Third Street West From Butz Street south a distance
of 40 feet
Third Street West The current No Parking Zone (north
of Grape Street intersection) and
the common side property line of
house numbers 930 and 938 Third
Street
Third Street East Union Street to Bridge Street (SR
1004)
Third Street West Park Street and Grape Street
Third Street
Cementon Area
East Main Street (SR 329) and
northwardly 43 feet
Third Street South West 35 feet from Butz Street
Thirteenth Street West Overlook Road and Fairmont Street
Truman Street East Jay Street and Naylor Lane
Trone Alley Both Bridge Street and Main Street
West Alley East From East Alley to a point 75 feet
south thereof
§ 15-37 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-37
14:554
Street Side Between
West Street North From Fairview Street to a point 25
feet east
West Union Street Both Paved blacktop playground pathway
and Jordan Boulevard
West Union Street North Minnesota Drive and Jordan
Boulevard
Whitehall Street South Unnamed alley and a point 40 feet
west thereof
Wint Lane Both Grape Street and Jefferson Street
Wood Street South Park Street and Fullerton Avenue
§ 15-38. Parking prohibited in certain locations, certain days and
hours.
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days
and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Columbia Avenue East Between Main
Street and Bridge
Street
W & S Mornings
Columbia Avenue East Bridge Street (SR
1004) to Main
Street
W 7:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m.
Front Street
(Fullerton)
[Added
7-10-2006 by
Ord. No. 2643]
East Chestnut Street
southwardly 110
feet
M-F 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
Jordan Boulevard
(Fullerton)
[Added 4-9-2007
by Ord. No.
2673]
Both West Union Street
and a point 370
feet south of
Jefferson Street
Every day
between
May 15
through
Labor Day
All times
Kemmerer Street South Church Lane
(alley) and
westwardly for a
length of 40 feet
Tues. All times
Pershing
Boulevard
Both Fullerton Avenue Every day 11:30 p.m.
to 5:00
a.m.
§ 15-37 RESERVED § 15-38
14:555
Street Side Between Days Hours
Pershing
Boulevard
[Added
3-13-2006 by
Ord. No. 2611]
North A point 45 feet
west of Fullerton
Avenue to Melville
Street (alley)
School
days;
Monday
evenings
7:30 a.m.
to 3:30
p.m.; 5:30
p.m. to
8:00 p.m.
Quarry Street
[Added 5-5-2014
by Ord. No.
2968]
East 113 feet north of
North Street and
144 feet north of
North Street
Every day
between
November
15 and
April 1
All times
Quarry Street
[Added 5-5-2014
by Ord. No.
2968]
East 69 feet south of
North Street and
19 feet south of
North Street
Every day
between
November
15 and
April 1
All times
Quarry Street
[Added 5-5-2014
by Ord. No.
2968]
East 77 feet south of
North Street and
113 feet south of
North Street
Every day
between
November
15 and
April 1
All times
Quarry Street
[Added 5-5-2014
by Ord. No.
2968]
East 395 feet south of
North Street and
343 feet south of
North Street
Every day
between
November
15 and
April 1
All times
Quarry Street
[Repealed
5-13-2019 by
Ord. No. 3149]
Ruch Street West Between Chestnut
Street southwardly
South Ruch Street
School days 7:30 a.m.
to 3:30
p.m.
Second Street,
North
East 5109 and 511
Second Street
M-F 3:00 p.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
South Street South From Front Street
to the alley 172
feet west thereof
Every day 7:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Third Street West From Garden Lane
to a point 105 feet
south of Garden
Lane
Every day 5:00 a.m.
to 9:00
p.m.
§ 15-38 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-38
14:556
Street Side Between Days Hours
Thirteenth Street West From a point 103
feet north of
Fairmont Street to
a point 140 feet
north thereof
Every day 10:30 a.m.
to 8:30
p.m.
§ 15-39. Parking of trucks, buses and certain other vehicles
prohibited in certain locations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to allow to remain parked,
on any of the following streets or parts of streets, any vehicle other than a
passenger car (which shall not include any bus, motor home or passenger
car attached to a trailer of any kind).
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a trailer (which shall mean a
vehicle without motive power designed to carry property of passengers
or designed and used exclusively for living quarters wholly on its own
structure, and to be drawn by a motor vehicle or tractor and including,
but not limited to, house trailers, boat trailers and rental handling
trailers), upon any street or highway in the Township of Whitehall,
without having attached to such trailer a means of mechanical traction
constructed or designed for the purpose of drawing such trailer.
Cementon Area
(No parking of trucks over 11,000 lb. G.V.W.)
Street Between
Leisenring Street Westerly end to Second Street (SR
1027)
Third Street Main Street (SR 0329) to Kemmerer
Street
Olympic Garden Apartments (Fullerton Area)
(No parking of trucks over 11,000 lb. G.V.W.)
Street Between
Corinth Road Overlook Road to Olympic Circle North
Delphi Drive Olympic Circle East to Mickley Road
Olympic Circle East Overlook Road to Olympic Drive
Olympic Circle North Olympic Circle South to Olympic Drive
Olympic Circle South Olympic Circle North to Olympic Circle
East
Olympic Drive Overlook Road to Olympic Drive
Overlook Road South Whitehall/Whitehall Township
boundary to Mickley Road
§ 15-38 RESERVED § 15-39
14:557
Peachtree Village Development (Fullerton Area)
(No parking of trucks over 11,000 lb. G.V.W.)
Street Between
Alberta Drive Sunset Drive to Georgia Drive
Georgia Drive Westerly turnaround circle to easterly
turnaround circle
Presidential Drive South Whitehall/Whitehall Township
boundary near Van Buren Drive to
Mickley Road
Redwood Drive Presidential Drive to Georgia Drive
Sunset Drive Van Buren Drive to private section
south of Presidential Drive
Van Buren Drive South Whitehall/Whitehall Township
boundary to end east of Sunset Drive
West Catasauqua Area
(No parking of trucks over 11,000 lb. G.V.W.)
Street Between
First Avenue Main Street to Pine Street
B. Parking of trucks, buses and certain other vehicles. [Added 4-12-2010
by Ord. No. 2820]
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to park a Registration Class 9 to
Class 25 truck, truck tractor, trailers, commercial buses and the
largest of the three classes of recreational vehicles on any street or
parts of streets within the districts defined in Appendix B-Street
Map-Area Delineation attached to the Benchmark Civil Engineering
Services study, referenced herein as Exhibit A,74 made a part hereof
and incorporated herein by reference.
(2) The aforementioned Benchmark Civil Engineering Services sets
forth in Appendix A, a review of the roadways throughout the
Township and the resulting deficiencies that warrant restricting the
parking of trucks and larger vehicles on public rights-of-way.
(3) The areas identified in Appendix B of the Benchmark Traffic/
Engineering Study contain similar uses, which form a zone. There
are 15 in number, which are color-coded in the street map attached
to Appendix B.
(4) Class of vehicles subject to parking restrictions.
74.Editor's Note: The Traffic Engineering Study Evaluation of Parking Regulations is included
at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-39 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-39
14:558
(a) This subsection applies to any vehicle registered as a Class 9
through Class 25 (Pennsylvania Registration Classification,
hereinafter "PRC") vehicle or above, and any vehicle otherwise
with a gross vehicle weight over 26,001 pounds.
(b) This subsection applies to commercial passenger buses and the
largest of the three classes of recreational vehicles.
(c) This subsection does not apply to vehicles registered in Class 1
through Class 8 (PRC) unless the vehicle in these
classifications is attached to a trailer.
(5) Parking of Class 9 through Class 25 vehicles, including trucks,
truck tractors, trailers, construction equipment or commercial
passenger buses and the largest of the three classes of recreational
vehicles.
(a) No person shall park a vehicle registered as a Class 9 through
Class 25 (PRC) above, including a truck, truck tractor or
trailer, upon any street within the Township unless the truck
trailer has attached thereto a means of mechanical traction so
constructed or designed for the purpose of pulling or drawing
such trailer, and the truck tractor or trailer is only parked on
the street for pick-up or delivery purposes in accordance with
the time provisions and limitations of this subsection.
(b) No person shall stand or park any vehicle defined as a class of
vehicle specifically prohibited in this subsection, including a
truck, truck tractor and trailer or tri-axle dump truck, upon any
public street that lies within any zoning district in Whitehall
Township except as provided in Subsection B(5) below. For the
purposes of this subsection, such area shall include all streets
that either lie within or are abutting the Township lines.
(c) Nothing in this subsection shall be intended to prohibit the
parking of any truck, tractor, truck tractor and trailer or triaxle
dump truck for the purpose of the delivery or pickup of
merchandise, material, or goods or in the performance of
construction operations on an adjoining location from 7:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m., provided that:
[1] The parking of said vehicle shall terminate immediately
upon the conclusion of the services, delivery or pickup of
merchandise, material or goods; and
[2] Such parking shall be limited to a period of no longer than
10 hours, or until the delivery or pickup operation is
completed, whichever is shorter.
(d) Nothing in this subsection shall be intended to prohibit the
parking of any vehicle specifically permitted by the Township,
or to vehicles responding to emergencies, or to any vehicle
§ 15-39 RESERVED § 15-39
14:559
§ 15-40. Parking time limited in certain locations certain days and
hours.
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than
the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Delaware
Lane
West 75 feet north of Ohio
Avenue to a point 30
feet north thereof
Mon-Sat 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Fifth Street East 200 feet north of
Fairmont Avenue and an
alley for a length of 39
feet along 283 Fifth
Street
T-F 9:00 a.m. to
5:30 p.m.;
15 min.
max.
involved in the moving of household goods, provided that a
permit has previously been issued by the Township pursuant to
approved Township ordinance requirements.
(e) Nothing in this subsection shall be intended to prohibit the
parking of any vehicles of service companies, contractors,
repairmen, delivery trucks or others actually engaged in
working operations during the actual period of such work
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Time restrictions
under this section do not apply for emergency service calls.
(f) Notification of violation is not required for the Township Police
Department to issue a citation in violation of this subsection.
(6) All areas of the Township to be controlled by this subsection shall
be signed in accordance with Exhibit A, which adopts the standards
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Motor Vehicle Code
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(7) Penalty. For violation of § 15-39 of the Whitehall Township
Codification, Motor Vehicles and Traffic, or any subsection
thereunder, the following penalty shall be imposed: For violation of
this section, the owner or operator within 10 days of the time when
such notice was attached to his motor vehicle conveyance, pay as a
penalty, in full satisfaction of each violation, the sum of $50 and
after 10 days, but within 20 days of violation, the sum of $100. In
addition to the fine, the Police Department may have the vehicle or
trailer immediately towed if the vehicle is in its judgment posing an
immediate safety hazard.
§ 15-39 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-40
14:560
Street Side Between Days Hours
Fifth Street
[Added
4-9-2012 by
Ord. No.
2894]
West Along No. 522 Fifth
Street for a length of 60
feet
Weekdays 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.;
15 min.
max.
Fifth Street West From Pennsylvania
Street to first alley
south thereof
Mon.-Sat. 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.; 1
hr. max.
First Street East Union Street to a point
75 feet north thereof
Mon.-Sat. 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.;
20 min.
max.
Front Street
[Added
7-10-2006
by Ord. No.
2644]
West Chestnut Street
southwardly 58 feet
along No. 736 Front
Street
Mon.-Fri. 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.; 1
hr. max.
Front Street West From Main Street to a
point 100 feet north
thereof
Everyday All times; 2
hr. max.
Lehigh
Avenue,
South
[Added
2-13-2017
by Ord. No.
3070]
South Fairview Street and a
point 92 feet east
Tues. -
Sun.
8:00 a.m. to
11:00 p.m.;
2 hr. max.
Main Street North From Front to the first
unnamed alley to the
west thereof
Everyday All times;
15 min.
max.
Main Street South From Park Street to a
point 37 feet west
thereof
Everyday All times;
20 min.
max.
Main Street North 4619 Main Street was to
Center Alley
Mon.-Sat. All times; 2
hr max.
Overlook
Road
North 250 feet west of Mickley
Road and 275 feet west
of Mickley Road
Everyday All times;
30 min.
max.
Pershing
Boulevard
North 73 feet east from
Fullerton Avenue
Everyday All times; 1
hr. max.
Pershing
Boulevard
South From Fullerton Avenue
west 90 feet
Mon.-Fri. All times; 3
hr. max.
§ 15-40 RESERVED § 15-40
14:561
Street Side Between Days Hours
Quarry Street North Between Second Street
and Third Street except
in front of No. 215
Quarry Street
Mon.-Fri. 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.; 2
hr. max.
Roosevelt
Street
West Spruce Street to
Hoffman Drive
Mon.-Fri. 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.; 2
hr. max.
Ruch Street West From a point 153 feet
south of Oak Street for
52 feet southwardly
Everyday All times;
20 min.
max.
Second Street East From the Fire House to
the Post Office
Everyday All times;
15 min.
max.
Second Street West From a point 25 feet
south of School Street
46 feet southwardly
Everyday All times;
20 min.
max.
Spruce Street South From a point 36 feet
from Wilson Street for a
distance of 19 feet
Everyday All times;
20 min.
max.
Third Street West From Chestnut Street
for a distance of 71 feet
Everyday All times; 1
hr. max.
Third Street West From Summit Street to
a point 75 feet south
thereof
Mon.-Fri. 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.;
10 min.
max.
Third Street West Quarry Street to Cherry
Street
Mon.-Sat. 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.; 1
hr. max.
§ 15-41. Special purpose parking zones established; parking
otherwise prohibited.
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked,
in any such zone, except as specifically provided for that zone:
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Alberta Drive (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
1944 Alberta Drive Handicapped
Alberta Drive (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
1946 Alberta Drive Handicapped
§ 15-40 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-41
14:562
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Alberta Drive (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
1948 Alberta Drive Handicapped
Alta Drive
(Fullerton)
Bldg. C, 1580 Alta
Drive
Handicapped
Andrew Drive (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
1401 Presidential
Drive
Handicapped
Bridge Street (Egypt)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
4134 Bridge Street Handicapped
Bridge Street (West
Catasauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
2020 Columbia
Avenue
Handicapped
Bridge Street (West
Catasauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
2102 South Lehigh
Avenue
Handicapped
Broad Street (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
122 America Street Handicapped
Broad Street (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
1030 Catasauqua
Road
Handicapped
Carbon Street
(Stiles)
Apt. #51, 3345
Carbon Street
Handicapped
Carbon Street
(Stiles)
Apt. #50, 3345
Carbon Street
Handicapped
Carbon Street
(Stiles)
Apt. #41, 3337
Carbon Street
Handicapped
Catasauqua Road
(Fullerton) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
7 Catasauqua
Avenue
Handicapped
Catasauqua Road
(Fullerton)
1016 Catasauqua
Road
Handicapped
§ 15-41 RESERVED § 15-41
14:563
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Catasauqua Road
(Fullerton)
1151 Catasauqua
Road
Handicapped
Center Street
(Stiles)
Apt. #1, 3400
Center Street
Handicapped
Columbia Avenue (West
Catasauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
2017 Columbia
Avenue
Handicapped
Columbia Street, East
(Stiles) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3332 East
Columbia Street
Handicapped
Coplay Road, North
(Cementon) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
5608 North Coplay
Road
Handicapped
Corinth Road
(Fullerton)
Apt. #9, 1223
Knossos Drive
Handicapped
Corinth Road (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
1229 Pericles Place Handicapped
Corinth Road (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
1573 Pericles Place Handicapped
Delphi Drive (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
1309 Delphi Drive Handicapped
Delphi Drive (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
331 Hill Road Handicapped
East Union Street
(Fullerton)
1132 Catasauqua
Road
Handicapped
Edgewood Lane
(Alley)
South Along St. John's
UCC #525 Grape
Street starting at
Cherry Alley
northwardly for a
length of 25 feet
10-minute dropoff
and pickup,
Monday - Friday
6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
§ 15-41 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-41
14:564
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Fairmont Avenue Apt. #921
Fairmont Avenue
Handicapped
Fairview Street West Bordering the
property of 2012
Fairview Street
Handicapped
Fairview Street East Opposite 2010
Fairview Street
Handicapped
Fernhill Lane (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
1012 Fernhill Lane Handicapped
Fernhill Lane South Bordering the
property of 1034
Fernhill Lane
Handicapped
Fifth Avenue, South
(Stiles) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3315 South Fifth
Avenue
Handicapped
Fifth Avenue, South
(Stiles) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3318 South Fifth
Avenue
Handicapped
Fifth Avenue, South
(Stiles) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3330 South Fifth
Avenue
Handicapped
Fifth Avenue, South
(Stiles) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3411 South Fifth
Avenue
Handicapped
Fifth Street
(Stiles)
East 70 feet north to
Carbon Street
Handicapped
Fifth Street
(Fullerton)
279 Fifth Street Handicapped
Fifth Street
(Fullerton)
301 Fifth Street Handicapped
Fifth Street (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
432 Fifth Street Handicapped
§ 15-41 RESERVED § 15-41
14:565
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Fifth Street (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
505 Fifth Street Handicapped
Fifth Street (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
748 Fifth Street Handicapped
Fifth Street (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
803 Fifth Street Handicapped
Fifth Street (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
818 Fifth Street Handicapped
Fifth Street (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
821 Fifth Street Handicapped
Fifth Street (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
822 Fifth Street Handicapped
Fifth Street South Apt. #140, 3340
5th Avenue
Handicapped
First Avenue, North
(West Catasauqua)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
2221 North First
Avenue
Handicapped
First Avenue, North
(West Catasauqua)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
2223 North First
Avenue
Handicapped
First Avenue East Starting at the
northeast corner
with Wood Street
and extending
northwardly a
distance of 25 feet
Loading and
unloading; 6:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Fourth Street (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
408 Fourth Street Handicapped
Fourth Street (Fullerton)
[Amended 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
826 Fourth Street Handicapped
§ 15-41 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-41
14:566
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Fourth Street
(Fullerton)
West 870 Fourth Street Handicapped
Fourth Street In front of 3010
South Fourth
Street
Handicapped
Front Street [Added
4-10-2006 by Ord. No.
2622]
East Along No. 925
Front Street for a
length of 49 feet
Loading and
unloading;
Monday - Friday,
6:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
Front Street East The south side R/W
of Grape Street
northwardly a
distance of 150
feet
Loading and
unloading
Front Street (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
706 Front Street Handicapped
Front Street (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
1005 Front Street Handicapped
Front Street West 5184 Front Street Handicapped
Front Street (Cementon)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
5327 Front Street Handicapped
Front Street, North
(Hokendauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3023 North Front
Street
Handicapped
Front Street, North
(Hokendauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3420 North Front
Street
Handicapped
Front Street South East Bordering 3236
South Front Street
Handicapped
Front Street South Bob Warke Athletic
Field (2 spaces at
the northwest
corner of Lehigh
Street)
Handicapped
§ 15-41 RESERVED § 15-41
14:567
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Iron Street North Starting at the
existing driveway
approximately 32
feet west of Front
Street's westerly
R/W line,
westwardly for a
length of 45 feet
Loading and
unloading
Georgia Drive (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
1890 Georgia Drive Handicapped
Georgia Drive (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
1892 Georgia Drive Handicapped
Harding Circle
(Fullerton) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
1654 Harding
Circle
Handicapped
Hobson Street (Stiles)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
3114 Hobson
Street
Handicapped
Hobson Street (Stiles)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
3122 Hobson
Street
Handicapped
Hobson Street (Stiles)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
3228 Hobson
Street
Handicapped
Hobson Street (Stiles)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
3305 Hobson
Street
Handicapped
Jefferson Street
(Fullerton) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
525 Jefferson
Street
Handicapped
Jefferson Street
(Fullerton) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
702 Jefferson
Street
Handicapped
Kansas Avenue Bordering the
property of 414
Carolina Avenue
Handicapped
§ 15-41 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-41
14:568
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Kemmerer Street
(Cementon) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
5253 Second
Street
Handicapped
Keystone Avenue South Bordering the
property of 420
Keystone Avenue
Handicapped
Keystone Avenue 425 Keystone
Avenue
Handicapped
Lehigh Avenue 1112 Lehigh
Avenue
Handicapped
Lehigh Avenue South
(West Catasauqua)
2117 South Lehigh
Avenue
Handicapped
Lehigh Avenue South
(West Catasauqua)
2102 South Lehigh
Avenue
Handicapped
Lehigh Avenue South
(West Catasauqua)
2232 North Lehigh
Avenue
Handicapped
Lehigh Street West Properties No.
1114 to No. 1116
Loading and
unloading
Livingston Street Front of the
Michael J.
Nicholson Pool of
Allen Crest
Handicapped
Main Street (Egypt)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
4641 Main Street Handicapped
Maryland Circle
(Fullerton) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
1 Maryland Circle Handicapped
Maryland Circle
(Fullerton)
Apt. #218, 3
Maryland Circle
Handicapped
Maryland Circle
(Fullerton)
Apt. #304, 3
Maryland Circle
Handicapped
Maryland Street West 25 feet north of
Fernhill Lane for a
distance of 20 feet
One handicapped
parking space
§ 15-41 RESERVED § 15-41
14:569
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Melville Street
(Fullerton)
603 Melville Street Handicapped
Mickley Road
(Fullerton)
173 Mickley Road Handicapped
Mickley Road
(Fullerton)
Apt. E, 1000
Mickley Run Apts.
Handicapped
Miller Street
(West Catasauqua)
2124 Columbia
Avenue
Handicapped
Olympic Circle (East)
(Fullerton)
Apt. #3, 1545
Olympic Circle
East
Handicapped
Olympic Circle (East)
(Fullerton)
Apt. #4, 1541
Olympic Circle
East
Handicapped
Olympic Circle (East)
(Fullerton)
Apt. #3, 1201
Overlook Road
Handicapped
Olympic Circle (East)
(Fullerton)
Apt. #A6, 1545
Olympic Circle
East
Handicapped
Olympic Circle (East)
(Fullerton)
Apt. #1, 1565
Olympic Circle
East
Handicapped
Olympic Circle (East)
(Fullerton)
Apt. #3, 1565
Olympic Circle
East
Handicapped
Olympic Circle (North) North In front of 1249
Olympic Circle
North
Handicapped
Olympic Circle (North) North Bordering the
property of 1605
Olympic Circle
North
Handicapped
Olympic Circle (North) Apt. #3, 1580
Olympic Circle
North
Handicapped
§ 15-41 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-41
14:570
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Olympic Circle, North
(Fullerton) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
1556 Olympic
Circle North
Handicapped
Olympic Circle (South) North In front of 1221
Olympic Circle
South
Handicapped
Olympic Circle (South) North Bordering
Apartment No.
1209-1 of Olympic
Garden
Apartments
Handicapped
Olympic Circle (South) Apt. #1221-1
Olympic Circle
South
Handicapped
Olympic Circle (South) Apt. #1249-2
Olympic Circle
South
Handicapped
Olympic Circle (South) Apt. #1, 1203
Olympic Circle
South
Handicapped
Olympic Circle (South) Apt. #4, 1221
Olympic Circle
South
Handicapped
Olympic Circle (South) Apt. $1, 1249
Olympic Circle
South
Handicapped
Orchard Drive
(Fullerton) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
140 Orchard Drive Handicapped
Orchard Drive
(Fullerton) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
202 Orchard Drive Handicapped
Overlook Road North Bordering
Apartment No.
1201-2 of Olympic
Garden
Apartments
Handicapped
Overlook Road 1205 Overlook
Road
Handicapped
§ 15-41 RESERVED § 15-41
14:571
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Overlook Road Apt. #300 A
Mickley Run
Handicapped
Packer Avenue
(Fullerton)
25 Packer Avenue Handicapped
Pennsylvania Street
(Fullerton) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
701 Pennsylvania
Street
Handicapped
Pennsylvania Street
(Fullerton) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
861 Pennsylvania
Street
Handicapped
Pennsylvania Street 5220 Pennsylvania
Street
Handicapped
Presidential Drive
(Fullerton) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
1409 Presidential
Drive
Handicapped
Presidential Drive
(Fullerton) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
1433 Presidential
Drive
Handicapped
Quarry Street North In front of 215
Quarry Street
Loading and
unloading
Quarry Street [Repealed
5-13-2019 by Ord. No.
3150]
Quarry Street
(Hokendauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3300 Quarry Street Handicapped
Ruch Street, North
(Stiles) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3016 North Ruch
Street
Handicapped
Ruch Street, North
(Stiles) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3018 North Ruch
Street
Handicapped
§ 15-41 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-41
14:572
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Second Avenue (West
Catasauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
2124 Second
Avenue
Handicapped
Second Avenue (West
Catasauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
2225 Second
Avenue
Handicapped
Second Avenue (West
Catasauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
2228 Second
Avenue
Handicapped
Second Avenue, South
(Stiles) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3401 South Second
Avenue
Handicapped
Second Street In front of 619
Second Street
Handicapped
Second Street West In front of 862
Second Street
Handicapped
Second Street West In front of 3113
South Second
Street
Handicapped
Second Street East Bordering 5123
Second Street
Handicapped
Second Street
(Cementon) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
5247 Second
Street
Handicapped
Second Street
(Cementon) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
5311 Second
Street
Handicapped
Second Street, North
(Hokendauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3106 North Second
Street
Handicapped
Second Street, North
(Hokendauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3126 North Second
Street
Handicapped
§ 15-41 RESERVED § 15-41
14:573
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Second Street, South
(Hokendauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3150 Lehigh Street Handicapped
Second Street, South
(Hokendauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3151 Lehigh Street Handicapped
Second Street South
(Hokendauqua)
3208 South 2nd
Street
Handicapped
Second Street, South
(Hokendauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3218 Second
Street
Handicapped
Shiloh Court (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
173 Shiloh Court Handicapped
Sixth Street
(Fullerton)
Whitehall Manor Handicapped
Sixth Street (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
575 Grape Street Handicapped
Sixth Street (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
212 Sixth Street Handicapped
Sixth Street
(Fullerton)
220 6th Street Handicapped
Sixth Street (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
835 Sixth Street Handicapped
Sixth Street (Fullerton)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
950 Sixth Street Handicapped
Spruce Street (Egypt)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
4211 Spruce Street Handicapped
Spruce Street In front of 4329
Spruce Street
Handicapped
Spruce Street 4351 Spruce Street Handicapped
§ 15-41 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-41
14:574
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Spruce Street 4225 Spruce Street Handicapped
Summit Street
(Fullerton) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
801 Fifth Street Handicapped
Summit Street North From Third Street
to a point 25 feet
east thereof
Loading and
unloading
Summit Street 802 3rd Street Handicapped
Third Avenue (West
Catasauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
2230 Main Street Handicapped
Third Avenue, North
(Stiles) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3012 North Third
Avenue
Handicapped
Third Street (Cementon)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
5221 Third Street Handicapped
Third Street (Cementon)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
5235 Third Street Handicapped
Third Street (Cementon)
[Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3002]
5239 Third Street Handicapped
Third Street, North
(Hokendauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3015 North Third
Street
Handicapped
Third Street, North
(Hokendauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3017 North Third
Street
Handicapped
Third Street, North
(Hokendauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3019 North Third
Street
Handicapped
§ 15-41 RESERVED § 15-41
14:575
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Third Street, North
(Hokendauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3024 North Third
Street
Handicapped
Third Street, North
(Hokendauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3108 North Third
Street
Handicapped
Third Street, North
(Hokendauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3110 North Third
Street
Handicapped
Third Street, North
(Hokendauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3112 North Third
Street
Handicapped
Union Street 2101 North First
Avenue
Handicapped
Union Street, East
(Fullerton) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
1132 Catasauqua
Road
Handicapped
Union Street, East South Bordering House
No. 158 East Union
Street
Handicapped
Union Street, East
(Fullerton) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
216 East Union
Street
Handicapped
Union Street, East
(Fullerton) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
1133 Third Street Handicapped
Union Street, West South In front of 309
West Union
Handicapped
Union Street, West Whitehall Manor Handicapped
Washington Avenue
(Cementon) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
5023 Washington
Avenue
Handicapped
§ 15-41 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-41
14:576
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Washington Avenue
(Cementon) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
5159 Washington
Avenue
Handicapped
Water Street
(Hokendauqua) [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3002]
3227 Water Street Handicapped
Water Street
(Hokendauqua)
3241 Water Street Handicapped
Water Street
(Hokendauqua)
3239 Water Street Handicapped
Wood Street South Starting at the
southeast corner
with Center Street
(alley) and
extending
eastwardly a
distance of 25 feet.
Loading and
unloading; 6:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
§ 15-42. Angle parking required on portions of certain streets.
§ 15-43. Parking prohibited on portions of certain highways during
street sweeping hours.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow the same to
remain parked, at any time between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on any of the
following portions of the highways of the Township of Whitehall on the days
hereby respectively designated for street sweeping purposes:
Street Between Day
(Reserved)
A. Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of
streets:
Street Side Between
Pershing Boulevard North Fullerton Avenue and Melville
Street
Pershing Boulevard Fifth Avenue and Fullerton Avenue
B. On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked at
the angle shall be parked with its front nearest the curb.
§ 15-41 RESERVED § 15-44
14:577
§ 15-44. No stopping or standing.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the
purpose of loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted
on the following named streets on Monday through Saturday, between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and
4:00 p.m., and for no longer than necessary for the loading or unloading.
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 15-45. Residential permit parking.
A. Findings and purpose. The Township of Whitehall finds that:
(1) Certain residential areas in the Township are subjected to
commuter vehicle parking, therefore, depriving the residents of
those areas of spaces in which to park their own vehicles.
(2) Those residential streets are also subjected to a high degree of
commuter traffic which substantially reduces the quality of the
ambient air level.
(3) The establishment of a parking permit program for certain affected
areas should facilitate efficient movement of traffic by providing for
parking preference during certain hours of the day and days of the
week. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners considers it to be in
the interest of the people of the Township to provide for the
establishment of a residential permit parking program to insure
primary access to available parking spaces by neighborhood
residents and also to provide a cleaner ambient air level.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, words and terms listed in
this subsection, as follows, shall have the following meanings:
COMMUTER VEHICLE — A motor vehicle parked in a residential area
by a person not a resident of that residential area.
PROPRIETOR — A person who owns or leases real estate within a
residential area of which he is not a resident, but who owns or manages
a business enterprise or professional office maintained at that address;
for the purpose of this section, a proprietor shall be entitled to one
parking permit for that business or professional office address.
RESIDENT — A person who owns or leases real property within a
residential area and who maintains either a voting residence, or bona
fide occupancy, or both, at that address.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — A contiguous area containing public highways
or parts of public highways primarily abutted by residential property or
§ 15-44 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-45
14:578
residential and non-business property (such as schools, parks, places of
worship, hospitals and nursing homes).
C. Criteria. The residential areas designated in Subsection D of this
section are those deemed impacted and hence eligible for residential
parking on the basis of the following criteria:
(1) During any period between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:30 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday, except legal holidays, the number of
vehicles parked (or standing), legally or illegally, on the streets in
the area is equal to 70% or more of the legal, on-street parking
capacity of the area. For the purpose of this criterion, a legal
parking space shall be 20 linear feet.
(2) Specific areas.
(a) During the same period as specified in Subsection C(1),
directly above, 10% or more of the vehicles parked (or
standing) on the streets in the area are not registered in the
name of a person residing in the area. For the purpose of this
criterion, the latest available information from the Bureau of
Motor Vehicles and Licensing of the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation regarding registration of motor vehicles
shall be used.
(b) Provided that in determining that a specific area identified as
impacted and eligible for residential permit parking is
designated as a residential permit parking area, the following
factors are taken into consideration:
[1] The local and metropolitan needs with respect to clean air
and environment.
[2] The possibility of a reduction in total vehicle miles driven
in the Township.
[3] The likelihood of alleviating traffic congestion, illegal
parking and related health and safety hazards.
[4] The proximity of public transportation to the residential
area.
[5] The desire and need of the residents for residential permit
parking and their willingness to bear the administrative
costs in connection with it.
[6] The need for parking in excess of the residential permit
parking program in proximity to establishments located in
the residential permit parking area and used by the
general public for religious, health or educational
purposes.
D. Designation of residential permit parking areas.
§ 15-45 RESERVED § 15-45
14:579
(1) The following are designated as residential permit parking areas:
Area Bounded By And Including
Fullerton Parking Permit
Area [Added 12-14-2015
by Ord. No. 3038]
Quarry Street, north side, between
Third Street and Second Street (19);
Quarry Street, south side, between
Third Street and Second Street (13);
Quarry Street south side, between
Second Street and Front Street (16);
Second Street, east side, between
Quarry Street and Grape Street (13);
and Second Street, west side,
between Quarry Street and Chestnut
Street (13)
Mickley Gardens
Subdivision
Dogwood Circle, Dogwood Drive,
North side of Mechanicsville Road*,
Rosewood Circle, Rosewood Lane,
Rosewood Place**
*From Route 145 to Brynwood Drive
**Permit parking is required on any and all days in which the
Whitehall-Coplay School District is in session between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. Permits shall (i) be issued by the
Chief of Police to each affected household or resident, (ii) be
hung on the rear view mirror, (iii) be used for licensed motor
vehicles registered at the address of the household to which the
permit is assigned or for licensed motor vehicles of visitors of the
household, (iv) be issued at no cost to the household or resident,
(v) be valid until revoked by the Chief of Police, and (vi) not
have vehicle or driver's information set forth thereon. Penalties for
violations of the restrictions set forth herein for permit parking
in the Mickley Garden Subdivision shall be $10 per violation. The
Bureau of Police shall maintain an inventory of all permits and the
households to which said permits are assigned.
(2) Signs shall be erected along the streets in each residential permit
parking area, indicating the days, hours, locations and conditions
under which parking shall be by permit only.
E. Application for permit. Application for a residential parking permit shall
be made to the Chief of Police by the person desiring the permit, who
shall be only the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle who resides on
or is a proprietor of property immediately adjacent to a street or other
location within a residential parking permit area. A separate
application shall be required for each motor vehicle, and each
application shall be accompanied by a permit fee, set pursuant to a
resolution of the Board of Commissioners which shall be for the use of
the Township, to be applied to the cost of administering the residential
permit parking program. Each application shall contain the following
§ 15-45 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-45
14:580
information: the name of the owner or the driver, as the case may be,
of the motor vehicle; the address of the resident or the proprietor, as
the case may be; the make, model and registration number of the motor
vehicle; and the driver number as taken from the applicant's current
driver's license. At the discretion of the Chief of Police, the applicant
shall be required, at the time of making application, to present his
driver's license and the vehicle registration card.
F. Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of the application and the permit fee,
and determination by him that the information upon the application
shows that the applicant is entitled to a residential parking permit, the
Chief of Police shall issue to the applicant a residential parking permit,
which shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar year. The permit
shall display the serial and registration numbers of the motor vehicles,
the residential parking area number, and the expiration date. The
permit shall be renewable annually before the expiration date, upon
making application for renewal and payment of the permit fee. It shall
be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to display
other than the current and valid permit while standing or parking in a
residential permit parking area at any time when those permits are to
be displayed.
G. Temporary and exemption parking permits. Temporary parking permits
may be issued by the Chief of Police, upon payment of a fee established
pursuant to a resolution, to bona fide visitors of residents of a
designated residential permit parking area, and exemption parking
permits may be issued, without payment of a fee, to handicapped
persons.
H. Responsibility of permit holder.
(1) Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the
holder of a residential parking permit shall be permitted to stand or
park a motor vehicle operated by him in any designated residential
parking area during those times when parking of motor vehicles is
permitted in that area. While a vehicle for which a residential
parking permit has been issued is so parked, that permit shall be
displayed so as to be clearly visible through the windshield of the
vehicle. A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve
to the holder a parking space within a designated residential
permit parking area.
(2) A residential parking permit shall not authorize its holder to stand
or park a motor vehicle in any place where or at any time when
stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles is prohibited or set
aside for other specified types of vehicles, nor shall the permit
exempt its holder from the observance of any traffic or parking
regulation other than residential permit parking regulation or
restriction.
§ 15-45 RESERVED § 15-45
14:581
§ 15-46. Illegal parking penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more the $20 and costs or prosecution,
except for violations of handicapped designated parking spaces, provided:
(3) No person other than the permit holder whose name appears on the
permit shall use a residential parking permit or display it on a
vehicle operated; any such use or display by a person other than
the permit holder shall constitute a violation of this section by the
permit holder and by the person who so used or displayed the
parking permit.
(4) It shall constitute a violation of this section for any person falsely to
represent himself as eligible for a residential parking permit or to
furnish false information in an application to the Chief of Police in
order to obtain a residential parking permit.
(a) Revocation of permits. The Chief of Police shall have authority
to revoke the residential parking permit of any permit holder
found to be in violation of any provision of this section. Upon
written notification to him of the revocation, the permit holder
shall surrender the permit to the Chief of Police. Failure to do
so, when so requested, shall constitute a violation of this
section. Provided: any person receiving such a notice may,
within 10 days after the date of the notice, appeal to the Board
of Commissioners for a hearing on the revocation, and the
decision of the Board of Commissioners shall be final.
A. Violation procedures.
(1) It shall be the duty of the police officers and of the parking
enforcement personnel of the Township to report to the appropriate
official all violations of any provision of this article indicating in
each case:
(a) The section violated;
(b) The license number of the vehicle involved in the violation;
(c) The location where the violation took place; and
(d) Any other facts that might be necessary in order to secure a
clear understanding of the circumstances attending to the
violation.
(2) The police officer making the report shall also attach to or place
upon every such vehicle illegally parked a notice stating that the
vehicle was parked in violation of the ordinances of Whitehall
Township. The notice shall contain instructions to the owner or
driver of the vehicle that if he will report to the office of the Chief of
police and pay the sum of $10 within 48 hours after the time of the
§ 15-45 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-46
14:582
notice, or if he will place the sum of $10 by check or money
order, in the U.S. mail addressed to the Whitehall Township Police
Department and postmarked within 48 hours of the violation, that
act will save the violator from prosecution for that offense and from
payment of the full time and costs prescribed in the first sentence
of this section.
B. The police officer making the report shall also attach to or place upon
every such vehicle illegally parked a notice stating that the vehicle was
parked in violation of the ordinances of Whitehall Township. The notice
shall contain instructions to the owner or driver of the vehicle that he
will report to the office of the Chief of Police and pay the sum of $20
within 48 hours after the time of the notice, or if he will place the sum of
$20 by check or money order, in the U.S. Mail addressed to the
Whitehall Township Police Department and postmarked within 48 hours
of the violation, that act will save the violator from prosecution for that
offense and from payment of the full time and costs prescribed in the
first sentence of this section. [Amended 5-13-2019 by Ord. No.
3152]
§ 15-46 RESERVED § 15-46
14:583

ARTICLE V
Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 15-47. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a-22) of the Vehicle Code,
and gives authority to the Township to remove and impound those vehicles
which are parked in a tow-away zone and in violation of parking regulations
of this chapter. Vehicles which have been abandoned (as defined by the
Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a manner as to interfere with
traffic or pose a hazard to others, may be towed under the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 15-48. Authority to remove and impound.
The Township shall have authority to remove and impound, or to order
the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 15-47 of this article. Provided, no such vehicle shall be
removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions of this
article, or the provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 15-49. Tow away zones designated.
The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established
as tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice
that their vehicles may be towed for violation of the Township parking
regulations:
Street Side Between Parking Lot
(Reserved)
§ 15-50. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding; towing
and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by "approved storage garages" that shall be designated from time to time
by the Board of Commissioners. Every such garage shall submit evidence
to the Board of Commissioners that it is bonded or has acquired liability
insurance in an amount satisfactory to the Board of Commissioners as
sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or
damage to those vehicles while in the custody of the garage keeper for the
purpose of towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall submit
to the Board of Commissioners its schedule of charges for towing and
storage of vehicles under this article, and, when the schedule is approved by
Board of Commissioners, those charges shall be adhered to by the approved
storage garage; no different schedule of charges shall be demanded of or
collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or impounded under
this article by any approved storage garage. The Board of Commissioners
shall delete from its list of approved storage garages any garage that
§ 15-47 RESERVED § 15-50
14:585
makes any unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle removed or
impounded under this article.
§ 15-51. Payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provision of this article for which the vehicle was removed or
impounded.
§ 15-52. Reclamation costs.
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage
costs, plus a $25 fee of which $10 shall be transferred to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation by the garage to which the vehicle was taken.
§ 15-53. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Township of Whitehall shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles
impounded under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times
to furnish the owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with
information as to the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 15-54. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article or the Vehicle
Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the
time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness
and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 15-55. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 together with all costs
of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 P.S.
§ 7301 et seq., (1977) as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 15-56. Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with § 7311 of The Vehicle
Code, by the person having legal custody of the vehicle. If the vehicle
has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be transferred to a
licensed Salvor who will then be responsible for filing the proper reports
and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
73 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., as
amended).
§ 15-50 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-56
14:586
ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Emergency
§ 15-57. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHAINS — Full chains, strap chains or other types of chains mounted on
both rear wheels of a motorized vehicle.
EMERGENCY DIRECTOR — Any Township employee designated from time
to time by the Mayor as the Emergency Director.[Amended 6-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
EMERGENCY ROUTES — All streets in the Township so designated and
marked.
SNOW — Any precipitation depositing any accumulation on the streets
including, snow, sleet, hail, ice and freezing rain.
SNOW EMERGENCY — A state of highway conditions caused by snow
that is hazardous and dangerous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic and so
declared by the Emergency Director.
SNOW TIRES — Tires having reads designed for use in snow, which tires
must be in such condition as to serve the purpose for which they are
designed.
VEHICLES — All self-propelled motorized vehicles using Township streets
and highways including taxicabs, but excluding other public transportation
conveyances.
§ 15-58. Emergency routes.
The Township shall, by ordinance, designate streets which are necessary
thoroughfares for the movement of vehicular traffic through the Township
of Whitehall as "emergency routes." (See § 15-61 hereof.)
§ 15-59. Posting emergency routes.
All streets designated as "emergency routes" shall be posted with suitable
signs or markers at points where any street or highway affected thereby
joins other streets or highways and, in any case, at intervals not exceeding
1,500 feet, which signs shall bear the words "Emergency Route — No
Parking."
§ 15-60. Snow emergency.
When, in the opinion of the Emergency Director, the actual or expected
precipitation of snow will create hazardous or dangerous highway
conditions for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, he shall have the authority to
declare a "snow emergency."
§ 15-57 RESERVED § 15-60
14:587
§ 15-61. Snow emergency routes designated. [Amended 6-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009; 5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 3153]
The following streets shall be designated as "Emergency Routes" in time of
emergency as declared by the Mayor or designated representative:
Street From To Restrictions
Catasauqua Road
(Fullerton area)
Lehigh Avenue Third Street (SR
1015)
No parking, both
sides
Fairmount
Avenue
(Fullerton area)
MacArthur Road
(SR 0145)
Fifth Street No parking, both
sides
Fifth Street
(Fullerton area)
Park Street/St.
Paul Street
intersection
South end bridge
of US Route 22
(SR0022)
No parking, both
sides
First Avenue
(West
Catasauqua area)
Pine Street Main Street No parking, both
sides
Front Street
(Cementon area)
Main Street (SR
0329)
Second Street
(SR 1027)
No parking, both
sides
Grape Street
(Fullerton area)
Third Street (SR
1015)
Front Street No parking, both
sides
Lehigh Avenue
(West
Catasauqua area)
Bridge Street (SR
1004)
Catasauqua Road No parking, both
sides
North Church
Street (Egypt
area)
Main Street (SR
0329)
Hoffman Drive No parking, both
sides
A. The Emergency Director shall immediately inform the public of the
snow emergency by issuing a press release to the local radio and news
services.
B. The snow emergency shall continue in force and effect until the
Emergency Director declares it to be over in the same manner as
provided in Subsection A.
C. One hour after a snow emergency has been declared and during its
existence:
(1) No vehicle shall be parked on a snow emergency route.
(2) Any person who drives a vehicle without chains or snow tires upon
any street in the Township of Whitehall and such vehicle becomes
stalled or incapable of moving under its own power, or who leaves
such vehicle unattended, shall be in violation of this article and
shall be subject to the penalties set forth herein.
§ 15-60 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-61
14:588
Street From To Restrictions
Overlook Road
(Fullerton area)
Mickley Road 300 feet east of
Forest Road
No parking,
north side only
Presidential
Drive (Fullerton
area)
Hoover Lane Andrew Drive No parking,
south side only
Roosevelt Street
(Egypt area)
Spruce Street Main Street (SR
0329)
No parking,
northwest side
only
Ruch Street
(Stiles area)
Chestnut Street/
West Coplay
Road intersect
Center Street No parking, west
side only
Spruce Street
(Egypt Area)
Main Street (SR
0329)
Roosevelt Street No parking, both
sides
§ 15-62. Towing during snow emergencies.
All vehicles parked, stalled, incapable of moving under their own power or
left unattended on streets and which are obstructing traffic or the necessary
and required snow plowing and clearing of the streets of the Township,
are declared to be public nuisances and may be towed and impounded in
accordance with provisions of this article.
§ 15-63. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-13-2019 by Ord. No.
3153]
A. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 15-57 of this article, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a
motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency
route, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article, and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and
costs.
B. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 15-57 of this article, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route, without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 15-61 RESERVED § 15-63
14:589

ARTICLE VII
Regulation of Pedalcycles and Nonmotorized Vehicles
§ 15-64. Riding and parking of pedalcycles on sidewalks along
certain streets prohibited.
§ 15-65. Restrictions on use of pushcarts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to park a pedalcycle on the
sidewalk along the following portions of the streets in the Township of
Whitehall:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
A. The word "pushcart," as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle,
including a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power, and used or
intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods,
wares or merchandise.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the
pushcart to a location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from
which goods, wares or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under
permit from the Mayor as provided in Subsection C of this section.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any sidewalk
except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit from the
Mayor. Every such permit shall be issued to the person making
application for the permit, upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the
use of the Township set by the Mayor pursuant to a resolution. The
permit shall be granted to the applicant, upon payment of the fee, and
upon his signing an agreement with the Mayor that he shall be bound
by the conditions imposed by Mayor and made a part of the permit,
dealing with the following matters: [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(1) Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more
stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at
each location;
(2) Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations
carried on;
§ 15-64 RESERVED § 15-65
14:591
§ 15-66. Skates, skateboards, coasters, sleds and other toy vehicles.
(3) Requiring that there be no violation of any law, ordinance or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food
or drink.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any condition
of any permit granted under this section, shall be guilty of a summary
offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a sled upon any sidewalk in
the Township of Whitehall, or upon any roadway unless that roadway is
on a portion of a street blocked off for sledding by authority of § 15-5 of
Article I or § 15-26 of Article II of this chapter. Provided: nothing in this
subsection shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a sled, with or
without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roller-skating,
skateboarding or to ride upon or propel any coaster or other toy vehicle
upon:
(1) Any street except in order to cross the roadway; or,
(2) Any sidewalk located in a business district, except that nothing in
this subsection shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a coaster or
other toy vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
§ 15-65 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-66
14:592
ARTICLE VIII
Pedestrian Regulations
§ 15-67. Pedestrians to obey traffic-control signs.
At all locations in the Township of Whitehall where official traffic-control
signals are installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by
pedestrian-control signals installed under § 15-68 of this article, shall obey
the directions of those traffic-control signals, as follows:
§ 15-68. Pedestrian-control signal locations established.
§ 15-69. Locations where pedestrian crossing in unmarked
crosswalks restricted.
Except when authorized by a police officer or other appropriately attired
person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, it shall be unlawful
for any pedestrian to cross the roadway at any of the following streets, at
the intersection with that street indicated.
A. When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk.
B. When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to cross
the roadway.
C. When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
A. At the following locations, official pedestrian-control signals shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected):
Location
B. Every pedestrian facing a steady or flashing "Don't Walk" signal shall
obey the directions of that signal, as follows:
(1) When facing a steady "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any
pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk"
signal should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't
Walk" signal is showing.
(2) When facing a flashing "Don't Walk" signal a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the "Walk"
indication should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone.
C. Any pedestrian who fails to obey the directions of a "Don't Walk" signal,
as indicated above, shall be guilty of an offense and a violation of this
article.
§ 15-67 RESERVED § 15-69
14:593
Street Intersection Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
§ 15-70. Locations where pedestrians may cross only in crosswalk.
§ 15-71. Violations and penalties.
Any pedestrian who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$5 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian:
(1) To cross any roadway in a business district within the Township
except in a crosswalk.
(2) To cross the roadway, in any of the following portions of streets in
the Township, except in a crosswalk:
Street Between
(Reserved)
B. Provided, nothing in this section shall permit any pedestrian to cross in
a crosswalk at any location where that crossing is prohibited by § 15-68
of this article.
§ 15-69 WHITEHALL CODE § 15-71
14:594
Chapter 16
PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 15-71 RESERVED § 15-71
14:595

ARTICLE I
Park Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 7-19-1976 by Ord. No. 1211]
§ 16-1. Requirements concerning use of grounds and facilities.
Each person, firm or corporation using the public parks and grounds within
the Township shall remove all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are
permitted and leave the premises and facilities in good order and in a neat
and sanitary condition.
§ 16-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation using such parks to
either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts:
A. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or
remove any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings,
paving or paving material, waterlines or other public utilities or parts of
appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary
or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers or
other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
B. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in or adjacent
to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into
such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will
or may result in the pollution of said waters.
C. Dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes,
cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or other refuse. No such refuse or
trash shall be placed in any body of water in or contiguous to any park
or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the
proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are
not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from
the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly
disposed of elsewhere.
D. Disturb the peace or use any profane, obscene or blasphemous
language.
E. Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act.
F. Commit any assault, battery or engage in fighting.
G. Violate any rule adopted by the Board of Commissioners regulating the
use of the park.
H. Prevent any person from using any park or any of its facilities or
interfere with such use in compliance with this article and the rules
applicable to such use.
§ 16-1 RESERVED § 16-2
14:597
§ 16-3. Hours of operation. [Added 11-11-1976 by Ord. No. 1222;
amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
All public parks shall be opened daily to the public during daylight hours.
Individuals participating in activities specially lighted for evening activity
shall be permitted to remain in the parks until 10:00 p.m., providing they
are active participants and providing they remain in the lighted areas. It
shall be unlawful for any person or persons (other than Township personnel
conducting Township business), to occupy or to be present in said park in
any area or during any hours in which the park is not open to the public.
Extensions to these hours may be granted by the Mayor or the Board of
Commissioners in the case of Township sponsored or scheduled events.
§ 16-4. Other regulations. [Amended 11-11-1976 by Ord. No. 1222;
10-12-1978 by Ord. No. 1286]
§ 16-5. Enforcement of regulations.
The Bureau of Police shall enforce the provisions of this article and any
other ordinance relating to the use of said park.
I. Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any
park, except in such waters and at such places are provided therefor,
and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may
be hereafter adopted.
A. Special activities. It shall be unlawful to engage in special activities
including flying model airplanes, golf practice and ice skating, except at
locations specifically designated for such activities by the Township
Board of Commissioners. Areas for such activities may be reserved by
groups for use at specified times.
B. Automobiles. It shall be unlawful to drive or park any automobile except
on a street, driveway or parking lot in any park or to park or leave any
such vehicle in any place other than one established for public parking.
C. Sales. It shall be unlawful for any person other than employees and
officials of this park district acting on behalf of this district to vend, sell,
peddle or offer for sale any commodity or article within any park.
D. Signs. It shall be unlawful for anyone to paste, glue, tack or otherwise
post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall
any person erect or cause to be erected by sign whatever on any public
lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park; Provided, that these
provisions shall not apply to any properly authorized government
official in pursuit of any official duty.
§ 16-2 WHITEHALL CODE § 16-6
14:598
§ 16-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-17-1995 by Ord. No.
1944; 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense. Provided, any
violation of any provision of this article, which also constitutes a violation
of any provision in any of the laws of the State of Pennsylvania, shall be
prosecuted under the law and not under this article.
§ 16-6 RESERVED § 16-6
14:599

ARTICLE II
Animals Prohibited
[Adopted 10-12-1978 by Ord. No. 1286]
§ 16-7. Animals.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal, or any person having
possession or custody of any animal, to cause, suffer or permit an animal
to be present upon public or privately-owned parks and playground areas
open to the public in Whitehall Township. "Owner" shall mean any person
or person, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping or harboring an
animal.
§ 16-8. Deposit of fecal matter prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal, or any person having
possession or custody of any animal, to permit the same to discharge or
deposit any fecal matter on public or privately-owned parks and playground
areas open to the public in the Township.
§ 16-9. Removal of fecal matter deposited by animals.
The owner of any animal shall be required to remove immediately any fecal
matter deposited by said animal on the property of another and dispose of
the fecal matter in a sanitary manner, to prevent any such accumulation
from becoming a danger to the public health. Property of another shall
mean publicly or privately-owned property.
§ 16-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-17-1995 by Ord. No.
1944; 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 16-7 RESERVED § 16-10
14:601

ARTICLE III
Athletic Fields, Game Courts or Park Pavilions
[Adopted 5-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1883; amended in its entirety
10-9-2006 by Ord. No. 2652]
§ 16-11. Reservation fee and proof of insurance required.
A reservation fee and proof of insurance is hereby established for the use of
athletic fields, courts for play of basketball, volleyball, or tennis; and opensided
pavilions owned by or maintained by the Township.
§ 16-12. Reservation cards.
The person or team reserving the field, court or pavilion shall obtain a
Whitehall Township Recreation Facility Permit Card from the Township
upon payment of the fee and proof of insurance and shall have that card
in their possession at all times while using the reserved facility. Persons or
teams using an athletic field, game court or pavilion without reservation
shall yield the facility to a person or team with such a valid reservation card.
§ 16-13. Fee established.
The reservation fee is hereby established as $25 per use per field, game
court or open-sided pavilion. This fee may hereinafter be revised by the
Board of Commissioners by resolution from time to time as they may deem
appropriate. A "use" shall be the expected length of a game or event, as
determined by the Bureau Chief of Recreation of Whitehall Township.
§ 16-14. Amount of required insurance established.
The amount of insurance required shall be in the following amounts:
§ 16-15. Exemptions.
A. Personal injury or death: $500,000 each occurrence; $1,000,000
aggregate.
B. Property damage: $250,000.
A. Notwithstanding the above, Whitehall Township Resident League
Teams or groups shall be entitled to reserve a field, court or pavilion
without the payment of the reservation fee. Such fee-exempt groups
shall include:
(1) A group which lists a minimum of 80% of its members as Whitehall
Township residents by its official roster or membership list.
(2) A group representing Whitehall Township Playground Athletic
Associations.
(3) A group composed of members of a service officially recognized
and otherwise funded in whole or in part by the Township of
§ 16-11 RESERVED § 16-15
14:603
Whitehall (i.e., volunteer fireman's league, Environmental Advisory
Council, etc.).
(4) A private nonprofit group with official offices in Whitehall Township
(i.e., V.F.W., Church, Rotary Club, etc.).
B. Fee exempt groups must still obtain a valid Whitehall Township
recreation facility permit from the Township to reserve playing fields,
courts or pavilions.
§ 16-15 WHITEHALL CODE § 16-15
14:604
Chapter 17
RESERVED
Chapter 18
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL; WATER SUPPLY
§ 16-15 RESERVED § 16-15
17:605

ARTICLE I
Sewage and Industrial Waste
[Adopted 10-14-2019 by Ord. No. 317875]
§ 18-1.1. Adoption of standards.
Allentown Ordinance No. 15346, attached hereto as Exhibit A is adopted as
Article I of Chapter 18 of the Codified Ordinances of Whitehall Township,
Sewage and Industrial Waste.76 All rules and regulations and prior
provisions of this article inconsistent herewith are altered and repealed to
the extent that they are inconsistent herewith.
75.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Sewage and Industrial Waste,
adopted 4-18-1997 by Ord. No. 2025, as amended.
76.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 18-1.1 RESERVED § 18-1.1
17:607

ARTICLE II
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 1-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2-2012; amended in its entirety
10-14-2019 by Ord. No. 3178]
§ 18-2. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Whitehall Township Holding Tank
Ordinance."
§ 18-2.1. Statutory authority.
This article is authorized by the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law, Act
of 1937, June 22, P.L. 1987, as amended, 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.; the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of 1966, Jan. 24, P.L. (1965) 1535,
as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.; and, by the applicable regulations of the
Department of Environmental Protection including specifically 25 PA Code,
Section 71.63.
§ 18-2.2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the installation, maintenance,
and removal of holding tanks; and to provide a means of assuring that
proper security is provided to enable the Township of Whitehall to properly
remove such tanks should the owner thereof default on his responsibilities;
and to establish penalties for violations of said article.
§ 18-2.3. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them herein.
ACT 537 — The Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S.
§ 750.1 et seq; also known as the "Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act."
BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Whitehall,
Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
DEP — The Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
E.D.U. — An equivalent dwelling unit, and for the purposes of this article
is defined to be a volume measurement in gallons per day of expected
sanitary sewage flow equal to that generated by a single-family residential
establishment. For the purposes of this article, that expected sanitary
sewage flow shall be 400 gallons per day.
HOLDING TANK — A tank, whether permanent or temporary, to which
sewage is conveyed by a water-carrying system.
OFFICIAL SEWAGE FACILITY PLAN — The Whitehall Township Act 537
Sewage Facilities Plan as approved by the DEP.
§ 18-2 RESERVED § 18-2.3
17:609
PERSON — Any individual, association, public or private corporation for
profit or not for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department, board,
bureau, or agency of the commonwealth or other political subdivision,
municipality, district, authority, or any other legal entity whatsoever
recognized by law. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing a
penalty or imposing a fine or imprisonment, the term "person" shall include
the members of an association, partnership or firm and the officers of any
local agency or municipality, public or private corporation, whether for
profit or not for profit.
RETAINING TANK — A watertight receptacle that receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the
sewage at another site.
SEWAGE — A substance that contains the waste products or excrement or
other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals and noxious or
deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the public health, or to
animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic water supply or
for recreation, or which constitutes pollution under the Pennsylvania Clean
Streams Law.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — The official of Whitehall
Township who issues permits, reviews permit applications and sewage
facilities planning modules, and conducts investigations and inspections
necessary to implement the Sewage Facilities Act and the regulations
thereunder.
§ 18-2.4. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons owning any property
within Whitehall Township serviced by a holding tank for the first time
after the effective date of this article and to all persons within Whitehall
Township installing, repairing, altering, or removing a holding tank. This
article shall not apply to existing holding tanks lawfully in use at the time of
the enactment of this article.
§ 18-2.5. Limitation on permitted tanks.
Permits may be issued only for holding tanks that receive only one E.D.U. of
inflow per day or less.
§ 18-2.6. Permit requirements.
All permits issued shall meet the following requirements:
A. No person shall install, construct, or alter a holding tank system
without first obtaining a permit indicating that the site and the plans
and specifications of such system are in compliance with the provisions
and standards adopted pursuant to Act 537.
B. No holding tank shall be covered from view until approval to cover the
same has been given by the SEO. If 72 hours have elapsed, excepting
§ 18-2.3 WHITEHALL CODE § 18-2.6
17:610
§ 18-2.7. Inspections.
The SEO shall have the right to conduct inspections of holding tanks as
follows:
Sundays and holidays, since the SEO issuing the permit received
notification of completion of construction, the applicant may cover said
system or structure unless permission has been specifically refused by
the SEO.
C. The Board may require applicants for holding tank permits to notify the
Township's SEO of the schedule for construction of the holding tank so
that inspections in addition to the final inspection required by Act 537
may be scheduled and performed by the SEO.
D. No zoning permit, building permit, or occupancy permit shall be issued
by Whitehall Township or its designated Zoning Officer for a building
which will contain a holding tank until a valid permit under this article
and Act 537 has been obtained from the SEO.
E. No zoning, building, or occupancy permit shall be issued and no work
shall begin on any alteration or conversion of any existing structure if
served by a holding tank if said alteration or conversion will result in an
increase or potential increase in sewage flows from the structure until
the structure's owner receives from the SEO either a permit for
alteration or replacement of the existing holding tank or written
notification that such a permit will not be required. The SEO shall
determine whether the proposed alteration or conversion of the
structure will result in increased sewage flows.
F. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any structure to be
served by a holding tank until the owner of said structure has entered
into an agreement and provided the security required under this article.
G. A permit for a holding tank may be issued only when the SEO has
certified that an existing system has failed and that the site is
unsuitable for any replacement system so that a holding tank is
necessary to remedy the existing system failure, or in the alternative
that the Board allows such system on the basis that the area where the
holding tank will be installed will be connected to a community sewage
system within one year of the installation of the holding tank unless an
extension of time has been approved by the Sewage Enforcement
Officer and the Township, for a period not to exceed three years so that
said holding tank will be for a temporary measure only.
A. The SEO shall conduct, at a minimum, an annual inspection of each
holding tank within the Township and prepare a written inspection
report, one copy of which shall be delivered to the owner of the
property, and one copy shall be retained by the SEO.
B. In addition to required yearly inspections, any holding tank may be
inspected by the SEO at any reasonable time.
§ 18-2.6 RESERVED § 18-2.7
17:611
§ 18-2.8. Restrictions on discharge.
Only normal domestic wastes shall be discharged into any holding tank. The
following shall not be discharged into a holding tank system:
§ 18-2.9. Maintenance duties.
Every owner of a lot with a holding tank shall have the following duties of
maintenance:
C. All inspections may include a physical tour of the property, the taking of
samples from surface water, wells, other groundwater sources, the
sampling of the contents of the holding tank itself and/or the
introduction of a traceable substance into the interior plumbing of the
structure served to ascertain the path and ultimate destination of
wastewater generated in the structure.
D. The SEO shall have the right to enter upon all land for the purpose of
inspections described above.
A. Industrial waste.
B. Automobile oil and/or other nondomestic oil.
C. Toxic and/or hazardous substances and/or chemicals, including, but not
limited to, pesticides, disinfectants, acids, paints, paint thinners,
herbicides, gasoline and/or other solvents.
D. Surface water or groundwater, including water from roof and/or cellar
drains, springs, basement sump pumps and/or French drains.
A. Any person owning a lot served by a holding tank shall have said
holding tank pumped by a qualified pumper/hauler as often as
necessary to prevent exceeding the holding tank's capacity. The person
must submit documentation to the Township SEO illustrating that the
holding tank has been pumped according to this requirement.
B. This required pumping frequency may be increased at the discretion of
the SEO based upon the officer's inspection of the holding tank.
C. Any person owning property served by a holding tank shall submit, with
each required pumping receipt, a written statement from the pumper/
hauler or from any other qualified individual acceptable to the
Township that the tank has been found to be in good working order. Any
person whose tank has been determined to require repair or
replacement shall first contact the SEO for approval of the necessary
repair.
D. In the event that the person who is the property owner of any property
containing a holding tank has failed to submit the above-required
receipts to the SEO evidencing that the tank has been pumped on an
annual basis or as directed by the SEO, the Township shall have the
ability to have the tank pumped by a licensed pumper/hauler with the
§ 18-2.7 WHITEHALL CODE § 18-2.9
17:612
§ 18-2.10. Security.
§ 18-2.11. Malfunctioning systems.
cost to be billed to the person owning the property upon which the tank
is installed. In the event that said person refuses to pay said bill, the
Township may draw upon the security provided under this article to pay
for said pumping.
A. No person shall operate a holding tank system and no building, zoning
or occupancy permit shall be issued for the occupancy of any structure
if said structure will be served by a holding tank system until said
person has posted security as required under this article.
B. Said security shall be cash in an amount sufficient to cover the
estimated maintenance and/or pumping costs of a holding tank in the
event that the owner fails to do so, and also sufficient to cover the
estimated removal cost of said holding tank, both as determined by the
Township SEO.
C. The said security shall also consist of a holding tank maintenance
agreement to be entered into by the person owning and/or installing
said tank, and Whitehall Township. Said agreement shall be prepared
by the Township Solicitor.
D. Said agreement and security shall permit the Township to draw upon
said security in order to undertake required maintenance which the
owner of the holding tank has not undertaken, including pumping the
holding tank, other maintenance and/or repairs, the removal of said
holding tank, and penalties charged under this article.
E. Interest, if any, earned on the account shall be added to the security.
F. At intervals of five years, the Township may adjust the security to reflect
current costs.
A. No person shall operate and maintain a holding tank in such a manner
that it malfunctions. All liquid wastes, including kitchen and laundry
wastes and water softener backwash, shall be discharged to a tank. No
holding tanks shall discharge untreated or partially treated sewage to
the surface of the ground or into the waters of the commonwealth
unless a permit to discharge has been obtained from DEP.
B. The Township may issue a written notice of violation to any person who
is the owner of property in the Township which is found to be served by
a malfunctioning holding tank or which is discharging raw or partially
treated sewage without a permit.
C. Within seven days of notification by the Township that a malfunction
has been identified, the property owner shall make application to the
SEO for a permit to repair or replace the malfunctioning tank. Within
30 days of issuance of the permit, construction of the permitted repair
§ 18-2.9 RESERVED § 18-2.11
17:613
§ 18-2.12. Fees.
The Board of Commissioners shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees.
Costs for the completion of required water quality testing and Township
SEO inspections shall be assessed to the property owner. It shall be each
individual property owner's responsibility to contract with a qualified
pumper/hauler for the pumping of the owner's holding tank.
§ 18-2.13. Repair of malfunctioning system by township.
Where a property owner or other person fails to maintain, repair or replace
a holding tank system after notice pursuant to the terms of this article, such
failure shall constitute a public nuisance and a violation of this article. The
Township may abate the nuisance by performing the work needed, or by
contracting to perform the work needed to abate the nuisance, and may
charge the landowner or other responsible person for the cost thereof, plus
a penalty of 20%. Said cost plus penalty may be collected by civil action or
by the filing of a lien according to law. Such costs, plus penalty, may also be
or replacement shall commence. Within 60 days of the issuance of a
permit by the Township, the construction shall be completed unless the
Township shall extend the period.
D. Failure to apply for a permit or to complete the repair or replacement
within the times specified in Subsection C shall constitute a violation of
this article.
E. The Township's SEO shall have the authority to require the repair of any
malfunction by the following methods: cleaning, repair or replacement
of components of the existing system, adding capacity or otherwise
altering or replacing the system's treatment tank, or other alternatives
as appropriate for the specific site.
F. Should none of the remedies described above prove totally effective in
eliminating the malfunction of any existing holding tank, the property
owner is not absolved of responsibility for that malfunction. The
Township may require whatever action is necessary to lessen or
mitigate the malfunction to the extent that such is necessary.
G. Failure of the landowner to take the actions required in § 18-2.11
relating to malfunctioning systems shall constitute a public nuisance
and a violation of this article, as well as a violation of the Whitehall
Township Ordinance forbidding public nuisances.
H. Should the remedies provided above not prove effective in eliminating
the malfunction of any existing holding tank, the Township shall have
the remedy of requiring the property owner to remove said system.
Should the property owner refuse to remove said system, then the
Township shall have the ability to accomplish the removal drawing upon
the funds provided under the security agreement entered into between
the property owner and the Township.
§ 18-2.11 WHITEHALL CODE § 18-2.13
17:614
drawn from the irrevocable letter of credit or other posted security provided
for in this article.
§ 18-2.14. Disposal of contents.
The contents of holding tanks shall be disposed of as follows:
§ 18-2.15. Administration.
The Township shall fully utilize those powers it possesses through enabling
statutes and ordinances to effect the purposes of this article.
§ 18-2.16. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or who
shall fail to act upon notice or determination of the SEO or other authorized
agent of the Township within the time stated in the notice on determination
shall, upon conviction thereof before a District Magistrate, be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300
and costs, and/or shall be imprisoned for a period of not more than 90 days.
It is further provided as follows:
A. The contents of all holding tanks originating within the Township shall
be disposed of at sites or facilities approved and permitted by DEP.
B. Pumper/haulers operating within the Township shall operate in a
manner consistent with the provisions of the Act of July 28, 1988, P.L.
556, No. 101, as amended, 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., known as the
"Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act."
A. Each day of violation or continuing violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. Failure to appeal a notice or determination pursuant to § 18-2.16 and
the Local Agency Law shall constitute an admission of the violation and
a failure to utilize administrative remedies.
C. This article constitutes an ordinance enacted for the purposes of
property maintenance, public health and safety, and for water and air
pollution violations, for the purposes of Section 702, Clause XLI, of the
Second Class Township Code, as amended, 53 P.S. § 65741.
D. In addition to all other remedies, the Township may institute suits in
equity to restrain or prevent violations of this article, or to abate public
nuisances.
E. The Township may file Township liens for abatement of nuisances in
accordance with law.
§ 18-2.13 RESERVED § 18-2.16
17:615

ARTICLE III
Sewage Management Program
[Adopted 10-14-2019 by Ord. No. 3178]
§ 18-3. (Reserved)
§ 18-3.1. Introduction; purpose.
§ 18-3.2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, any term not defined herein shall have that
meaning found in the Sewage Facilities Act, the Municipal Planning Code
and regulations promulgated thereto, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A sewage enforcement officer, or professional
engineer, or code enforcement officer who is authorized to function as an
agent of the Township to administer or enforce the provisions of this article.
BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of Whitehall Township, Lehigh
County, Pennsylvania.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly or
privately owned, for the collection of sewage from two or more lots, and the
treatment and/or disposal of the sewage on one or more lots or at any other
site.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (DEP).
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in
whole or in part into the soil or into any waters of the commonwealth.
MALFUNCTION — The condition which occurs when an on-lot sewage
disposal system discharges untreated or inadequately treated sewage onto
the surface of the ground, into the groundwaters of this commonwealth, into
A. In accordance with municipal codes, the Clean Streams Law and the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, it is the power and duty of the
Township to provide for adequate sewage treatment facilities and for
the protection of public health by preventing the discharge of untreated
or inadequately treated sewage. The official sewage facilities plan for
the Township indicates that it is necessary to formulate and implement
a sewage management program to effectively prevent and abate water
pollution and hazards to the public health caused by improper
treatment and disposal of sewage.
B. The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation, inspection,
maintenance and rehabilitation of on-lot sewage disposal systems; to
further permit intervention and to establish appeal procedures as
necessary for the proper administration of a sewage management
program.
§ 18-3 RESERVED § 18-3.2
17:617
surface waters of this commonwealth, backs up into a building connected
to the system or in any manner causes a nuisance or hazard to the public
health or pollution of ground- or surface water or contamination of public
or private drinking water wells. The system shall be malfunctioning if any
condition noted above occurs for any length of time during any period of the
year.
MUNICIPALITY — Whitehall Township, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
OFFICIAL SEWAGE FACILITIES PLAN — A comprehensive plan for the
provision of an adequate sewage disposal system, adopted by the Board and
approved by the DEP, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system for disposal of
domestic sewage involving pretreatment and subsequent disposal of the
clarified sewage into a subsurface soil absorption area or retaining tank;
this term includes both individual sewage systems and community sewage
systems.
PERSON — Any individual, association, public or private corporation for
profit or not for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department, board,
bureau or agency of the commonwealth, political subdivision, municipality,
district, authority, or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized
by law as the subject of rights and duties. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty or imposing a fine or imprisonment, the
term "person" shall include the members of an association, partnership or
firm and the officers of any local or municipal, public or private corporation
for profit or not for profit.
PUMPER/HAULER — Any person, company, partnership or corporation
which engages in cleaning community or individual sewage systems and
transports the septage cleaned from these systems, and who has registered
with the Township and is a current member in good standing of the
Pennsylvania Septage Management Association.
REHABILITATION — The work done to modify, alter, repair, enlarge or
replace an existing on-lot sewage disposal system.
REPLACEMENT AREA — A portion of a lot or a developed property, sized to
allow the installation of an on-lot sewage disposal system, which is reserved
to allow that installation in the event of the malfunction of the presently
installed on-lot sewage disposal system.
SEPTAGE — The sewage, residual scum and sludge pumped from on-lot
sewage disposal systems.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals,
and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the
public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation or which constitutes pollution under the Act
of June 22, 1937, known as the "Clean Streams Law," as amended.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — A person certified by DEP
who is appointed by the Township. Such person is authorized to conduct
§ 18-3.2 WHITEHALL CODE § 18-3.2
17:618
investigations and inspections, review permit applications, issue or deny
permits and do all other activities as may be provided for such person in the
Sewage Facilities Act, the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder
and this or any other ordinance adopted by the Township.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — A comprehensive set of legal and
administrative requirements encompassing the requirements of this article,
the Sewage Facilities Act, the Clean Streams Law, the regulations
promulgated thereunder and such other requirements adopted by the Board
to effectively enforce and administer this article.
SEWAGE PERMIT — A document issued for the local agency by the SEO
when proper application, fee, test results, field investigations, a suitable
system design and other requested information by the Township have all
been provided to the SEO in accordance with PA Code Title 25 Chapter 72,
and Administration of Sewage Facilities Permitting Program.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two
or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes
in existing lot lines. The enumerating of lots shall include as a lot that
portion of the original tract or tracts remaining after other lots have been
subdivided therefrom. For this article this term shall also mean land
development.
TOWNSHIP — Whitehall Township, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
§ 18-3.3. Applicability.
From the effective date of this article, its provisions shall apply in any
portion of the Township identified in the Official Act 537 Sewage Facilities
Plan as a Sewage Management District. Within such area or areas, the
provisions of this article shall apply to all persons owning any property
serviced by an on-lot sewage disposal system and to all persons installing or
rehabilitating on-lot sewage disposal systems.
§ 18-3.4. Permit requirements.
A. No person shall install, construct or request bid proposals for
construction or alter an individual sewage system or community
sewage system or construct or request bid proposals for construction or
install or occupy any building or structure for which an individual
sewage system or community sewage system is to be installed without
first obtaining a permit from the Sewage Enforcement Officer; which
permit shall indicate that the site and the plans and specifications of
such system are in compliance with the provisions of the Clean Streams
Law and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, and the regulations
adopted pursuant to those Acts.
B. No system or structure designed to provide individual or community
sewage disposal shall be covered from view until approval to cover the
same has been given by a Sewage Enforcement Officer.
§ 18-3.2 RESERVED § 18-3.4
17:619
§ 18-3.5. (Reserved)
§ 18-3.6. Permitted and prohibited discharges.
Only normal domestic waste shall be discharged into any on-lot sewage
disposal system. The following shall not be discharged into the system:
C. The Sewage Enforcement Officer will require notification of the
schedule for construction of the permitted on-lot sewage disposal
system so that inspections in addition to the final inspection required by
the Sewage Facilities Act may be scheduled and performed by a Sewage
Enforcement Officer.
D. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for a new building
which will contain sewage-generating facilities until a valid sewage
permit has been obtained from the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
E. No building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued and no work
shall begin on any alteration or conversion of any existing structure, if
said alteration or conversion will result in the increase or potential
increase in sewage flows, that will require an alteration or replacement
of the existing sewage disposal system, until either the property owner
receives a permit for the alteration or replacement of the existing
sewage disposal system or until the appropriate officials of the
Township receive written notification from the Sewage Enforcement
Officer that such a permit will not be required. The Sewage
Enforcement Officer shall determine whether the proposed alteration
or conversion of the structure will result in increased sewage flows.
F. Sewage permits may be issued only by a Sewage Enforcement officer
appointed by the Township. DEP shall be notified as to the identity of
each Sewage Enforcement Officer appointed by the Township.
G. Replacement areas for each lot or developed property or subdivisions
or land developments existing or proposed within the Sewage
Management District shall provide for the testing, identification and
reservation of a replacement area of each lot suitable for the
installation of a replacement on-lot sewage disposal system. This
requirement is in addition to the testing, identification and reservation
of an area for the primary on-lot sewage disposal system.
H. No sewage permit shall be issued for any proposed-on lot sewage
disposal system on any newly created or subdivided property in any
Sewage Management District unless and until a replacement area is
tested, approved and reserved. All subdivision plans must show the
location of two approved on lot disposal sewage sites on each lot.
A. Industrial waste.
B. Automobile oil and other nondomestic oil.
§ 18-3.4 WHITEHALL CODE § 18-3.6
17:620
§ 18-3.7. (Reserved)
§ 18-3.8. System rehabilitation.
§ 18-3.9. (Reserved)
§ 18-3.10. Disposal of septage.
C. Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including but not limited
to pesticides, disinfectants (excluding household cleaners), acids,
paints, paint thinners, herbicides, gasoline and other solvents.
D. Clean surface water or groundwater, including water from roof or cellar
drains, springs, basement sump pumps and French drains.
A. No person shall operate or maintain an on-lot sewage disposal system
in such a manner that it malfunctions. All liquid wastes, including
kitchen and laundry waste, softener backwash, shall be discharged to a
treatment tank. No sewage system shall discharge untreated sewage to
the surface of the ground or into the waters of the commonwealth
unless a permit for such discharge has been obtained from DEP.
B. A written notice of violation shall be issued to any person who is the
owner of any property which is found to be served by malfunctioning on
lot sewage disposal system or which is discharging sewage without a
permit.
C. Within seven days of notification by the Township that a malfunction
has been identified, the property owner shall make application to the
Sewage Enforcement Officer for a permit to repair or replace the
malfunctioning system. Within 30 days of initial notification by the
Township, construction of the permitted repair or replacement shall
commence. Within 60 days of the original notification by the Township,
the construction shall be completed unless seasonal or unique
conditions mandate a longer period, in which case the Township SEO
shall set an extended completion date.
D. A SEO shall have the authority to require the repair of any malfunction
by the following methods: cleaning, repair, or replacement of
components of the existing system, adding capacity or otherwise
altering the existing disposal area, replacing a gravity distribution
system with a pressurized system, replacing the system with a holding
tank, or any other alternative appropriate for the specific site.
E. Should none of the remedies described above prove totally effective in
satisfactorily eliminating the malfunction of an existing on-lot sewage
disposal system, the property owner is not absolved of responsibility for
that malfunction. The Township may require whatever action is
necessary to lessen or mitigate the malfunction. This may include a
connection to a public system regardless of the distance or availability
of such a system or the vacating of the structure.
§ 18-3.6 RESERVED § 18-3.10
17:621
§ 18-3.11. Violations.
§ 18-3.12. Administration.
A. All septage originating within the Sewage Management District shall be
disposed of in accordance with the requirement of the Solid Waste
Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 ss60.18.101 et seq), latest revision
and all other applicable laws and at sites or facilities approved by DEP.
The pumper/hauler shall provide a list of approved disposal sites that
they have contracted with to dispose of the septage.
B. The pumper/hauler of septage, shall operate in a manner consistent
with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act
(Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. §§ 6018.101 through 6018.1003), latest revision
and all other applicable laws.
A. The Township SEO shall issue a written notice of violation to any person
who is the property owner, if the Township has not received from the
property owner, a pumper/hauler on-lot sewage system certification
form proving that their septic tank, cesspool, or drywell or tank has
been cleaned and pumped within the time limits as specified by this
article.
B. Within 30 days of the notice of violation by the SEO, the property owner
shall have said septic tank, cesspool, or drywell or tank cleaned and
pumped. Failure to comply with the notice of violation shall be
considered a violation of this article.
C. Any person or property owner interfering with the pumper/hauler's
responsibility to notify the Township under this article shall be in
violation and susceptible to all penalties noted herein. As set forth in
this article, the property owner of the building shall ensure that the
pumper/hauler supplies the Township with the certification form of
pumping the on-lot disposal system.
A. The Township shall fully utilize those powers it possesses through
enabling statutes and ordinances to effect the purposes of this article.
The Township shall employ a qualified SEO and/or Code Enforcement
Officer and such other persons as may be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this article. The Township may also contract with private
qualified persons or firms as necessary to carry out the provisions of
this article.
B. Any permits, records, reports, files and other written materials
pertaining to the installation, operation and maintenance and
malfunction of on-lot sewage disposal systems shall become the
property of the Township, and shall be maintained by the SEO and kept
at the Township. Records shall be available for inspection by
representatives of DEP as may be necessary.
§ 18-3.10 WHITEHALL CODE § 18-3.12
17:622
§ 18-3.13. Enforcement actions.
C. All fees associated with enforcing this article shall be as set forth in the
Township Fee Schedule, including administrative fees for the
imposition and maintenance of liens.77
A. In addition to remedies available under the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act, as it relates to nuisances, violation of the Act or
interference with any officer, agent or the Township itself, the Township
may assess civil penalties after providing notice of such penalties or
assessments.
B. The Township may assess the cost of damages caused by violation of
this article or the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, applicable fines
and penalties, the cost of correcting such violation(s) as well as legal
fees, costs of enforcement and fees incurred to hold hearings.
C. The Township or SEO shall provide notice of violations of this article or
the Sewage Facilities Act and the proposed assessment of penalty.
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. A29, Fees.
§ 18-3.12 RESERVED § 18-3.13
17:623

ARTICLE IV
Public Water and Sewer Systems
[Adopted 10-14-2019 by Ord. No. 3178]
§ 18-4. (Reserved)
§ 18-4.1. Public system availability.
A public water main or public sewer system shall be considered available
to a property subject to the following sections. Connection to any public
facilities must comply with the requirements of the facility owner, including,
but may not be limited to, frontage extension requirements.
A. Public sewer systems.
(1) A public sewer or water system shall be considered available to a
property when the property is within 150 feet of the nearest
terminus of the public sewer collection system, without requiring
the acquisition of property or property rights (easements) to extend
the sewer, other than public rights-of-way.
(2) Connection requirements.
(a) All existing one- and two-family residential properties whose
property boundary lies within 150 feet of the nearest terminus
of the public sewer system shall be required to connect when
sewer is available pursuant to CWSA guidelines; or if the
existing private system fails at any time.
(b) Commercial properties. All commercial properties, including
residential properties other than one- and two-family dwellings
and residential rental properties: connection required.
(c) All proposed structures within the public sanitary sewer
service area as identified in the Township's Sewage Facilities
(Act 537) Plan are required to connect to the public sanitary
sewer system.
B. Public water systems.
(1) Connection requirements. A public water main shall be considered
available to a property when the property is within the following
distances from the nearest terminus of public water main:
(a) Any individual lot on which a single-family residence is
proposed to be constructed: 50 feet.
(b) Any one- or two-family residential subdivision up to and
including four lots: 150 feet.
(c) Any one- or two-family residential subdivision of five lots up to
and including 20 lots: 1,000 feet.
§ 18-4 RESERVED § 18-4.1
17:625
(d) Any residential subdivision of more than 20 lots: connection
required.
(e) Any commercial or industrial development, including mixed
use and multifamily residential: connection required.
§ 18-4.1 WHITEHALL CODE § 18-4.1
17:626
ARTICLE V
Appeals
[Adopted 10-14-2019 by Ord. No. 3178]
§ 18-5. (Reserved)
§ 18-5.1. Filing; hearing; decision.
Any person aggrieved by any notice, action, or determination may appeal to
the Whitehall Township Board of Commissioners within 30 days in writing
pursuant to the Act of 1978, April 28, P.L. 202, No. 53, as amended,
2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 105 and 551 et seq., known as the "Local Agency Law".
Notwithstanding the above:
A. Appeals from the final decision of the SEO under this article shall be
made to the Board of Commissioners in writing within 30 days from the
date of written notification of the decision in question.
B. The appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Board of
Commissioners at the next regularly scheduled meeting if a timely
appeal is filed meeting all advertising deadlines. The Township Board of
Commissioners shall thereafter affirm, modify, or reverse the decision.
The hearing may be postponed for a good cause shown by the appellant
or the Township. Additional evidence may be introduced at the hearing,
provided that it is submitted with the notice of appeal.
C. A decision shall be rendered in writing by the Township Solicitor within
30 days of the date of the hearing.
§ 18-5 RESERVED § 18-5.1
17:627
Chapter 19
RESERVED
Chapter 20
SOLID WASTE
§ 18-5.1 WHITEHALL CODE § 18-5.1
19:628
ARTICLE I
Title and Definitions
§ 20-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Township of Whitehall
Municipal Waste Management, Collection, Removal and Recycling
Ordinance."
§ 20-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings indicated hereinbelow, except where the context clearly indicates
or expressly requires a different meaning.
ACCESS ROAD — Any cartway or roadway available to the public which
provides access between a publicly-owned roadway and the entrance to a
site or facility.
ALUMINUM CAN(S) — Empty container(s) used for food or beverage or
both and consisting entirely of aluminum.
APPLICANT or APPLICANTS — A commercial solid waste hauler who
desires to secure a municipal waste collection license pursuant to Article
III of this chapter, a person who desires to secure a recycled waste
transportation license pursuant to Article IV or a person who desires to
secure a permit for a site or facility pursuant to Article II of this chapter.
ASHES — All residue or cinders resulting from the burning of coal, wood or
any other combustible material.
BIMETALLIC CAN(S) — Empty container(s) used for food or beverage or
both and consisting of either steel or steel and aluminum.
COATED PAPER — Any paper, including the advertising inserts which are
intermingled or distributed with newspapers which has a shiny or glossy
finish or appearance resulting from treatment of the surface or application
of a coating of kaolin, clay or other chemicals.
COLLECTOR — A person to whom a license has been issued authorizing the
collection, transportation and disposal of municipal waste and/or recyclable
materials from the Township of Whitehall. For the purposes of this chapter
the word "collector" shall include the collector's employees, agents and
principals.
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY — All commercial, educational, industrial,
institutional or municipal establishments, community activities and
commercial multifamily housing. The phrase "commercial activity" shall not
include home occupations which are registered with the Township pursuant
to the Whitehall Township Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 27).
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in a
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business including, but not limited
to, stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
§ 20-1 RESERVED § 20-2
19:629
COMMERCIAL MULTIFAMILY HOUSING — A structure or building which
is designed or used for four or more residential dwellings.
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE HAULER — A person engaged in the activity
of hauling or otherwise transporting solid waste.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events sponsored in whole or in part by the
Township or conducted within the Township and sponsored privately, which
include, but are not limited to, fairs, bazaars, socials, picnics and organized
sporting event that will be attended by 200 or more individuals per day.
COMPOSTING — The process by which organic solid waste is biologically
decomposed under controlled anaerobic or aerobic conditions to yield a
humus-like product.
COMPOSTING FACILITY — A facility using land for processing of municipal
waste by composting. The term includes land thereby affected during the
lifetime of the operations including, but not limited to, areas where
composting actually occurs, support facilities, borrow areas, offices,
equipment sheds, air and water pollution control and treatment systems,
access roads, associated on site or contiguous collection, transportation and
storage facilities, closure and post-closure care and maintenance activities
and other activities in which the natural land surface has been disturbed
as a result of or incidental to operation of the facility. The term does not
include a facility for composting residential municipal waste that is located
at the site where the waste was generated.
CONTAINER — A portable device in which waste is held for storage or
transportation.
CORRUGATED PAPER — The fabricated or manufactured structural paper
material with an inner core shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges,
with one or more outer liners, often consisting of a material known as kraft
paper.
CURBSIDE — The following locations on adjoining public streets or roads
from which the Township shall collect garbage:
CURBSIDE CONTAINER OR CRATE — The container issued or approved by
the Township for the purpose of collecting, storing and placing recyclable
materials at the curbside for collection by the Township.
For those streets and roads which have curbs, within 10 feet of the curb
or curbline or at the edge of the cartway.
A.
For those streets and roads which do not have curbs, within reasonable
safe proximity of the paved cartway, but no further than 10 feet from
the public street or alley right-of-way.
B.
For those streets and roads for which the locations stated in
Subsections A and B of this definition above are not clear or
satisfactory, as otherwise established by regulation of the Mayor.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
C.
§ 20-2 WHITEHALL CODE § 20-2
19:630
CURBSIDE RECYCLING PROGRAM — The regularly scheduled Township
operation which provides labor, equipment and services to collect
recyclable materials from the curbside of residential dwellings within the
Township.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner
that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the
environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DISPOSAL SITE — Any site, facility, location, area or premises to be used
for the disposal of municipal waste.
DUMPSTER(S) — The community trash container(s) used by residents of
commercial multifamily housing and provided by the landlord, owner or
manager of the facility.
FACILITY — Land, structures and other appurtenances or improvements
where municipal waste disposal or processing is permitted or takes place.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable wastes attending or resulting from
the handling, dealing, storing, preparation, cooking and consumption of
foods.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass, excluding plate glass, automotive glass, blue glass and porcelain and
ceramic products.
GROUNDWATER — Water below the land surface in a zone of saturation.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial or
other wastewater treatment plant, sludge from a water supply treatment
plant or air pollution control facility and other discarded material including
solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from
municipal, commercial, industrial, institutional, mining or agricultural
operations and from community activities, or any combination of the above,
which because of its quantity, quality, concentration or physical, chemical
or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an
increase in mortality in either an individual or the total population, or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or pose
a substantial present or future threat or potential hazard to human health or
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed
of or otherwise managed.
HIGH GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Any white paper of the type commonly
used for letter writing, stationery, note paper, plain paper for photocopying
machines, computer printers and other general-purpose paper, whether
or not any printed or written matter is contained thereon, excluding
newspapers, magazines, corrugated paper or any coated paper.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing including, but not limited to, factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants and refineries.
§ 20-2 RESERVED § 20-2
19:631
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
service including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages,
schools and universities.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any police officer or auxiliary police
officer, whether employed by the Township or the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or a Code Enforcement Officer of the Township.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Batteries which contain lead including, but not
limited to, automotive, truck and industrial batteries.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves from trees, bushes and all other plants, garden
residues, shrubbery, tree trimming and similar material, excluding grass
clippings.
LICENSE — A license to a person issued pursuant to the terms, conditions
and provision of this chapter to collect, transport and dispose of municipal
waste or recyclable materials.
MAGAZINE(S) — Printed matter on coated paper containing miscellaneous
written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals, and also known
as periodicals, including telephone directories, but expressly excluding
newspaper and all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MANAGEMENT — The entire process, or any part thereof, of storage,
collection, transportation, processing, treatment and disposal of municipal
waste by any person engaging in such process.
MAYOR — The duly elected Mayor of the Township and/or the Mayor's duly
appointed designee.[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING — Any structure or building which is designed or
used fro more than one, but less than four residential dwellings, regardless
of the form of ownership, tenancy or the physical arrangement of the
structure or building.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from the operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant,
wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility. For the purpose
of Article IV, inclusive, the term "municipal waste" shall include source
separated recyclable materials.
MUNICIPAL WASTE LANDFILL — A facility using land for disposing of
municipal waste. The facility includes land affected during the lifetime of
operations including, but not limited to, areas where disposal or processing
activities actually occur, support facilities, borrow areas, offices, equipment
sheds, air and water pollution control and treatment systems, access roads,
associated onsite and contiguous collection, transportation and storage
facilities, closure and postclosure care and maintenance activities and other
activities in which the natural land surface has been disturbed as a result
§ 20-2 WHITEHALL CODE § 20-2
19:632
of or incidental to operation of the facility. The term does not include a
construction/demolition waste landfill or a facility for the land application of
sewage sludge.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint and
distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions,
containing advertisements and other matters of public interest, expressly
excluding however, advertising inserts printed on coated paper which are
often distributed or intermingled with newspapers.
PERMIT — A permit issued to a person pursuant to terms, conditions and
provisions of this chapter to construct, establish, operate or maintain a
municipal waste storage, treatment processing or disposal site or facility or
a recycling facility.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, association, partnership, trust,
firm, joint stock company, organization, institution, cooperative enterprise,
commission, municipal authority, governmental body or agency or any other
legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties. In a provision of this chapter prescribing a fine, imprisonment or
penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include
officers and directors of a corporation or other legal entity having officers
and directors.
PLASTIC BEVERAGE CARRIER — The plastic rings or similar plastic
connectors used as holding devices in the packaging of beverages including,
but not limited to, all carbonated beverages, liquors, wines, fruit juices,
mineral waters, soda and beer.
PLASTIC CONTAINER(S) — Container(s) of any variety, type and chemical
composition of plastic.
PROCESSING — Any technology, methods or means used for the purpose
of reducing the volume or bulk of solid waste or any technology used to
convert part of or all of such waste materials for offsite or onsite reuse.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Property owned or leased by the Township, the
County of Lehigh, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the federal
government.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL(S) — Material identified by the Township to be
recycled including, but not limited to, those materials listed in § 1501 of Act
101 found at 53 P.S. § 4000.1501.
RECYCLING FACILITY — A facility employing a technology that is a process
that separates or classifies municipal waste and creates or recovers
reusable materials that can be sold to or reused by a manufacturer as a
substitute for or a supplement to virgin raw materials. For purpose of this
chapter, the term "recycling facility" shall not include transfer stations,
landfills for solid waste, composting facilities or resource recovery facilities.
REFUSE — All scrap or waste materials of cloth, paper, fabrics, glass, china,
wood or metal, prunings from vines and trees, leaves, lawn trimmings,
grass, as well as rubbish composted of stone, sand, clay, concrete, brick
§ 20-2 RESERVED § 20-2
19:633
or tile from any residential, municipal, commercial or institutional
establishment.
REGULAR(LY) — At least three or more times per month.
REGULATION(S) — Any rule(s), standard(s), specification(s), order(s),
license(s), permit(s), interpretation(s), schedule(s), zone(s), route(s) and
waiver(s) established from time to time by the Township pursuant to the
authority of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, any regulations
adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be a
part of this chapter and are included by reference as if set forth herein in
full.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING — A structure or building, or part thereof,
constructed, developed, proposed and available for or used as an
independent living facility for one or more persons, regardless of the
relationship between such persons. For purposes of this chapter, a
residential dwelling shall be intended or designed to be occupied as a
residence and shall have at a minimum: permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation and no connecting doorways with
another residential dwelling or common doors except for entrances and
exists to the exterior of the building, structure or part thereof.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material or
other waste including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials
resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations and water
supply treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or air pollution
control facility, provided that it is not hazardous.
SCAVENGING — The act or practice of removing, taking, scattering or
disturbing recyclable materials which have been collected and assembled
in containers, whether stored on private or public property or placed at the
curbside for collection.
SETBACK LINE — A line across the front, side or rear of any private
or public property the establishment of which prohibits the subsequent
erection of any building, fence or other obstruction in the area between
such lines and the property line, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
SITE — The area where municipal waste processing or disposal facilities
are operated. If the operator has a permit to conduct the activities, and is
operating within the boundaries of the permit, the site is equivalent to the
permit area.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste including, but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous materials.
SOURCE SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Material that is
separated from municipal waste at the point or origin for the purpose of
recycling.
STORAGE — The containment of waste on a temporary basis in such a
manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall be presumed
§ 20-2 WHITEHALL CODE § 20-2
19:634
that the containment of waste in excess of one year constitutes disposal
rather than storage. This presumption can be overcome by clear and
convincing evidence to the contrary.
TOWNSHIP — Whitehall Township, a Home Rule Charter Township of the
First Class, located in Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, including the Board
of Commissioners, the Mayor, the Township staff and others when duly
authorized.[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
TRANSPORTATION — The offsite removal of any municipal waste generated
or present at any time from any property situate within the Township.
TREATMENT — A method, technique or process, including neutralization,
designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of any waste so as to neutralize such waste or so as to render
such waste nonhazardous, suitable for recovery, suitable for storage or
reduced in volume. For purposes of this chapter, the term "treatment" shall
include activity or processing designed to change the physical form or
chemical composition of waste so as to render it neutral or nonhazardous.
WASTE — A material, the original purpose of which has been completed
and which is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise
disposed of, whether municipal, residual or hazardous waste, or otherwise,
excluding source separated recyclable materials or material approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for beneficial
use.[Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
§ 20-2 RESERVED § 20-2
19:635

ARTICLE II
Municipal Waste Management
§ 20-3. Permits.
No person shall establish, construct, substantially alter, own, operate or
maintain any municipal waste storage, treatment processing or disposal site
or facility in the Township without first obtaining a permit for such site or
facility pursuant to the provisions of Part 5 of this chapter.
§ 20-4. General provisions.
§ 20-5. Buffer zone.
A. The disposal of residual and hazardous wastes shall be prohibited at
any municipal waste storage, treatment, processing or disposal site or
facility covered by Article II of this chapter. Any violation of this
Subsection A whatsoever shall result in the immediate revocation of all
applicable municipal permits and the issuance of a cease and desist
order from the Mayor. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
B. The disposal of municipal waste shall be prohibited in areas where
continuous or intermittent contact occurs between the waste and the
ground water table.
C. The municipal waste storage, treatment, processing or disposal sites or
facilities shall be operated or maintained in such manner as to prevent
health hazards and environmental degradation.
D. The storage, treatment, processing or disposal of municipal wastes
shall be practiced so as to prevent the attraction, harborage or
breeding of insects or rodents and to eliminate conditions which are
harmful to public health or which create safety hazards, odors, dust,
unsightliness and public nuisances.
E. The proposed operation of a site or facility shall not: create any
nuisance which shall include, but not be limited to, excessive noise,
odor, rodent or insect infestation or effects similar in nature, or impose
a hardship on adjoining property owner or result in an undue burden
upon the Township, the Township's municipal services and/or
infrastructure.
F. All equipment shall be stored inside totally enclosed buildings during
those hours when the landfill is not in operation.
G. Bonding and liability insurance in such amounts with companies and
upon forms acceptable to the Township must be established by the site
of facility operator to compensate private property owners and the
Township for well contamination, property damage, etc.
§ 20-3 RESERVED § 20-5
19:637
§ 20-6. Inspection, right of entry. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
The Mayor, the Board of Commissioners, any Township fire official, law
enforcement officer or building, housing or zoning official or inspector or
representative of Whitehall Township Authority shall have the authority to
inspect each municipal waste storage, treatment, processing or disposal
site or facility, and all structures of buildings situate thereat, as often as
may be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining or causing to be corrected
any condition which may be in violation of this chapter or any regulation
promulgated thereunder.
§ 20-7. Limited access to site or facility.
Access to any municipal waste storage, treatment, processing or disposal
site or facility shall be limited in the following manner:
A. A one-hundred-yard buffer zone shall be established upon which no
municipal waste shall be deposited adjacent to perimeter property lines
unless otherwise approved by the Mayor. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
B. Within the buffer zone, two parallel rows of six-foot-high arborvitae set
three feet apart, as well as trees, shrubs and other suitable vegetation,
shall be planted and landscaping provided to fully obscure any view of
the site or facility from public roadways and adjacent public or private
properties and to maintain, preserve and enhance the environmental
integrity of the surrounding area. Arborvitae shall be set back not less
than 50 yards from all property lines.
C. All municipal waste storage, treatment, processing or disposal sites or
facilities shall be completely enclosed by chain-link fencing or such
other durable fencing as approved by the Township, which fencing shall
be no less than six feet in height but which shall not exceed the
maximum height limitation of eight feet. All fencing shall be set back at
least 15 feet from the property line.
A. Access to the site or facility shall be limited to normal operating hours.
B. A gate or barrier as approved by the Township at the entrance to the
site or facility shall be erected to block access to the site or facility
during times when an attendant is not on duty.
C. Normal operating hours of the landfill during weekdays shall be from
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and on weekends from 7:00 a.m. to noon on
Saturdays. No operation of the site or facility of any type, including
waste deliveries, shall be permitted at any other time and the site or
facility shall be closed on:
(1) Christmas Day.
(2) New Year's Day.
§ 20-5 WHITEHALL CODE § 20-7
19:638
§ 20-8. Litter and dust control.
(3) Thanksgiving Day.
(4) Good Friday.
(5) Labor Day.
(6) Memorial Day.
(7) Fourth of July.
D. Hours of operation and other limitations regarding access to the site or
facility shall be prominently displayed on a sign at the entrance which
sign shall have a minimum size of three feet by four feet.
E. Access to the site or facility shall be limited to vehicles bearing
identification stickers issued by the Township. Such stickers shall be
plainly visible on all vehicles admitted to the site or facility. Access to
the site or facility by unauthorized vehicles or persons shall be
prohibited.
F. Operators shall, upon request, provide access keys to the facility for
emergency personnel.
A. Portable fencing constructed of wire mesh, snowfencing or other
suitable material shall be used to control blowing litter.
B. Litter control fences shall be located in the immediate operating area or
working face of any municipal waste landfill or similar site or facility.
The nature of the waste or excessive winds may require additional litter
control measures, which shall be provided.
C. The entire site or facility shall be adequately policed and litter shall be
collected daily from fences, roadways and any trees or live barriers.
D. Provisions shall be made to prevent dust from interrupting, hampering
or preventing operations at the site or facility and from causing health
or safety hazards or public nuisances.
E. An equipment cleaning area shall be provided at the site or facility at a
location approved by the Mayor. All equipment used to grade and
compact waste in, on or at the site or facility shall be cleaned daily to
prevent odors, vectors and other nuisances. All drainage from
equipment cleaning areas shall be managed so as to prevent water
pollution and shall be discharged to a sanitary sewer system or other
facility approved by the Mayor. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
F. A tire cleaning area shall be provided on the access road within the site
or facility. All tires on all vehicles leaving the site or facility shall be
cleaned. Runoff from the tire cleaning area shall be controlled in
§ 20-7 RESERVED § 20-8
19:639
§ 20-9. Roadways.
§ 20-10. Safety and fire provisions.
accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
Landfill Management Regulations.
G. Requirements.
(1) Vehicles utilizing the site or facility shall take appropriate
measures to guarantee that all waste materials, including solid,
semisolid and liquid wastes, shall remain within the transportation
vehicles during the trip to the site or facility. Any open-bodied
vehicles shall be provided with a suitable cover which shall remain
in place during transportation to and from the site or facility. Any
transporting vehicles shall travel only those designed routes that
are established by the Mayor with the approval of the Board of
Commissioners. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
(2) The provisions of Subsection G(1) hereinabove shall be applicable
to collectors who are in the process of traveling to or from
established accounts that such collector services within the
Township.
A. Access roads to the entrance of a municipal waste storage, treatment,
processing or disposal site or facility shall be paved with asphalt,
curbed and provided with a base capable of withstanding anticipated
load limits. Two-way traffic access roads shall have a minimum cartway
width of 36 feet or two single cartways each a minimum width of 16
feet. For one-way traffic, separate access roads with a minimum
cartway width of 16 feet shall be established.
B. Any cartway from a site or facility entrance into the dumping or
unloading areas, working faces or treatment facility located within the
property boundaries of the site or facility shall be constructed in a
manner which will be negotiated by loaded collection vehicles and
provide utilization by such vehicles in all weather conditions.
A. Measures and procedures to prevent and minimize fire hazards shall be
established and practiced at the site or facility which measures or
procedures shall be at least equivalent to the Township Fire Control
Ordinance or regulations enacted or adopted from time to time.
B. Necessary measures shall be taken to prevent and extinguish fires.
Water of adequate volume and pressure, as determined by the Township
Engineer after consultation with the Township Fire Chief, to supply
water hose streams or foam producing equipment or water spray
systems as well as necessary equipment, compatible with the local fire
department equipment, such as hoses, nozzles and pumps for
minimizing fire hazards, shall be available at the site or facility. All
§ 20-8 WHITEHALL CODE § 20-10
19:640
§ 20-11. Working face, cover for municipal waste landfill.
equipment and buildings at the site or facility shall be equipped with
functional fire extinguishers. In addition to the foregoing, at least three
functional Scott air packs shall be housed at the site or facility. All
employees, prior to commencing work at the site or facility, undergo a
training program in cooperation with local fire departments, designed
to teach basic firefighting techniques.
C. Telephone or radio communication shall be located at the site or facility
or shall be readily available or accessible. Furthermore, a list of all
emergency numbers shall be provided for the plant operators. The
Township shall be provided with information including the names,
addresses and phone numbers of the appropriate plant operators,
managers and owners to be contacted in case of an emergency.
D. Each site or facility shall have onsite, during all operating hours, at
least one person certified in first aid cardiopulmonary resuscitation by
the American Red Cross or the equivalent.
A. The unloading of municipal wastes shall be controlled and restricted to
the working face of the municipal waste landfill. The size of the working
face shall be confined to an area no greater than that which can be
easily compacted and covered daily.
B. A uniform six inch compacted layer of daily cover material shall be
placed on all exposed waste by the end each working day, at the end of
every 24 hours or at the completion of every shift, whichever interval is
less.
C. A layer of intermediate cover material, compacted to a minimum
uniform depth of one foot, shall be placed on completed portions or
areas within the site or facility where there is a clear intention to
dispose or store additional waste materials within one year. When
additional waste is not deposited within one year, additional cover and
vegetation shall be provided as required by Subsection D hereof for
final cover.
D. Complete portions of a disposal or storage area within the site or
facility where there is no intention of placing any additional waste
materials at any time shall receive final cover within two weeks of
completion. Final cover shall provide a cap consisting of a uniform and
compacted one foot layer of clay placed over the surface of the final lift,
a drainage layer capable of transmitting flow and preventing erosion
placed over the cap, and a uniform and compacted layer of soil at least
two feet in thickness placed over the drainage layer. Final cover shall
not exceed the height of the original contour of the land on which the
facility is situate. Seed bed preparation and planting operations to
promote stabilization of the final soil cover shall be completed as soon
as weather permits and seasonal conditions are suitable for the
establishment of a vegetative cover suitable to prevent erosion.
§ 20-10 RESERVED § 20-11
19:641
§ 20-12. Variance. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
The Mayor may, with the approval of the Board of Commissioners, grant
a variance upon a showing that compliance with the requirements of this
article of this chapter, or any regulations promulgated pursuant thereto,
would not endanger the public health, safety and welfare and that the best
interests of the residents of the Township would be served by granting the
variance.
§ 20-13. Intergovernmental cooperation.
E. Soils to be used as daily, intermediate and final cover material shall be
soils that fall within the United States Department of Agriculture
("USDA") textural classes of sandy loam, loam, sandy clay loam, silty
clay loam, loamy sand and silt loan. For final cover to be acceptable, the
same shall compact well, not crack excessively when dry and support a
vegetative cover.
A. The Township is hereby empowered to enter into agreements with other
municipalities or other public bodies in Lehigh County for the purpose
of establishing a cooperation among such municipalities toward the
completion and implementation of a solid waste management plan so
long as the parties adhere to the following terms:
(1) The Township will commit itself to participation as an active
member in the solid water management planning process.
(2) The Township shall authorize Lehigh County to prepare the solid
waste management plan required by law.
(3) The Township shall cooperate with participating entities in
approving a budget and other related fiscal activities necessary to
undertake the appropriate planning process.
(4) The Township shall share in the cost of the planning process on a
per capita basis, which per capita amount shall be agreed upon by a
simple majority of the participating municipalities.
(5) The Township shall appoint an individual to serve in the Lehigh
County Solid Waste Association.
B. The proper officers and other personnel of the Township are hereby
authorized and empowered to take all such further actions and execute
such additional documents as they may deem appropriate to carry out
the purposes of § 20-13 of this chapter.
§ 20-11 WHITEHALL CODE § 20-13
19:642
ARTICLE III
Municipal Waste Collection and Removal
§ 20-14. Collection by Township.
A. The Township, or the Township collector, shall collect and dispose of all
municipal waste generated or accumulated at or from residential
dwellings other than commercial multifamily housing. The owner(s) of
every such residential dwelling within the Township from which the
municipal waste is collected by the Township, or the Township's
collector, shall be required to pay the fee established pursuant to this
chapter therefor. The obligation for payment shall remain in force and
shall be effective whether or not the owners, occupants or operators of
such residential dwellings choose to utilize any collection and disposal
service provided by the Township.
B. All municipal waste accumulated by owners of residential dwellings,
other than commercial multifamily housing, and/or the occupants of
such residential dwellings shall be placed in containers for collection by
a collector. The containers shall be durable, water tight and made of
metal or plastic. Securely tied plastic bags may also be used. The size of
each such container shall not exceed a capacity of 30 gallons nor
exceed a weight of 50 pounds. However, larger containers designed for
use with special hoisting equipment may be used if the collector serving
the residential dwelling uses collection vehicles with such special
hoisting equipment. The purchase and maintenance of containers shall
be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of the residential
dwelling.
C. Each municipal waste container shall be placed or set at curbside and
empty containers shall be removed from curbside, on the scheduled day
for collection, in accordance with the times and schedules established
by the Township. Except for residential dwellings excluded by other
provisions of this chapter, the collector shall collect municipal waste
from each residential dwelling at least once per week and will not be
limited to any specific amount of municipal waste per collection.
D. Each municipal waste container, when placed or set out at curbside,
shall be located so as to be accessible to the collector at ground level
and at a point on the curbline of the street or within 10 feet of the public
street or alley right-of-way from which collection from a vehicle can be
made. Failure to place containers at such locations may result in
discontinuance of service.
E. Containers shall be placed at curbside and removed from curbside on
the scheduled day of collection in accordance with the regulations
established by the Township.
F. The dumping, deposit or accumulation of ashes, garbage or refuse upon
private property, except as permitted by this chapter while awaiting
collection and removal, is expressly prohibited within the Township.
§ 20-14 RESERVED § 20-14
19:643
§ 20-15. Commercial, institutional and industrial establishments
including commercial multifamily housing.
§ 20-16. Disposal of municipal waste; transportation.
§ 20-17. Exclusions.
G. Prunings and trimmings of vines, bushes and trees for collection shall
be cut in lengths not to exceed three feet and in girth not to exceed 12
inches. Prunings and trimmings shall be securely tied in bundles and
the weight of each bundle shall not exceed 50 pounds.
A. All commercial multifamily housing, commercial, industrial and
institutional establishment shall provide for the collection and disposal
of all municipal waste generated by that establishment or activity from
that establishment or activity at least one each week, by contract with a
collector. The Township shall not provide any such collection, removal,
transportation or disposal service to or from any such establishment or
activity.
B. Storage of municipal waste on the property of commercial, institutional
and industrial establishments and commercial multifamily housing shall
be provided in the same type of containers as are required for
residential dwellings except that containers larger than 30 gallons may
be used where needed to accommodate larger volumes of municipal
waste. Such containers shall be kept in good working order.
C. Containers for collection of municipal waste at commercial, industrial
and industrial establishments and commercial multifamily housing shall
be located on such premises and shall be appropriately screened at a
place which shall not interfere with public or private sidewalks,
driveways, roads, streets, highways or entrances and exits or public or
private buildings.
A. All municipal waste produced, collected and transported from within
the Township shall be, to the extent permitted by law, disposed of at a
disposal site or facility designated by the Township. In the absence of
such disposal site or facility and/or such currently effective solid waste
management plan, municipal waste from the Township shall be
disposed of at a state-permitted site or facility.
B. If the Township designates a disposal site or facility all collectors and
other interested persons shall be informed of the location and other
information pertaining to the designated disposal site or facility to be
used for the disposal of municipal waste collected, transported and
removed from the Township.
C. Any person transporting municipal waste within the Township shall
prevent or remedy any spillage from vehicles or containers used in the
transport of such municipal waste.
§ 20-14 WHITEHALL CODE § 20-17
19:644
A. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit an owner or
occupant of any residential dwelling from transporting the owner's or
occupant's own municipal waste to a state-permitted disposal site or
facility on an irregular and unscheduled basis. In the event that an
owner or occupant undertakes such action, the owner or occupant shall
not be exempt from the fee for collection by the Township.
B. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a farmer from carrying out the
normal activities of his farming operation, including composting and
spreading of manure or other farm-produced agricultural waste.
C. The provisions of this article of this chapter shall only apply to the
storage, collection, transportation and disposal of municipal waste and
shall not apply to the storage, collection, transportation or disposal of
hazardous or residual waste. The storage, collection, transportation
and disposal of hazardous waste shall be undertaken and accomplished
to and in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws,
statutes, rules, ordinances and regulations.
D. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the Township from entering
into agreements or contracts with any person to collect and dispose of
municipal waste generated within the Township.
§ 20-17 RESERVED § 20-17
19:645

ARTICLE IV
Mandatory Recycling
§ 20-18. Recyclable materials.
The following materials are hereby designated as "recyclable materials"
within the Township:
§ 20-19. Collection by Township.
A. For all residential dwellings, including multifamily housing, as defined
in this chapter:
(1) Clear glass.
(2) Brown and green glass.
(3) Aluminum cans.
(4) Bimetallic cans.
(5) Newspapers.
(6) Leaf waste.
(7) Plastic containers of the varieties, types and chemical compositions
as specified by the Mayor. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(8) Magazines.
(9) Junk mail/paper mix.
(10) Paper board (cereal boxes, etc.).
(11) Telephone books.
B. For all commercial activities, other than commercial multifamily
housing, as defined in this chapter:
(1) Clear glass.
(2) Brown and green glass.
(3) Aluminum cans.
(4) Bimetallic cans.
(5) Corrugated paper.
(6) High grade office paper.
(7) Leaf waste.
A. The Township, or the Township collector, shall collect and dispose of all
recyclable materials from residential dwellings, other than commercial
§ 20-18 RESERVED § 20-19
19:647
multifamily housing, which are placed at curbside at least one occasion
per calendar month, in accordance with zones and schedules
established by the Township, and the owners, occupants or operators of
every such residential dwelling within the Township shall be required to
pay the fee established pursuant to this chapter therefor. The obligation
for payment shall remain in force and shall be effective whether or not
the residential dwelling is occupied or the owners or occupants of the
residential dwelling choose to utilize any collection and disposal service
provided by the Township.
B. The Township, or Township collector, shall collect and dispose of all
recyclable materials which have been properly prepared, separated and
placed at curbside in time for collection on the scheduled collection day.
The Township, or the Township's collector, shall have no obligation to
collect any materials which are not recyclable materials.
C. The Township, or the Township collector, may establish and maintain
"drop-off" centers at various locations within the Township for the
collection of recyclable materials. The Township shall establish the
locations, operating hours, recyclable materials accepted and other
details of the operation of the drop-off centers.
D. The Township, or the Township collector, shall collect leaf waste during
the months of October, November and December of each calendar year.
E. Recyclable materials that are collected by the Township shall be
recycled unless markets for such materials do not exist. The Township
shall:
(1) Transport, process, sell, market and dispose of all recyclable
materials collected by the Township in any manner that the Mayor
deems appropriate, except that there shall be no cash transaction
involving recyclable materials. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(2) Require the Mayor to establish and keep necessary records and to
issue a report, at least annually, to the Board of Commissioners
regarding the quantity price, total amount, to whom the recyclable
materials are sold, processed, marketed or where the recyclable
materials have been disposed. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(3) Accord consideration for the collection, marketing and disposition
of recyclable materials to person engaged in the business of
recycling on the effective date of Act 101, whether or not the
persons were operating for profit, as required by § 1501(f) of Act
101, 53 P.S. § 4000.1501(f).
(4) Require dealers that market the Township's recyclable materials to
provide written documentation that either said materials are
recycled or that markets for those materials do not exist.
§ 20-19 WHITEHALL CODE § 20-19
19:648
§ 20-20. Township ownership of recyclable materials.
All recyclable materials shall become the property of and shall be owned
by the Township or Township collector when such materials are collected
at curbside or delivered to the drop-off center. Nothing contained herein
shall be deemed to impair the ownership of recyclable materials by the
person who generated them prior to such pickup or delivery. Collection
of recyclable materials by persons not authorized by the Township is
prohibited.
§ 20-21. General operation of program and requirements.
§ 20-22. Recycling containers.
F. The Mayor shall establish an appropriate administrative organization
and system for the collection transportation, separation, processing,
sale, marketing and disposition of recyclable materials in accordance
with this article of this chapter. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
A. Every person in the Township shall be required to separate each of the
recyclable materials listed in § 20-18 for the purpose of recycling, from
all of the other municipal waste and other waste generated by that
person. No person may dispose of such recyclable materials with any
other municipal waste or other waste.
B. Lead acid batteries shall not be disposed of or be included as municipal
waste or recyclable materials. Lead acid batteries shall be disposed of
only in accordance with § 1510 of Act 101 found at 53 P.S. § 4000.1510
and otherwise prevailing Commonwealth law and regulations.
C. Plastic beverage containers, which are not degradable, shall not be
used as required by § 1701(c) of Act 101 found at 53 P.S.
§ 4000.1701(c).
A. Acquisition, purchase, identity, purpose.
(1) Recycling containers shall be purchased by the owner, occupant or
operator of each residential dwelling, other than commercial
multifamily housing, from the Township for $15 and shall become
the property of such owner, occupant or operator.
(2) The owners, occupants or operators of each residential dwelling,
other than commercial multifamily housing, may purchase
additional recycling containers from the Township at the discretion
of the Township.
(3) The Township shall have the power to require that each recycling
container be marked to identify the address or location of the
residential dwelling at which it is used.
§ 20-19 RESERVED § 20-22
19:649
§ 20-23. Residential dwellings other than commercial multifamily
housing.
All persons owning, occupying or operating residential dwellings, other
than commercial multifamily housing, within the Township shall:
§ 20-24. Commercial multifamily housing.
(4) Recycling containers shall not be used for any purpose other than
recycling.
B. Loss, theft or damage.
(1) The owner, occupant and operator of each residential dwelling,
other than commercial multifamily housing, is responsible for and
shall bear the risk of less, theft or damage to the owner's,
occupant's or operator's recycling containers.
(2) If a recycling container is lost, stolen or damaged, the owner,
occupant or operator shall purchase a replacement container from
the Township.
A. Prior to collection, cause the recyclable materials to be separated and
maintained in the separated condition until collection by the Township
which separation shall occur prior to the time the materials are placed
at curbside for collection.
B. Prior to collection, cause the recyclable materials to be prepared for
recycling in accordance with the regulations for each respective
material as established by the Township.
C. Cause recyclable materials to be placed in the separate official
Township recycling containers or other containers authorized by the
Township, in accordance with regulations promulgated pursuant
thereto.
D. Acquire and use an official Township recycling container for the
purposes set forth herein.
E. Place recyclable materials at curbside, and remove empty recycling
containers from curbside, on the scheduled day of collection, in
accordance with the regulations established by the Township.
A. The owner, occupant or operator of any commercial multifamily housing
shall provide for the recycling of all recyclable materials which are
generated by such commercial multifamily housing, by:
(1) Securing a contract with a collector.
(2) Establishing a collection system for recyclable materials at each
property, which collection system shall provide:
§ 20-22 WHITEHALL CODE § 20-24
19:650
§ 20-25. Commercial activities, other than commercial multifamily
housing.
(a) Suitable containers for the collection and sorting of recyclable
materials.
(b) Easily accessible locations for the recyclable materials
containers.
(c) Written instructions to the occupants concerning the use and
availability of the recyclable materials collection system.
B. The Township may establish regulations defining compliance with the
collection system requirements provided in Subsection A.
C. Owners and operators of commercial multifamily housing who comply
with Subsection D shall not be liable for the noncompliance by the
occupants of their buildings.
D. Owners and operators of commercial multifamily housing shall provide
education to occupants at least every six months in the form of
meetings, posters in the trash area or on bulletin boards, or written
notices provided to occupants, instructing them in the use of the
recycling containers and designating the locations where specified
recyclable materials shall be placed for collection. In addition, the
owner or operator shall provide confirmation of oral instruction or a
copy of any written material given to tenants to document compliance
with these requirements.
A. Every person owning, occupying or operating a commercial activity,
other than commercial multifamily housing, within the Township shall
comply with this article of this chapter by separating and storing in an
enclosed building or closed container, or as otherwise approved by the
Township, until collection for recycling, by contract with a collector, all
recyclable materials which are generated by that commercial activity.
B. Persons owning, occupying or generating commercial institutional and
municipal establishments shall be exempt from this article of this
chapter provided such persons have otherwise provided for the
recycling of the recyclable materials; and, provided, further that an
annually provide written document is provided to the Township of the
total number of tons recycled materials and the total amount of
municipal waste, in tons, to determine the percentage reduction in the
municipal waste stream. Community activities shall not be exempt from
this article of this chapter.
C. Compliance with regulations.
(1) If a person is contracted, engaged or hired for recycling in a
commercial activity, the commercial activity shall comply with all
regulations regarding:
§ 20-24 RESERVED § 20-25
19:651
§ 20-26. Collector.
Any collector contracted, engaged or hired for recycling in the Township
shall:
(a) Separation.
(b) Preparation.
(c) Storage and place in containers.
(d) Placement for pickup.
(e) Timing of place and pickup.
(2) Provided however that to avoid contamination, in no event shall any
solid waste be mixed with any recyclable material, and further
provided that all cans and glass containers, paper and cardboard
shall be kept separated from each other, unless prior written
approval is obtained from the Township.
A. Be licensed by the Township as provided by this chapter.
B. Comply with this chapter, Act 101 and all other applicable laws and
regulations.
C. To avoid contamination, keep each of the several types of recyclable
materials which are designed for collection and collected separate from
each other, unless the collector can demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Mayor, in writing, that a market exists for the commingled
recyclable materials and prior written approval is obtained from the
Mayor to engage in such activity. In no event shall any solid waste be
mixed with any recyclable material. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
D. Ensure that one of the following occurs:
(1) Process and recycle all of the recyclable materials.
(2) Transport, process, market, sell or deliver all of the recyclable
materials to dealers in those materials and document such delivery
in writing.
(3) Provide written proof that markets for those materials do not exist.
E. Submit an annual report to the Township Recycling Coordinator or such
other person as may be designated by the Mayor to receive such reports
no later than January 31 of each year reporting for the previous
calendar year. Each report shall state for that year: [Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(1) The quantity in tons of each recyclable material collected by that
collector from properties situate within the Township.
§ 20-25 WHITEHALL CODE § 20-26
19:652
§ 20-27. Public information and education program.
(2) The total quantity in tons of all garbage, trash, and refuse collected
by that collector from properties within the Township.
(3) From whom and to whom, where and how each recyclable material
was sold or delivered for processing or recycling.
F. Report all instances of apparent noncompliance with either this article
or its own regulations of the Mayor within 72 hours of becoming aware
of that noncompliance. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
A. The Township shall notify the occupants of residential dwellings and
commercial, institutional and municipal establishments within its
boundaries of the requirements of this article.
B. This notification shall occur at least once every six months.
C. Education programs shall be furnished periodically or upon request
through the schools and other organizations.
D. The Mayor shall have the power to use other methods of publication to
comply with the public information and education requirements of Act
101 found at 53 P.S. § 4000.1501(d), as may be satisfactory and
adequate in the circumstances. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
§ 20-26 RESERVED § 20-27
19:653

ARTICLE V
Permits, Appeals, Rule-making
§ 20-28. Permits. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
The Mayor is authorized to issue permits in accordance with the terms
hereof. Any permit granted under this article of this chapter shall be valid
for a period of one year after its date of issuance and each permit shall be
renewed annually before the expiration date set forth on the permit. Permits
issued under and pursuant to this chapter are not transferable or assignable
under any circumstances.
§ 20-29. Permit application.
A. Application for a permit to construct, operate, establish or maintain a
municipal waste storage, treatment, processing, disposal site or facility
or a recycling facility shall be submitted in such written form as
prescribed by the Township and shall be accompanied by the required
fee.
B. After submission of the application and payment of the required fee,
together with all plans, specifications and supporting data required to
be furnished with said application, the Mayor shall have up to six
months within which to review the application and its supporting data,
to hold one or more public hearings before the Board of Commissioners
regarding the proposed site or facility and either to grant or deny the
permit. When the Mayor has determined that the application and its
supporting data is complete and that the proposed site or facility meets
the requirements of this chapter, and the regulations promulgated
thereunder, a permit will be issued which issuance shall require the
approval of the Board of Commissioners. If an application for a permit is
denied, the fee, less an administrative processing fee shall be returned
to the applicant. An applicant shall have the right to submit a new
application for a permit no sooner than 12 months after the denial of
any previously filed application. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
C. The plans, specifications and supporting data referenced in Subsection
B hereof shall include the following:
(1) Design and construction plans, maps, specifications and such other
supporting information and data as required by the Township,
together with a written plan of operation delineating procedures to
be carried out for the daily operation, types of wastes or recyclable
materials to be accepted, and procedures for handling wastes and
recyclable materials in the event of emergencies or shutdowns,
shall be submitted with any application for a permit. The written
plan of operation, in addition to the aforesaid information required
to be furnished, shall include a narrative concerning:
§ 20-28 RESERVED § 20-29
19:655
(a) The proposed daily operation methodology of the proposed site
or facility.
(b) The nature of the solid wastes or recyclable materials, by
source and type of material, that will be accepted at the site or
facility.
(c) The expected life of the site or facility and the proposed
ultimate disposition of the site or facility.
(d) The anticipated environmental effects of the facility on the
physical characteristics of the site or facility and the adjacent
properties.
(e) A description of the technology underlying the operational
methodology, together with a comprehensive history of the use
of the technology, its effectiveness, its efficiency and its
potential long-term impact.
(2) Topographic maps which shall include, at a minimum, the following
information as it pertains to the area within one mile of the
proposed site or facility property lines:
(a) The location of public and private water lines, supplies, wells,
springs, streams, swamps, rivers and other bodies of water and
public and private sewer lines and septic systems.
(b) The location of underground and surface mines showing the
extent of deep mine workings, elevation of the mine pool and
location of mine pool discharge.
(c) The location of gas and oil wells.
(d) The location of high-tension power line rights-of-way.
(e) The location of pipeline rights-of-way.
(f) The location of geologic and hydrologic features.
(g) The floodplain and location of the site or facility within that
floodplain, water runoff from the floodplain and stormwater
runoffs.
(h) The location of public and private recreational areas.
(i) A soils, geologic and groundwater report of characteristics of
the are where the proposed site or facility will be located.
(j) The location of significant historical and architectural sites.
D. The fee for a permit shall be established from time to time, by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners. [Amended 8-8-2005 by
Ord. No. 2578]
§ 20-29 WHITEHALL CODE § 20-30
19:656
§ 20-30. Licenses. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
The Mayor is authorized to issue licenses in accordance with the terms
hereof. Any license granted under this article of this chapter shall be valid
for a period of one year after it date of issuance and each license shall
be renewed annually before the expiration date set forth on the license.
Licenses issued under and pursuant to this chapter are not transferable or
assignable under any circumstances.
§ 20-31. License application.
A. Application for a license to collect, transport and dispose of municipal
waste or recyclable materials shall be submitted in such written form as
prescribed by the Township and shall be accompanied by the required
fee. Licenses shall be issued only to a person who or which provides
satisfactory evidence that such person is capable of providing that
necessary services and can comply with the provisions and intent of this
chapter. The Township reserves the right to disapprove any application
for a license.
B. The applicant for a license shall include the following information:
(1) The make, model, license plate number and size of each vehicle to
be used for collection and transportation.
(2) The location, address and telephone number of the business office
of the applicant.
(3) A certificate of the applicant's workmen's compensation insurance
as required by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(4) A certificate of insurance coverage providing complete third-party
comprehensive, bodily injury and property damage, liability
insurance, the limits of which shall not be less than
$1,000,000/$3,000,000 for bodily injury and $500,000 for property
damage.
(5) Any other information which the Township may request and deem
necessary prior to the issuance of a license.
C. Licenses shall be issued on a calendar year basis but may be suspended
or revoked at any time by the Township for failure to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
D. If the application for a license is denied, the fee, less an administrative
processing fee as established by resolution, from time to time, by the
Board of Commissioners, shall be returned to the applicant. [Amended
8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
E. Each vehicle used by a collector shall prominently display the name and
number of the collector and the cubic yard capacity of the vehicle's
body.
§ 20-30 RESERVED § 20-31
19:657
§ 20-32. Appeal procedure.
Any person adversely affected by an action taken pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter relative to the issuance of a permit or a license or any
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto may appeal from that action to
the Board of Commissioners within 30 days from the date of the action
appealed.
§ 20-33. Rule-making.
F. The fee for a license shall be in an amount as established by resolution,
from time to time, by the Board of Commissioners. [Amended
8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
G. Only one license need be obtained by each person, but a copy of the
license shall be carried on each vehicle utilized for the transportation of
recyclable materials where the point of origin or the destination of such
material is within the boundaries of Whitehall Township.
A. After the effective date of this chapter, the Mayor may, with the
approval of the Board of Commissioners, promulgate, and thereafter
revise as appropriate, rules and regulations necessary to carry out the
purposes and intent of this article including, but not limited to,
regulations regarding the following aspects of proper municipal waste
or recyclable materials management: [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(1) The criteria for determining the qualities and characteristics of
materials that constitute municipal wastes or recyclable materials.
(2) The operation methodology of the site or facility and the onsite
handling, including the separation, combination and containment
of municipal waste and recyclable materials.
(3) Procedures and requirements for the use of a manifest or form
which identifies the quantity, characteristics, composition, type and
origin of municipal waste or recyclable materials received and
accepted by the site or facility.
(4) Varieties, types and chemical compositions to be collected for
recycling, both in the Township's curbside recycling program and
at any drop-off centers or otherwise disposed in municipal waste.
(5) Preparation of recyclable materials for recycling.
(6) Separating, placing and combining recyclable materials in the
official Township recycling binds.
(7) Exact location for curbside pickup, where those locations are not
established or are otherwise unsatisfactory.
(8) Zones, routes and schedules for collection days.
§ 20-31 WHITEHALL CODE § 20-33
19:658
§ 20-34. Suspension or revocation of licenses and permits.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(9) Times to set out and bring in the official Township recycling bins.
(10) Drop-off center locations, operating hours, materials accepted and
other details.
(11) Designation of recyclable materials.
B. At the time of the promulgation of the proposed regulations referred to
in this section, a copy of said proposed regulations shall be provided to
the Board of Commissioners of the Township.
C. Alteration or suspension of regulations.
(1) The Mayor may alter or suspend any regulation for good cause or in
the event of an emergency including, but not limited to, snow
storms and floods, without prior notice, for a period of time not to
exceed 30 days. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
(2) Any alteration or suspension of a regulation for a period of time
extending for more than 30 days shall be permitted only by
affirmative vote of the Board of Commissioners.
D. The attached Whitehall Township Recycling Regulations,78 consisting of
one page, are hereby approved, adopted and enacted.
A. The Mayor may immediately suspend a license or permit issued if a
collector or permittee is in violation of any provision of this chapter or
any of the promulgated pursuant thereto. Written notice of the
suspension or revocation, which notice shall state the reasons for the
suspension or revocation, the nature of the violation and the means to
cure or correct said violation, shall be served upon the collector. If the
violation is not cured or corrected within 10 days after receipt of the
notice of suspension or revocation, or if no appeal is filed with the
Board of Commissioners by the collector within said ten-day time
period, the suspension shall become final and the collector's license or
permit shall be deemed revoked. During any appeal period, substantial
progress toward correcting any violations shall be made daily by the
holder of the license or the permit. Citations shall be issued daily if
progress is not deemed substantial by the Mayor.
B. The person affected by a license or permit revocation may reapply for a
license or permit within 45 days of the revocation. If the applicant is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Mayor an ability and
willingness to comply with the provisions of this chapter, and the
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, the Mayor may grant a new
78.Editor's Note: Said regulations are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 20-33 RESERVED § 20-34
19:659
§ 20-35. Abatement and injunctions. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this chapter, if the Mayor
determines that any holder of a license or permit is operating in violation
of this chapter, or any of the regulations promulgated thereunder, or if any
holder of a license or permit is operating in any illegal, unsafe or otherwise
improper manner so as to endanger the public health, safety or welfare,
the Mayor may order the holder of a license or permit to immediately
discontinue operation. Upon failure to comply with such order, the Mayor
may: request the Township Solicitor to commence appropriate civil action
in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure a temporary restraining
order, a preliminary injunction, a permanent injunction or other appropriate
relief; or may declare the holder of a license or permit is creating a public
nuisance and order immediate abatement of same, with the costs of such
abatement to be borne and assessed against the holder of the license or
permit and collected as permitted by existing law.
§ 20-36. Violations.
license or permit. For the purposes of this chapter, a new application
shall be filed accompanied by the required fee.
A. It shall be unlawful and shall be deemed disorderly conduct for any
person to:
(1) Violate any of the provision of this chapter.
(2) Scavenge, remove, take, scatter or disturb recyclable materials
which have been collected and assembled in containers, whether
stored on private or public property or placed by a roadway or curb
for collection. Scavenging shall not include the collection or picking
up of scattered trash or debris, whether or not recyclable, from
roadsides or public property with the intent of properly disposing
of or recycling said waste.
(3) Damage, take, remove, deface or use for purposes other than
approved recycling storage and collection, any crate, curbside
container, bucket or other device issued or approved by Whitehall
Township and/or the County of Lehigh as part of any recycling
program, pilot program of effort.
(4) Construct, operate, establish or maintain a municipal waste
storage, treatment, processing or disposal site or facility or
recycling facility in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or
without first having obtained a permit therefor.
(5) Collect, transport or dispose of municipal waste or recyclable
materials in violation of the provisions of this chapter or without
first having obtained a license therefor.
§ 20-34 WHITEHALL CODE § 20-37
19:660
§ 20-37. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that
a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Provided, however, that any act which can also be prosecuted under any
provision of the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be
considered a violation of the applicable state law and shall be prosecuted
under such law and not under this chapter.
§ 20-37 RESERVED § 20-37
19:661

ARTICLE VI
Township Collection and Disposal Fees and Billing
§ 20-38. Collection and disposal fee schedule.
A. The Township shall establish a fee schedule, including abatement and
discounts, for the collection and disposal (the "collection and disposal
fee") of municipal waste and recyclable materials by the Township,
which fee schedule may be amended from time to time by ordinance of
the Board of Commissioners.
B. The collection and disposal fee shall be borne and paid for by the owner
of the property from which municipal waste and recyclable materials is
or may be collected.
C. Base fee; second container. [Amended last 12-9-2019 by Ord. No.
3186, approved 12-9-2019]
(1) The base fee for the collection of municipal solid waste shall be
$325 for each dwelling. Residents shall receive once per week
collection of municipal solid waste and recyclable materials. They
shall be limited to one collector cart of municipal solid waste per
collection with the approved Township cart container with the lid
completely closed. Included in the base fee is the once per week
collection of recyclable materials in the Township-approved
recycling collector cart.
(2) Any residential garbage customer with the need for a second
ninety-five-gallon MSW collector cart shall provide a formal written
request for the second container between January 3 and February
3, and the customer shall pay a nonrefundable charge of $100 for
the second ninety-five-gallon container at the Township Tax Office.
Additionally, the base fee for the collection of municipal solid waste
shall be $355 for each dwelling with two collector carts. Included in
the base fee is the once-per-week collection of recyclable materials
in the Township-approved recycling collector cart.
D. The cost for collection of Freon appliances shall be $25 per appliance.
Customers shall purchase a label required by the Township and affix the
same to said appliance to ensure collection. [Amended last 12-9-2019
by Ord. No. 3186, approved 12-9-2019]
E. Exceptions.
(1) The owner or owners of an owner-occupied residential dwelling, in
which household income, including the income of all individuals 18
years or older living in the home, from all sources is less than
$15,000/year one of whom is either: [Amended 8-14-2000 by
Ord. No. 2254]
(a) An adult individual aged 65 years and older as of December 31
of the prior calendar year;
§ 20-38 RESERVED § 20-38
19:663
§ 20-39. Billing and collection of Township collection and disposal
fee.
(b) A widow or widower aged 50 and older as of December 31 of
the prior calendar year;
(c) A person permanently and totally disabled, as determined
using criteria developed and hereinafter to be developed by
the Social Security Administration; or
(d) A person deemed legally blind, in accordance with the
appropriate Social Security criteria;
(2) Shall be deemed exonerated from the obligation to pay the
collection and disposal fee (of the current year only) for the
collection and disposal of municipal waste and recyclable
materials. [Amended 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 2254]
F. The owner or owners or an owner-occupied residential dwelling, one of
whom must be aged 72 years or older as of December 31 of the prior
calendar year, and one of whom does not otherwise qualify for fee
exoneration as provided in Subsection E of this section shall be entitled
to a discount of 25% from the face amount of the garbage collection and
disposal fee for the current year only for such owner-occupied
residential dwelling.
G. Requests for exoneration or discounts pursuant to Subsections E and F
above shall be made on an annual basis. Exonerations and discounts
may only be given for the current years collection and disposal fee. The
Township shall not give, and no person shall be entitled to, exoneration
or discount for any prior year's collection and disposal fee.
H. For the purposes of implementing Subsections E and F of this section,
the Township Treasurer shall adopt regulations to effectuate the
provisions of these paragraphs. The Township Treasurer is hereby
authorized to require proof of age in the form of a birth certificate,
social security care, driver's license or other document recognized by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as evidence of age. In addition, the
Township Treasurer is authorized to require such evidence of
household income as the Mayor may deem appropriate including, but
not limited to, Federal Income Tax returns, SSA Form 1099 or such
other form as might be adopted in the future by the Social Security
Administration as evidence of payments made, records documenting
income from savings account, annuities, pensions, stocks, bonds, trusts
or other sources of income to which the head of the household is
entitled through the calendar year for which abatement or the 25%
discount is being claimed. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
A. The Township shall annually invoice each owner of a residential
property with the Land Use Code of 1101, 1102, 1103, 1104, 1105,
§ 20-38 WHITEHALL CODE § 20-39
19:664
1108, 1132, 1134, 1136, 1140, 1141, 1190, 1410, 1418, 1420, 1428,
1430 within the Township for the collection and disposal fee established
in § 20-38C. Said fee must be paid by December 31 of the year issued.
[Amended 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 2254]
B. Commercial, institutional and industrial establishments and
commercial multifamily housing are excluded from participation in the
Township collection and disposal service.
C. Upon receipt of evidence that commercial activity is, or is deemed to be
occurring in, on or at the property upon which the residential dwelling
is situate, the owner of the residential dwelling shall not be required to
pay the collection and disposal fee. Evidence of commercial activity
shall include, but not be limited to, a current business privilege license
and evidence establishing the existence of collection and disposal
services from a collector for the commercial activity and all residential
dwellings situate upon the property.
D. For the purposes of Subsection C, the term "property" shall mean
property, or an adjacent property, which are included in a single Lehigh
County Tax Map parcel number.
E. Late and overdue resident collections. Your annual garbage fee is
overdue if unpaid by December 31 of each calendar year. The amount
due is the rate for that calendar year and a late penalty of 10% added on
June 1 of that calendar year. You have two options to satisfy your
obligation: [Added 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2932]
(1) Option No. 1. Pay the balance in full by December 31 of the year in
question, which includes the ten-percent penalty, without further
cost or penalty. If payment is not received by December 31 of the
year in question, an additional late fee in the amount of $35 will be
added to the base cost and ten-percent penalty.
(2) Option No. 2. Pay the balance due, which includes the base cost,
penalty penalty and late fee of $35, in consecutive monthly
installments for an additional cost of $10. Each of those three equal
monthly payments is due on the 15th day of each month, starting in
the subsequent February.
F. Late and overdue landlord collections. Your annual landlord garbage
fee is overdue if unpaid by December 31 of each calendar year. The
amount due is the rate for that calendar year and a late penalty of 10%
added on June 1 of that calendar year. You have two options to satisfy
your obligation: [Added 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2932]
(1) Option No. 1. Pay the balance in full by December 31 of the year in
question, which includes the ten-percent penalty, without further
cost or penalty. If payment is not received by December 31 of the
year in question, an additional late fee in the amount of $35 will be
added to the base cost and ten-percent penalty.
§ 20-39 RESERVED § 20-39
19:665
(2) Option No. 2. Pay the balance due, which includes the base cost,
ten-percent and late fee of $35, in consecutive monthly
installments for an additional cost of $11. Each of those three equal
monthly payments is due on the 15th day of each month, starting in
the subsequent February.
§ 20-39 WHITEHALL CODE § 20-39
19:666
ARTICLE VII
General Provisions
§ 20-40. Continuation of existing ordinance provisions.
The provisions of this chapter hereby adopted, insofar as they are the
same as any ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of
this chapter are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not
as new enactments. The provisions of this chapter hereby adopted shall
not be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or
any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under an act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in
this chapter, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be
lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 20-41. Continuation of existing rules and regulations.
Until such time as new regulations are promulgated, all regulations
promulgated pursuant to the predecessors to this chapter shall remain in
full force and effect, except to the extent that such regulations conflict with
any provision hereof.
§ 20-42. Effect upon the requirements of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
To the extent that the provisions hereof differ from those established or
to be established by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, by
regulation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or by any other commonwealth agency, both the
Commonwealth requirements and the requirements of this chapter shall
be deemed to be applicable, it being the intent of this chapter to impose
requirements more stringent than those applied by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. Should the provisions hereof be determined to be
incompatible or in conflict with state law or state regulations, the provisions
hereof shall be deemed null and void and to no effect only to the extent of
the incompatibility or conflict.
§ 20-40 RESERVED § 20-42
19:667
Chapter 21
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 20-42 WHITEHALL CODE § 20-42
19:668
ARTICLE I
Street Openings
[Adopted 6-14-1962 by Ord. No. 692]
§ 21-1. Permit required to make opening or excavation. [Amended
10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 1252; 11-13-1983 by Ord. No. 1440;
7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2781]
From and after the passage of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm, association, copartnership or corporation to make any opening
or excavation, including any boring or placing of conduit, in or under the
right-of-way , both the cartway as well as any sidewalk area or grass
strip that comprises the right-of-way, for any street, alley or other public
thoroughfare within the limits of the Township of Whitehall unless or until
a permit is secured from the Director of Operations or his designate for
each separate undertaking, said permit and the application to be on a form
furnished by the Township.
§ 21-2. Permit fees. [Amended 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 1252;
11-13-1983 by Ord. No. 1440]
§ 21-3. Submission of plan; effect of disapproval; emergency repair
work. [Amended 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 1252; 11-14-1983 by Ord.
No. 1440]
Said person, firm, association, partnership or corporation at the time of
filing its application shall submit a plan drawn to scale showing the location
and dimensions of the proposed openings, to the Township Engineer who
is hereby authorized and directed for and on behalf of the Township to
approve or disapprove as to location, which approval or disapproval shall be
A. At the time of making application for the permit for any such opening,
excavation, or boring the applicant shall pay the Township Treasurer,
for the use of the Township right-of-way, permit fees in accordance with
the established schedule. Total permit cost shall be the total of the
relevant portions of the following charges, plus any franchise fee or
other fee as required and permitted to be assessed to the utility or the
applicant under applicable Township, state and federal laws:
[Amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2781]
(1) Issuance fee.
(2) Occupancy fee.
(3) Restoration fee.
(4) Inspection fee.
B. The Board of Commissioners may impose such fees for permits or
services hereunder as may be established, from time to time, by
resolution. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
§ 21-1 RESERVED § 21-3
19:669
endorsed thereon. In the event the said authorities disapprove of any plan
or plans as to location of said opening or excavation, they shall designate
some other location suitable for the purposes of the said person, firm,
association, copartnership or corporation. In the event, however, of any
emergency repair work, any person, firm, association, copartnership or
corporation may immediately open any streets, alleys or other
thoroughfares for such repair work only, and shall submit a plan as soon
thereafter as possible to the Township Engineer.
§ 21-4. Backfilling. [Amended 12-9-1968 by Ord. No. 914; 6-14-1971
by Ord. No. 1037; by Ord. No. 1356; 11-13-1983 by Ord. No. 1440;
10-17-1995 by Ord. No. 1944]
A. Such person, firm, association, copartnership, corporation or other
entity of every nature whatsoever shall, immediately upon the
completion of the work for which said street opening was made, backfill
the opening in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) To the height of one foot above the top of the pipe, backfill shall be
of sand or screenings, placed by hand, and hand-tamped in layers
no exceeding four inches.
(2) From a height of one foot above the pipe, backfill shall be of
crushed stone (Type 2-A Modified); and backfill shall be placed and
mechanically tamped in layers not exceeding eight inches to within
2 1/2 inches below existing paving.
(3) Backfill around structures such as inlets, manholes, etc., shall be by
hand, placed in layers of eight inches [after compliance with
Subsection A(1) above] and thoroughly tamped.
(4) Before placing the ID-2 bituminous concrete binder in the opening,
the old pavement shall be saw-cut six inches larger all around the
original opening in order that the new ID-2 will have good bearing.
From 2 1/2 inches below existing street grade, bituminous concrete
meeting Pennsylvania Department of Transportation requirements
for ID-2 bituminous concrete binder and surface courses shall be
separately placed and rolled or tamped for bituminous streets.
Portland cement concrete shall be used to restore concrete streets.
The joints between old and new bituminous concrete pavements
shall be sealed with BM-1. Sealer shall also be place adjacent to
manholes, valve boxes, curbs, etc.
B. Any disturbance or excavation which occurs outside of the paved
surface of the road (cartway) shall be restored to its original condition
by the permittee. This will include the replacement of any sidewalk
slabs damaged in the work the restoration and reseeding of any grass
areas, and any other work as directed by the Department of Operations
as a result of the street opening. [Added 7-13-2009 by Ord. No.
2781]
§ 21-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 21-4
19:670
§ 21-5. Restrictions on openings. [Amended 11-14-1983 by Ord. No.
1440]
No person, firm, association, copartnership or corporation shall open any
street, alley or other thoroughfare in the Township for new work between
the 15th day of November and the 15th day of March next following in any
year, except in case of emergency and shall make no larger excavation than
is necessary to enable them to perform their work with proper economy and
efficiency.
§ 21-6. Safety precautions. [Amended 11-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1440]
Said person, firm, association, copartnership or corporation shall at all
times provide for the safety of the public by guard rails and barricades
where necessary, by the use of danger signs in the daytime and warning
signs at night, and shall at all times fully indemnify, protect and save
harmless the Township from and against all actions, claims, expenditures
arising from the said opening or excavation or from its neglect or failure to
do work in a good and safe manner.
§ 21-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-12-1971 by Ord. No.
1008; by Ord. No. 1356; 11-13-1983 by Ord. No. 1440; 10-17-1995
by Ord. No. 1944; 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
C. The Bureau of Development (under the Department of Operations) shall
be notified 24 hours in advance of street openings or excavation.
Failure to notify the Department in this manner will constitute a
violation of this article and will result in the forfeiture of the restoration
fee/deposit. An inspector will be provided by this Department and must
be present when backfill work is in progress. [Amended 7-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2781]
§ 21-4 RESERVED § 21-7
19:671

ARTICLE II
Protection of Streets
[Adopted 11-11-1916 by Ord. No. 165]
§ 21-8. Fires not permitted on streets. [Amended 4-12-1971 by Ord.
No. 1001; 10-17-1995 by Ord. No. 1944]
The making of any fire on any street, road or alley in the Township of
Whitehall, regardless of whether such street, road or alley shall be paved or
unpaved, is hereby prohibited.
§ 21-9. Salt water or other liquid waste prohibited. [Added
6-15-1922 by Ord. No. 214; amended 4-12-1971 by Ord. No. 1002]
The emptying, depositing, placing or permitting of salt water from any
source or any waste from any boiler, engine room or heating system, in
or upon any street or highway in the Township of Whitehall, is hereby
prohibited.
§ 21-10. Edifice mailboxes. [Added 7-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2499]
A. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BREAKAWAY MAILBOX — A mailbox approved by the U.S. Postal
Service and used for the curbside delivery of mail, which is supported
by a wood post no greater in cross-section than four inches square or
by a post with a strength no greater than a two-inch diameter steel
pipe. Two such posts may be used to support a cluster of four or more
mailboxes.
NEWSPAPER DELIVERY RECEPTACLE — A device for receiving and
containing newspapers delivered for and at the request of a subscriber
to the newspaper.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any street, highway, avenue, alley, sidewalk,
skywalk bridge, public place, or other real property or right-of-way
owned or controlled by the Township.
B. Regulations. No mailbox or newspaper delivery receptacle shall be
erected within any right-of-way or other public property which is not a
breakaway mailbox.
C. Damages. Any injury or damage to persons or property occurring in
consequence of the construction, use or maintenance of any of the
encroachments described in this article or because of any defect
therein shall be paid by the person using or maintaining such
encroachment. After August 11, 2004, the responsibility for damage to
a mailbox upon public property by the Township, its officers, employees,
and agents shall be limited to replacement of the damaged mailbox by
the Township with a breakaway mailbox of a standard design and color
§ 21-8 RESERVED § 21-10
19:673
§ 21-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-15-1922 by Ord. No.
214; 10-17-1995 by Ord. No. 1944; 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 21-12. Recovery of damages. [Added 6-15-1922 by Ord. No. 214;
amended 4-12-1971 by Ord. No. 1002]
The imposition of any penalty under this article shall not preclude the
Township or other injured party from recovery of damages incurred as a
result of any violation of the first section of this article.
§ 21-13. Dumpsters. [Added 6-15-1922 by Ord. No. 214; amended
9-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2336]
No person shall place or cause to be placed any dumpster within the
right-of-way area of any Township street, except upon having first obtained
the necessary dumpster permit, issued by the Whitehall Township Police
Department and Bureau of Development. In addition, all such dumpsters
shall conform to the following regulations:
selected by the Township. The owner of any mailbox remaining upon
public property after August 11, 2004, shall be deemed to have agreed
to this limitation as a condition of the owner's continued use of the
public right-of-way. Any mailbox which is not a breakaway mailbox,
when replaced or damaged in any way, shall be replaced with a
breakaway mailbox pursuant to these regulations.
D. Inspections. The Mayor or his or her authorized agent is authorized to
inspect, at any time, the different encroachments mentioned in this
article. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
A. The dumpster must be one that can be readily removed from the rightof-
way area.
B. The dumpster cannot extend into the sidewalk area and cannot be a
hazard to the public using the sidewalk.
C. All dumpsters in the cartway shall be clearly marked with reflective
tape and flashing caution lights. For the purposes of this section, the
cartway is defined as the area between curbs.
D. Plans and site location of the proposed dumpster shall be submitted
along with the application for dumpster permit and must be approved
prior to placement of the dumpster.
§ 21-10 WHITEHALL CODE § 21-13
19:674
E. No dumpster permit shall be issued if, in the opinion of the Whitehall
Township Police Department, such issuance will create a safety hazard
to the use of the sidewalk area or cartway by pedestrians or vehicles.
F. No dumpster to be located in the cartway shall be wider than eight feet.
G. Once issued, the maximum duration of a permit for a dumpster shall be
60 continuous days.
H. All waste must be emptied from the dumpster on a regular basis. At no
time shall the waste be permitted to overflow the dumpster.
I. No dumpster permit shall be issued for the placement of same in a
cartway with a width of less than 30 feet; nor shall such a permit be
issued for a cartway with parking restrictions established thereon.
J. Fees for dumpster permits shall be as set forth in the Whitehall
Township Fee Schedule.
K. All dumpsters shall display on them the name of the owner/supplier of
same.
L. Form of Permit. The dumpster permit shall contain, at a minimum, the
following information:
(1) Name, telephone and address of property owner for which the
dumpster is being placed.
(2) Name, telephone and address of dumpster supplier.
(3) Name and telephone number of dumpster company representative,
this representative shall be available 24 hours a day in case of
emergency.
(4) Date that dumpster is to be placed, and expected removal date.
(5) Size of dumpster.
(6) Location map for dumpster location.
(7) Proof of liability insurance coverage for the dumpster.
§ 21-13 RESERVED § 21-13
19:675

ARTICLE III
Street Widths
[Adopted 6-20-1904 by Ord. No. 36]
§ 21-14. Width of certain streets established. [Amended 4-12-1971
by Ord. No. 998]
All streets now or hereafter legally opened and adopted, by ordinance or
otherwise, shall be of a uniform width of 36 feet between curblines, except
for any and all streets for which a different width shall have been or shall
hereafter be specifically established by ordinance.
§ 21-15. Width of local streets. [Added 4-11-1988 by Ord. No. 1610]
Local streets shall have a minimum right-of-way of 55 feet, with a minimum
cartway width of 36 feet.
§ 21-14 RESERVED § 21-15
19:677

ARTICLE IV
Sidewalks to Curbs
[Adopted 11-9-1970 by Ord. No. 961]
§ 21-16. Duty to construct sidewalk, curbs and gutters. [Amended
11-8-1982 by Ord. No. 1411; 6-10-1997 by Ord. No. 2037; 3-10-2003
by Ord. No. 2396; 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2799; 7-13-2015 by Ord.
No. 3018]
§ 21-17. Definitions. [Amended 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3018]
The following words shall have the following meanings when used in this
article:
A. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be the duty of all owners of
property abutting a dedicated or opened public street or highway
within the Township to construct concrete sidewalks, curbs and any
other improvements required by the construction of curbing at their
own expense for the safety and convenience of the public in accordance
with regulations established by ordinance and keep same in good repair
and accessible pursuant to the requirements of both the Federal Fair
Housing Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act.
B. The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Whitehall shall hear
requests from property owners for deferrals from the duties imposed by
this section. Deferral requests shall be submitted by the property owner
no later than 180 days from the date of the advance curb and/or
sidewalk notice issued by the Department of Operations, or within 30
days of filing a land development and/or subdivision plan, or within 180
days of building permit issuance. The Board may grant deferrals either
modifying or postponing the obligation imposed by this section until
such time as deemed necessary by the then present Board where:
(1) The character of the neighborhood is such that the installation of
sidewalks would not serve any public purpose; or
(2) Where unique physical circumstances make the installation of
sidewalks an undue hardship, and the absence of this installation
would not materially affect the public safety and convenience.
(3) Where property abuts a state, federal or local roadway and said
installation would adversely affect the drainage patterns or
facilities presently in existence.
C. In granting such a deferral, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to protect the public
safety and convenience, including the requirement that a bond or other
security be posted to assure the completion of said improvements,
where appropriate. However, no deferrals shall be granted for
modifications required under the Federal Fair Housing or Americans
with Disabilities Acts.
§ 21-16 RESERVED § 21-17
19:679
ADA — Americans with Disabilities Act.
FFHA — Federal Fair Housing Act.
MAJOR STREET REPAIR, CONSTRUCTION or RECONSTRUCTION — Any
improvement of any street, alley, highway or public thoroughfare in the
Township of Whitehall other than sealing, patching, minor maintenance
such as micro-resurfacing, or temporary repairs.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Any improvement or addition on any parcel of
land whereby the value of any existing structures shall be increased by
100% or more; where no structure exists upon the parcel of land involved,
the improvement shall be classified as new construction regardless of the
value of the proposed improvement.
OWNER — Those persons owning property along streets or thoroughfares
in the Township of Whitehall who are subject to applicable rules of
assessment for municipal improvements; an "owner" shall include the
masculine, feminine and neuter, natural persons, partnerships,
corporations, fiduciaries and associations.
§ 21-18. New construction or major street improvement. [Amended
7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2781; 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3018]
All owners of real estate in the Township who desire to engage in any new
construction or whose property abuts any thoroughfare where major street
repair, construction or new construction takes place, as well as construction
on state routes, are hereinafter required to install curbs and sidewalks
and make any necessary modifications as required by the Americans With
Disabilities and Federal Fair Housing Acts.
§ 21-19. Construction when directed by Board of Commissioners.
[Amended 5-13-1976 by Ord. No. 1187; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009; 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3018]
Whenever the Board of Commissioners shall decide by motion or resolution
that curb and sidewalk in any area shall be necessary for the protection of
life and property, or for the orderly growth and development of the area
involved, or for the protection of the thoroughfare immediately adjacent to
the property involved, the Mayor shall cause the same to be installed in
accordance with other applicable provisions of this article.
§ 21-20. Annual review of street program. [Added 11-8-1982 by Ord.
No. 1411; amended 6-10-1997 by Ord. No. 2037; 6-11-2007 by Ord.
No. 2685; 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3018]
Each year the Department of Operations shall submit to the Board of
Commissioners a list of all proposed street construction and reconstruction
for the following calendar year, together with recommendations from the
Township staff as to the necessity for the installation of curbs and/or
sidewalks in connection with all streets proposed to be constructed or
reconstructed. Thereafter, the Board of Commissioners shall make a
§ 21-17 WHITEHALL CODE § 21-20
19:680
determination of which streets, if any, shall be granted deferrals from
the installation of sidewalks and/or curbs. The final determination shall
be in the form of an ordinance, which, when enacted, shall relieve the
Department of Operations of the responsibility for serving curb and
sidewalk notices to the affected property owners.
§ 21-21. Time for compliance. [Amended 6-10-1997 by Ord. No.
2037; 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 2685; 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3018]
A. Except as otherwise provided for herein, or where a deferral or
variance is granted by the Board of Commissioners, all owners of
property within the Township shall:
(1) Install or replace curb in accordance with the Township notice sent
to the property owner (which notice shall state the completion
date, which shall not be less than 90 days from the date of the
notice).
(2) Within three years of the date of the notice from the Township,
install or replace sidewalks in accordance with the Township notice
sent to the property owner. The property owner may install the
required sidewalk in conjunction with the street improvement
project work rather than postponing such work for the permitted
three-year grace period. Notwithstanding the other provisions of
that section to the contrary, sidewalks shall be installed or replaced
within 90 days of the date of the notice from the Township:
(a) If installation of handicap ramps will require the immediate
coordination of adjacent curb and sidewalk construction work,
in such instances, both curb and sidewalks for handicapped
ramps shall be installed simultaneously.
(b) In certain sidewalk installation cases where adjacent curb
work is also required, the postponement of the sidewalk
installation may be impracticable due to an adjoining grade
differential problem, other type of unique construction factors
(such as monolithic curb and sidewalk replacement) or where
such postponement may create a public safety concern. The
Township staff shall determine, on a case-by-case basis, that
the construction of the curb and sidewalk work shall be
coordinated and installed simultaneously.
B. In cases of new construction, new land developments, new building
construction or as a condition of a final plan approval, the property
owner shall install sidewalks as part of the project work and shall not be
entitled to defer construction under or pursuant to Subsection A(2)
hereinabove.
C. The Board of Commissioners hereby authorizes the Whitehall Township
Administration to adopt and maintain a policy that requires the
property owners to be notified of their obligation to install proposed
§ 21-20 RESERVED § 21-21
19:681
§ 21-22. Permit for new construction. [Amended 5-13-1976 by Ord.
No. 1187; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009;
7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3018]
The issuance of a permit for any new construction shall be expressly
conditioned upon the property owner's agreement or understanding that
he shall be required to install curbs and sidewalks in accordance herewith.
Said curbs and sidewalks shall be installed within one year of the date of
issuance of the permit. The Mayor shall have the power and right to insist
upon security for the installations for curbs and/or sidewalks for no more
than the estimated cost of the said improvement.
§ 21-23. Installation. [Amended 6-10-1997 by Ord. No. 2037;
7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3018]
Where major street repair reconstruction or construction is to take place,
said curbs and sidewalks shall be installed within 90 days (except as
otherwise provided for herein) from the date of the notice to be issued by
the Township Administration.
§ 21-24. Responsibility. [Amended 4-12-1971 by Ord. No. 1018;
7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3018]
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of every parcel of land in the
Township abutting on a public thoroughfare where sidewalk and curbing
shall have been constructed to keep such sidewalk in good repair and free
from accumulations of rubbish and mud. He shall also cause such sidewalk
to be kept level and safe for pedestrians and others who are entitled to
use it. Trees, bushes and hedges located on private property shall be kept
trimmed by the property owner or occupant so that they do not interfere
with the use of the sidewalks. Retaining walls, ditches and fences shall be
kept in repair and adequately safeguarded to prevent injury to users of the
sidewalk.
§ 21-25. New subdivisions and land development. [Amended
7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3018]
Sidewalks and curbing shall be provided in all new subdivisions and land
developments or other projects, and the cost thereof shall be borne by subdivider
or developer as specified further in Chapter 22, Subdivision and
Land Development.
§ 21-26. Replacement of sidewalks and curbs. [Amended 5-14-1976
by Ord. No. 1187; 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 2685; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009; 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3018]
curbs and sidewalks (pending approval for the subsequent year's
budget) in the subsequent year. Such notice shall be given to the
property owners no later than December 15 of the year preceding the
year in which the work is to begin.
§ 21-21 WHITEHALL CODE § 21-26
19:682
§ 21-27. Requirement for street excavation permit. [Added
7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3018]
Unless said repair/replacement is part of an upcoming Township
programmed street improvement project, whenever new curb or curb
replacement construction involves excavating the street pavement for its
proper construction, the property owner is also required to apply for and
obtain a Township street excavation permit and pay all applicable permit
fees for same. The property owner is responsible to restore the excavated
or damaged street paving during the curb construction according to the
Township's current paving standards as approved and inspected by the
Township.
§ 21-28. Specifications. [Amended 6-10-1997 by Ord. No. 2037;
6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 2685; 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3018]
All curbing, sidewalks and crossovers constructed in any of the public
thoroughfares shall be constructed with such material and in such manner
as specified herein:
A. Any owner, occupant or other person who shall take up or cause to be
taken up the whole or any part of any paved sidewalk and/or curbing for
the purpose of improvement or otherwise shall cause such sidewalk
and/or curbing to be replaced in accordance with the provisions
contained herein, including required modifications to make sidewalk
areas accessible pursuant to ADA and FFHA.
B. Owners shall be required to replace sidewalks and curbs along their
property whenever it shall be determined by the Mayor that it is in the
interests of the traveling public that such replacement of sidewalks
shall be done. Repairs and replacements shall also include required
modifications under the ADA and FFHA. If the property owner fails to
perform the required replacement, after being given at least 90 days'
notice thereof, the Township may complete same through whatever
means necessary, and all costs therefor shall be levied against the
property owner and collected as hereinafter provided.
A. Concrete mix materials mixture. All the concrete for the curb and
sidewalks shall meet all the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Class A Concrete as specified in Form
408 Specification, latest revision.
B. Forms. Forms shall be made of substantial materials, preferably steel
forms. They shall be smooth, free from warp and sufficiently rigid to
resist springing out of shape and of a depth to conform to the proposed
depth of curb. Before reusing, all forms must be thoroughly cleaned of
mortar and dirt adhering to them. Forms shall be well secured and set
to the given lines, the upper edges conforming to the grade of the
finished work. Sidewalks shall be five inches thick and shall slope
toward the curb at a rate of 1/4 inch per foot.
§ 21-26 RESERVED § 21-28
19:683
§ 21-29. Width, alignment and location. [Amended 6-14-1982 by
Ord. No. 1404]
§ 21-30. Township may do work and collect cost; extended payment
plan. [Amended 5-13-1976 by Ord. No. 1187; 6-10-1997 by Ord. No.
2037; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
C. Finish. After pouring concrete into the forms, it shall be peddled and
spaded so as to insure a thorough mixture, with all air pockets
eliminated. Before the concrete has been completely cured, the forms
shall be removed and the exposed surfaces be worked with a float or
steel trowel to make a uniform finished surface. Sidewalks shall be
broom finished.
D. Joints. All curbing shall be cut clear through so it will consist of sections
10 feet long. This shall be cut by use of a steel template when the curb
is cast in place. Expansion joints shall be placed at intervals of 30 feet
maximum, at all points of tangency and midpoints for street returns,
and along all abutting structures (poles, hydrants, valves, manholes,
curbs, sidewalks, concrete driveway aprons, buildings, foundation walls
etc.). Expansion joint material is to be three-eighths-inch premolded
bituminous material. Sidewalk blocks shall have an average of
approximately 25 square feet.
A. Width of sidewalks in commercial or industrial districts shall be a
minimum of five feet. Width of sidewalks in residential districts shall be
minimum of four feet wide with the back edge preferably six inches
from the street right-of-way line. Where sidewalks exist or have been
partially installed prior to the passage of this article, the new sidewalks
may conform to the width, alignment and location of the existing
sidewalks, if approved by the Bureau of Development. In all instances,
however, the minimum unobstructed widths as required under the ADA
and FFHA shall be provided. [Amended 7-13-2015 by Ord. No.
3018]
B. The widths of all driveway entrances or depressed curbing, minimum
distances between centerlines of residential and nonresidential
driveways, and minimum distances between the center lines of
residential and nonresidential driveways and intersecting streets shall
conform to the dimensions as indicated in Chapter 27, Zoning, of the
codified ordinances. [Amended 6-10-1997 by Ord. No. 2037;
7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3018]
C. The minimum distance between the center lines of nonresidential
driveway entrances shall be 60 feet. [Amended 6-10-1997 by Ord.
No. 2037]
D. The minimum distance between the center line of a residential
driveway entrance and the nearest curbline of an intersecting street
shall be 35 feet; for a nonresidential driveway entrance, this minimum
distance shall be 50 feet. [Amended 6-10-1997 by Ord. No. 2037]
§ 21-28 WHITEHALL CODE § 21-30
19:684
A. If the owner shall have failed to install or reinstall curb and sidewalk
within the required time period, after receipt of notice from the
Township administration or when required as a condition of the permit
issued for new construction, the Township shall install said curb and
sidewalk and assess the total cost of the same against the real estate
abutting on the improvement in accordance with the foot-front rule. The
Mayor shall cause 30 days' notice to be given to each party assessed
either by service on the owner, or his agent, in accordance with
applicable principles of law. If any assessment shall remain unpaid at
the expiration of the notice, it shall be the duty of the Township Solicitor
to collect the same with 5% penalty and interest from 30 days after the
completion of the improvement, by action of assumpsit, or by a lien to
be filed or collected in the same manner as municipal claims and in
accordance with applicable law.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A hereof to the contrary,
the Mayor or his duly authorized designee is hereby authorized to enter
into agreements as described below with property owners with regard
to assessments for municipal claims in the nature of curbing and
sidewalk installation and improvements as follows:
(1) If the pavement in full is tendered within 45 days of the date of the
notice of assessment or invoice from the Township, a discount of
1% shall be given to the property owner.
(2) The Township authorizes the use of extended payment plans, as set
forth in Subsections B(3) and (4) hereof. In the event that any
extended plan is chosen, the property owner shall bear an
administrative charge of $50, which is to reimburse the Township
for processing and recordkeeping regarding such plans which sum
shall be added to the other assessable charges and shall be paid as
a part of the installment amounts to be tendered.
(3) If the property owner shall elect to pay the assessment in a one
year payment plan, the assessment shall be paid in two
installments together with interest at the rate of 5% per annum.
The property shall be liened, the first installment shall be due six
months from the date of the notice of assessment or invoice relative
thereto, and the second such installment shall be due within 12
months from the date of such notice of assessment or invoice. In
the event that the property owner elects this payment option,
payments shall be made in timely fashion, in accordance with the
schedule set forth in this paragraph. The Township shall bear the
cost and expense of the filing and satisfaction of any municipal liens
filed to secure payment.
(4) If the property owner shall elect to pay the assessment in a two
year payment plan, the assessment shall be paid in four
installments together with interest at a rate of 5% per annum. The
property shall be liened, the first installment shall be due six
months from the date of the notice of assessment or invoice relative
§ 21-30 RESERVED § 21-30
19:685
§ 21-31. Safety precautions; watercourses to be kept open.
During any construction, it shall be the duty of the owner of the real estate
and contractors, mechanics and laborers employed by said owners to place
barricades as may be necessary to protect pedestrians as well as the public
in general, to burn lights or flares from sunset to sunrise, to provide safe
and convenient passage for the public around or over the said construction
and to keep all watercourses affected by the said work open for the free flow
of surface water.
thereto, the second such installment shall be due within 12 months
from the date of such notice of assessment or invoice, the third
such installment shall be due within 18 months from the date
of such notice of assessment or invoice and the fourth such
installment shall be due within 24 months from the date of such
notice of assessment or invoice. In the event that the property
owner elects this payment option, payments shall be made in a
timely fashion, in accordance with the schedule set forth in this
paragraph. The Township shall bear the cost and expense of filing
and/or satisfaction of any municipal liens filed to secure payment.
(5) If the property owner shall elect to pay the assessment in a three
year payment plan, the assessment shall be paid in six installments
together with interest at the rate of 5% per annum. The property
shall be liened, the first installment shall be due six months from
the date of the notice of assessment or invoice relative thereto, the
second such installment shall be due within 12 months from the
date of such notice of assessment or invoice, the third such
installment shall be due within 18 months from the date of such
notice of assessment or invoice, the fourth such installment shall be
due within 24 months from the date of such notice of assessment or
invoice, the fifth such installment shall be due within 30 months
from the date of such notice of assessment or invoice and the sixth
such installment shall be due within 36 months from the date of
such notice of assessment or invoice. In the event that the property
owner elects this payment option, payments shall be made in a
timely fashion, in accordance with the schedule set forth in this
paragraph. The Township shall bear the cost and expense of the
filing and/or satisfaction of any municipal liens filed to secure
payment.
(6) If the property owner shall fail to make timely payments pursuant
to any permissible payment option, the property owner shall bear
the cost and expense of the filing and/or satisfaction of all
municipal liens and the administrative charges set forth in
Subsection B hereof. In addition, the property owner shall pay
reasonable attorney's fees relative to the filing, satisfaction and
collection of the lien.
§ 21-30 WHITEHALL CODE § 21-32
19:686
§ 21-32. Inspection; rectification of defects.
The Township shall be notified 24 hours in advance for inspection of the
completed improvements and in the event such construction is found to be
contrary to the specified regulations or otherwise unsatisfactory, removal
may be directed and reconstruction so ordered. If any such order is refused
or neglected, the Township shall cause such removal and reconstruction to
be accomplished and shall do so at the expense of the owner in accordance
with existing law, including costs of the administration thereof.
§ 21-33. Surety bond required.
All contracts engaged in construction of sidewalks and curbing shall furnish
a surety bond which shall be used as a guarantee against cracking,
disintegrating or other defects due to defective workmanship or materials
for a period of one year.
§ 21-34. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-12-1971 by Ord. No.
1018; by Ord. No. 1356; 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 21-32 RESERVED § 21-34
19:687

ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice on Sidewalks
[Adopted 4-12-1971 by Ord. No. 1025]
§ 21-35. Responsibility for removal. [Amended 10-17-1995 by Ord.
No. 1944]
The owner, occupant or tenant of every property fronting or abutting upon
any of the streets in the Township of Whitehall is hereby required to remove
or cause to be removed from all the sidewalks in front of or alongside
such property all snow and/or ice thereon fallen or formed, within 24 hours
after the same shall have ceased to fall or to be formed. No person shall
shovel onto any street after it has been plowed or to pile snow around fire
hydrants so as to make them inaccessible. Provided further, the owner of
a property shall be responsible for conforming to the requirements of this
section where such property is occupied by such owner, or is unoccupied or
vacant or is a multi-business or multiple dwelling property occupied by or
designed for occupancy by more than one tenant or occupier, the tenant or
occupier of a property shall be so responsible in the case of a single unit
property occupied by such tenant or occupier.
§ 21-36. Township to remove and collect expenses.
In any case where the owner, occupant or tenant, as aforesaid, shall fail,
neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of the first section
of this article within the time limit prescribed therein, the Township
authorities may proceed immediately to clear all snow and/or ice from the
sidewalk of such delinquent, and to collect the expenses of such removal,
with an additional amount of 10% from such owner, occupant or tenant, as
the case may be, which may be in addition to any fine or penalty imposed
under the third section of this article.
§ 21-37. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-17-1995 by Ord. No.
1944; 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to remove any snow and/or
ice from any sidewalk as required by the first section of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense. Provided, such fine an costs
of prosecution may be in addition to any expenses and additional amounts
authorized by law, imposed as provided in § 21-36 hereof.
§ 21-35 RESERVED § 21-37
19:689

ARTICLE VI
Transportation Development Districts
[Adopted 11-14-1988 by Ord. No. 1629]
§ 21-38. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Whitehall Township Transportation
Development Ordinance."
§ 21-39. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish transportation development
districts and to provide a mechanism for assessment of the costs of
transportation improvements upon those property owners who are
benefitted by the improvements. The intent of this article is to provide a
program by which traffic problems can be identified and solved in a timely
fashion with the costs of the solutions fairly distributed.
§ 21-40. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BENEFITTED PROPERTY — Any property which is located in a designated
traffic development district and has a substantial relationship to the
proposed transportation facility project or service project.
FACILITY PROJECT — Any system of public highway or passive
transportation including, but not limited to, local streets, roads, sidewalks,
alleys, passageways, traffic control systems, structure, road beds, railroads,
buses, trolleys, subways, other forms of public passenger transportation,
guideways, elevated structures, stations, terminals, docks, shelters and
parking areas for use in connection with any of the foregoing.
IMPROVEMENTS, ONSITE — All public improvements required to be
constructed by the developer of property pursuant to any ordinance of
Whitehall Township including, but not limited to, the subdivision/land
development regulations, the Whitehall zoning ordinance or the Whitehall
building code. Generally, such improvements will be constructed on the
developer's property or on public streets and highways immediately
abutting and adjacent to the property being developed.
IMPROVEMENTS, OFFSITE — All public improvements necessary to be
constructed which are generally not contiguous with the property being
developed and not required as an onsite improvement.
PEAK HOUR TRAFFIC — The amount of traffic generated by a property for
peak hours as determined by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE)
in "Trip Generation and Informational Report," the current edition and all
future editions thereof.
SERVICE PROJECTS — Transportation service projects which include any
system of passenger transportation by any mode and the salaries and
§ 21-38 RESERVED § 21-40
19:691
costs associated therewith, the provisions of any system of public highway
transportation and the salaries and costs associated therewith, and any
method by which Whitehall Township provides, plans for, implements,
undertakes or otherwise makes available to the public transportation
facilities and any method by which the Township operates, provides,
maintains or holds out for the public transportation benefits.
TRANSPORTATION DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT — A specific area or areas
established by the Township for the purpose of planning, financing,
acquiring, developing, constructing and operating transportation facilities
or transportation services within the area designated as a district.
UNIT IMPROVEMENT COST — An amount equal to 1/2 the dollar
calculated by dividing the total improvement cost estimate for the
construction of the necessary transportation improvements by the peak
hour traffic growth capacity as the result of the construction of such
improvements.
§ 21-41. Identification of necessary public improvements.
The Board of Commissioners shall direct that a traffic study be made.
This traffic study shall evaluate the present highway infrastructure in the
Township and identify areas where problems exist because of inadequate
capacity or safety. The study shall also project the future traffic rates and
identify anticipated problem areas due to inadequate capacity or safety. This
study shall also identify existing and predicted areas where facility projects
and/or service projects are or will be needed in the near future. When
these problem areas are identified, the preparers of the study shall identify
areas which it recommends be designated as transportation development
districts. Upon the receipt of such study, the Board of Commissioners, after
public hearing thereon, shall adopt a list of specific areas which shall be
designated at traffic development districts. The Board of Commissioners
shall then assign a total improvement cost estimate to the list of necessary
improvements, together with a corresponding traffic growth capability as a
result of the construction of such improvements. The unit improvement cost
figure shall then be calculated.
§ 21-42. Imposition of assessment.
There is hereby imposed upon all benefitted properties which are located in
a transportation development district in Whitehall Township an assessment
for the construction of necessary public improvements in accordance with
the formula to be set forth below.
§ 21-43. Calculation of assessment.
The assessment imposed by this article upon all benefitted properties which
are located in a traffic development district shall be determined by applying
the unit improvement cost to the peak hour traffic generated by the
benefitted property. To determine the fee for a specific use, the peak hour
§ 21-40 WHITEHALL CODE § 21-43
19:692
trip generation rate for the proposed use shall be multiplied by the unit
improvement cost rate.
§ 21-44. Method of payment.
Payment of the assessment shall be made in full within 30 days notice to
the owner of the benefitted property by the Township of the amount of the
assessment. Should the owner of the benefitted property fail to pay the
assessment within this period, the Township Solicitor is hereby authorized
to file a claim for the unpaid amount using the method authorized by 53 P.S.
§ 1623(c).
§ 21-45. Deductions from assessments.
Any owner or developer of a benefitted property as defined in this article
who shall be performing, at its own expense, offsite improvements, as
above defined, shall have deducted from the traffic assessment the actual
cost of such offsite improvements as approved by the Township Engineer.
These offsite improvements must be listed on the specific list of highway
projects with a need for the improvements must be certified by the Board
of Commissioners in order for the owner or the developer of the benefitted
property to qualify for such deduction. Such deduction shall not exceed the
amount of the assessment.
§ 21-46. Revisions.
Revisions to the list of highway development districts and the cost of the
improvements to be performed in those districts shall be made by the Board
of Commissioners pursuant to public notice after a public hearing thereon.
Annual adjustments to the total improvement cost and unit improvement
cost shall be made for inflation and shall be based upon the January
Construction Cost Index as published in the American City and County
Magazine (The ACC Index). Adjustments shall also be made for the addition
or deletion of projects.
§ 21-43 RESERVED § 21-46
19:693
Chapter 22
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
§ 21-46 WHITEHALL CODE § 21-46
19:694
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 22-1. Title; short title.
§ 22-2. State of authority and application.
§ 22-3. Purpose.
A. Title. An ordinance providing for the regulation and control of the
subdivision of lots and the development of land; the approval of plans,
plots or replots of land laid out in building lots; standards for the design
of streets, lots, easements, blocks and other improvements; minimum
improvements and construction standards on all streets and required
dedications; the administration of this chapter and penalties for the
violation of this chapter.
B. Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the
"Whitehall Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of
1999."
A. Authority. The Township of Whitehall is empowered to regulate
subdivisions and land development within the Township by virtue of the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
B. Application.
(1) No subdivision of development of any lot, tract or parcel of land
shall be made, and no street, sanitary sewer, water main, gas or
electric transmission line (except those constructed by utilities
regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission), or other
improvements in connection therewith shall be laid out,
constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or travel or for the
common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except in
accordance with this chapter.
(2) No lot in a proposed subdivision or land development may be sold,
and no final permit to erect any building or structure upon land in a
subdivision or land development may be issued, unless and until a
final plan has been approved and recorded and either the Township
has been assured by means of an improvements agreement
acceptable to the Mayor and Township Solicitor that the
improvements will subsequently be installed or the required
improvements in connection therewith have been constructed.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(3) This chapter shall apply to all subdivisions and land development
applications filed after the effective date hereof and to all
subdivisions and land developments which have received
preliminary plan approval from the Board of Commissioners more
than five years prior to the effective date of this chapter.
§ 22-1 RESERVED § 22-3
19:695
§ 22-4. Repealer.
The Whitehall Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of
1971, and all amendments thereto are hereby repealed, except as to land
development plans (as such term is defined hereinafter) which have been:
A. Purpose. It is the intent, purpose and scope of this chapter to:
(1) Protect and promote the safety and health of the residents of the
Township of Whitehall.
(2) Assure the coordinated and thoughtful development of the
community in accordance with the Township of Whitehall
Comprehensive Plan.
(3) Provide for the general welfare and convenience and assure
governmental economies through the planned development of
streets, utilities and public facilities.
(4) Secure adequate sites for recreation, conservation, historic, scenic
and other open spaces.
(5) Facilitate the efficient movement of traffic.
(6) Improve land records by establishing standards for surveys and
plans.
A. Officially submitted to the Township prior to the effective date of this
chapter and are in good standing as of the date of the enactment of this
chapter.
B. Land development plans which have been approved by the Board of
Commissioners less than five years prior to the effective date of this
chapter.
C. As may otherwise be required by law. This chapter does not repeal
provisions of other laws or ordinances except those specifically set forth
herein.
§ 22-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-4
19:696
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 22-5. Definitions, interpretation.
A. Definitions. The following words and phrases shall have the meanings
hereinafter indicated unless the text clearly states an alternative or
different meaning.
AASHTO — The American Association of Transportation Officials.
ACCESS POINT — One combined ingress/egress point or one clearly
defined ingress point and one clearly defined egress point separated by
an appropriate distance.
ADT — Average daily trips. The phrase "average daily trips" shall refer
to the number of vehicles per day that pass by a given point.
ALLEY — A public or private thoroughfare, with a right-of-way of 24
feet or less, which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting
property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
ALLUVIAL SOILS — Water deposited soils including, but not limited to:
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application required to
be filed and approved prior to start of construction or development
including, but not limited to, an application for a building permit or for
the approval of a land development or subdivision.
ARTERIAL STREET OR HIGHWAY — A major regional highway
designed to carry heavy vehicular traffic into, out of or through a
regional area.
BERM — A natural or man-made mound of soil.
BLOCK — A tract of land or a lot or groups of lots, bounded by streets,
public parks, or parkways, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, or body
of water, unsubdivided land or a boundary line or lines of the Township.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of
Whitehall Township, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
BUFFER — An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to
and parallel with a property line, either consisting of natural existing
(1) Atkins silt loam (W).
(2) Atkins Silt Loam, Local Alluvial (AkA).
(3) Huntington Silt Loam (Hn).
(4) Lindside Silt Loam (Ln).
(5) Melvin Silt Loam (Mh).
(6) Melvin Silt Loam, Local Alluvial (MkA).
(7) Philo Silt Loam (Ph).
§ 22-5 RESERVED § 22-5
19:697
vegetation or created by the use of trees, shrubs, fences and/or berms,
designed to limit continuously the view of and/or sound from the site to
adjacent sites or properties.
BUFFER YARD — A continuous strip of land, either landscaped or
green space, clear of all buildings, structures, parking areas, outdoor
storage areas and detention ponds. A buffer yard may include a street
or driveway connecting an access point with the interior side or parts
thereof of a buffer yard by the most direct route but shall not include
any recreation area or a private street or an existing or future public
street right-of-way.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by buildings.
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF — A line drawn parallel to the front line of
a lot at that portion of the building or structure including sun parlors,
covered porches (but not steps) closest to the front lot line.
BUILDING RESTRICTION LINE — A line which designates the
minimum distance between any building and the adjacent street rightof-
way or property line. This line shall be measured from a point or
points formed by the intersection of a vertical building wall with the
ground (or in the case of a cantilevered building, at the vertical plane
which coincides with the most projected surface), to the street right-ofway
or property line.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE, FRONT YARD — The line parallel to the
public right-of-way line at a distance equal to the minimum depth of
the front yard designated for each district in Chapter 27, Zoning, as
amended from time to time. All yards adjacent to a public street rightof-
way shall be considered front yards.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE, REAR YARD — The line parallel to the rear
lot line and equal to the minimum depth of the rear yard designated for
each district in Chapter 27, Zoning, as amended from time to time.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE, SIDE YARD — The line parallel to the side
lot line and equal to the minimum depth of the side yard designated for
each district in Chapter 27, Zoning, as amended from time to time.
BUREAU OF DEVELOPMENT — The Whitehall Township Bureau of
Planning, Zoning and Development.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches. The
caliper of a tree trunk shall be measured two feet above the base of the
tree.
CAPPED SYSTEM — A completed water supply and/or sewage system
put in place for future use (contingent upon expansion), rather than to
meet immediate development needs.
CARTWAY — That portion of a street, alley or highway used for
vehicular traffic.
§ 22-5 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-5
19:698
CENTER LINE OF STREET, ROAD, ALLEY OR HIGHWAY — A line
equidistant from and parallel to the street, road, alley or highway rightof-
way lines.
CLEAR SIGHT DISTANCE — See "sight distance."
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by the center lines of the streets and by a line of
sight between points on such street's center lines at a predetermined
distance form the intersection of the center lines. For the purposes of
this chapter, the clear sight triangle shall be calculated pursuant to the
provision of § 27-91 of Chapter 27, Zoning, as amended from time to
time. A clear sight triangle is not a clear sight distance.
CLOSED DEPRESSION — In a karst area, a distinctive bowl-shaped
depression in the land surface. It is characterized by internal drainage,
varying magnitude and an unbroken ground surface.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street designed to carry a moderate volume
of traffic to intercept local streets, to provide routes to arterial roads
and to community facilities and to provide a limited amount of access
to the abutting properties.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The official Comprehensive Plan of the
Township of Whitehall, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania of 1972, as
amended from time to time.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions of § 27-59 of Chapter 27, Zoning, as
amended from time to time.
CONSOLIDATION OF LOT, CONSOLIDATION OF LAND, LOT
CONSOLIDATION OR LAND CONSOLIDATION — The combining two
or more lots, parcels or tracts into one lot by eliminating common lot
lines. A lot consolidation is deemed to be a subdivision and subject to
the requirements hereof.
CONSTRUCTION SECURITY — That security posted by a developer to
secure the construction of improvements proposed to be constructed
pursuant to an approved land development plan.
CROSSWALK OR WALKWAY — A right-of-way dedicated to public use
to facilitate pedestrian access through or into a development or
subdivision of land or a land development.
CUL-DE-SAC — A local street which intersects another street at only
one end.
CURB — A vertical or sloping edge along a paved surface.
CUT —
(1) An excavation.
The difference between a point on the original ground and a
designated point of lower elevation on the final grade.
(2)
§ 22-5 RESERVED § 22-5
19:699
DEDICATION — The conveyance of real or personal property from a
person or entity to another person or entity.
DENSITY, GROSS — The maximum number of dwelling units that may
be constructed upon a lot, parcel or tract which number shall be
determined by dividing the total number of dwelling units by the base
site area (total amount of land in the lot, parcel or tract to be developed
minus all land within the existing or proposed street rights-of-way,
utility rights-of-way, easements or land used for stormwater
management detention basins). Density requirements shall be
determined in direct proportion to lot size, i.e., maximum eight units
per acre, four units per half acre, two units per quarter acre.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event
measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., 50-year storm) and
duration (e.g., 24-hour), and used in computing stormwater
management control systems.
DETENTION BASIN — See "stormwater detention basin."
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who submits a land development
plan to the Township for approval.
DEVELOPER'S AGENT — Any person or entity authorized, by written
agreement of the developer filed with the Township, to act for the
developer.
DEVELOPER'S ESCROW — That cash escrow established by the
developer with the Township to reimburse the Township and Township
consultants for the processing of a land development plan.
DEVELOPMENT — Land development.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS — Those zoning, subdivision, site
plan, official map, floodplain or other governmental regulations of the
Township or other governing authority having jurisdiction over the
development of a lot, parcel or tract of land.
DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT — The Bureau Chief of Planning,
Zoning and Development of Whitehall Township, Lehigh County,
Pennsylvania.
DRAINAGE — That stormwater, surface water or groundwater removed
from land by a drainage system.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — A system or a network of systems which remove
drainage. For the purposes of this chapter, the phrase "drainage
system" shall include, but shall not be limited to, watercourses, piping,
bodies of water and wetlands.
DRIVEWAY — A private designated vehicular access way from a road,
street, highway or alley to a home, occupation, building or structure.
(3) The material removed during excavation.
§ 22-5 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-5
19:700
DRY LINES — See "capped system."
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms located within a
residential building and forming a single habitable unit with facilities
which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and
eating by one family.
EASEMENT — A liberty, privilege or right which one has in the lands of
another for a precise and definite purpose.
EROSION — The removal of soil or other surface material by drainage
or other natural elements.
EXPRESSWAY — A major highway designed for large volumes and high
speed traffic with access limited to grade separated intersections.
FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption
or foster relationship, living together as a single housekeeping unit
or a group of not more than five unrelated persons who are living
together in a single, nonprofit dwelling unit and maintaining a common
household with a single cooking facility. The term "family" shall not
include the occupants of a clubhouse, hotel, motel, fraternity house,
dormitory, boarding or rooming house, group home or community living
arrangement.
FILL —
FLOOD — A temporary inundation by surface water of land areas not
continually inundated.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the
floodway.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river,
stream or watercourse which is subject to a partial or complete
inundation during a 100-year design frequency storm or an area subject
to the accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPRONE AREAS — Areas within the 500-year floodplain and
areas containing alluvial soils or any area subject to the unusual and
rapid accumulation of surface water from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to buildings or structures which
Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or other material is
placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new
location above the natural surface of the ground or on top of
the stripped surface and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
(1)
The difference in elevation between a point on the original ground
and a designated point of higher elevation on the final grade.
(2)
(3) The material used to make a fill.
§ 22-5 RESERVED § 22-5
19:701
reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real estate,
water, sanitary and other utility facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge flood
waters in a 100-year design frequency storm without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point.
F.P.S. — Feet per second.
FRONTAGE — The part of a lot abutting a street right-of-way, commonly
referred to in terms of "feet of frontage."
GLARE, DIRECT — Illumination beyond property lines caused by direct
or reflected rays from incandescent, fluorescent or arc lighting, or
from such high temperature processes as welding or petroleum or
metallurgical refining.
GLARE, INDIRECT — Illumination beyond property lines caused by
defuse reflection from a surface such as a wall or roof of a structure or
a billboard.
GRADE — The surface of the ground, lawns, walks or streets adjoining
the exterior walls of any building or structure.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surface of the ground, lawns,
walks, or streets adjoining the exterior walls of any building or
structure.
GRADING — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom.
GROUND COVER — Low growing vegetation including, but not limited
to, plants or sod, which covers an area which prevents erosion and the
growth of unwanted plants.
GUTTER — A shallow channel usually set along a curb or the pavement
edge of a street, alley or highway for purpose of diverting drainage to a
drainage system.
HOP — A highway occupancy permit as issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
HISTORIC SITE — A structure or place of historical significance as
determined by a local, state or federal government.
HYDRIC SOILS — Those poorly drained soils which may or may not be
capable of supporting hydrophytic plants.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which does not absorb moisture,
water or rain and includes, but is not limited to, roofs, buildings,
parking areas, driveways, streets, any areas covered by concrete or
asphalt and stormwater detention and retention basins.
§ 22-5 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-5
19:702
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical additions and changes to the land
that may be necessary to produce usable and desirable lots.
IMPROVEMENTS SECURITY — That financial security posted by a
developer with the Township, in the form of cash, letter of credit
or approved bond, to guarantee the construction of proposed
improvements by the developer.
INSPECTION SECURITY — That financial security established by the
developer with the Township, in the form of cash, letter of credit
or approved bond, to guarantee the inspection of the improvements
proposed to be constructed by a developer.
ISLAND — With respect to street design or parking area, a raised area,
usually curbed, placed to guide traffic and separate lanes or used for
landscaping, signage or lighting.
KARST AREA — A type of geology that is formed over limestone,
dolomite or gypsum by bedrock solution and that is characterized by
closed depressions or sinkholes, caves and underground drainage.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan depicting a land development
submitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN FILING DATE — That date established
pursuant to § 22-8 hereof.
LANDOWNER — The legal owner or owners of a lot, parcel or tract
of land including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, a
lessee if authorized under the lease or other written agreement with
the landowner to exercise the rights of the landowner or other person
having a proprietary interest in land.
The improvement of two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels
of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure.
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulative, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Development, including those types of land development
referenced in § 503(1.1) of the Municipalities Planning Code, found
at 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
(3)
§ 22-5 RESERVED § 22-5
19:703
LANDSCAPING —
LCCD — The Lehigh County Conservation District.
LVPC — The Joint Planning Commission of Lehigh and Northampton
Counties, Pennsylvania.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street area used for loading and unloading
of goods and having direct access to a public street or alley.
LOCAL STREET — A street designed to provide access to the abutting
properties and a route to collector streets.
LOOP STREET — A street which intersects only with itself, except for a
single connection with the surrounding road network.
LOT — A parcel or tract of land established by a plat or otherwise as
permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — An area of land which is determined by the limits of the
property lines bounding that area and expressed in terms of square feet
or acres. Any portion of a lot included in a street right-of-way shall not
be included in determining lot area.
LOT, CORNER — A lot fronting on two or more streets at such streets'
intersection.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by all impervious
surfaces.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot fronting on a street and having the rear and all
side lot lines in common with adjacent lots.
LOT LINE — A line forming the front, rear or sides of lots, commonly
referred to as front, rear or side lot lines.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT — The alteration of an existing lot line or
lines resulting in the same number of lots in the aggregate. A lot
line adjustment is deemed to be a subdivision and subject to the
requirements hereof.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line along a public or private street. In the
event that a lot has more than one such lot line, all such lot lines shall
be deemed front lot lines.
LOT LINE, REAR — Any lot line which is parallel to or within 45° of
being parallel to the front lot line. In the event that a lot has no street
frontage or is a corner lot or a lot of an odd shape, the lot line farthest
from any street shall be considered the rear lot line.
LOT, WIDTH OF — The width of a lot measured at the front building
line.
Decorative plants including, but not limited to, trees, shrubs and
flowering plants.
(1)
Improving the natural beauty of a tract of land by grading, clearing
or decorative planting.
(2)
§ 22-5 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-5
19:704
MAIN — In any system of continuous piping, the principal artery of the
system to which branches or laterals may be connected.
MAINTENANCE SECURITY — That financial security established by
a developer with the Township, in the form of cash, letter of credit
or approved bond, to guarantee the structural integrity of dedicated
improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in
accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final
plan, for a period of 18 months.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land, lot line adjustment,
consolidation, or other altering of the legal boundaries of a tract of
more than four residentially zoned lots or any nonresidentially zoned
land.[Added 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2774]
MANHOLE — An inspection chamber of such size and diameter to allow
easy entry and exit and working room for a person inside.
MAYOR — The elected or appointed chief executive officer of the
Township.[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land, lot line adjustment,
consolidation, or other altering of the legal boundaries of a tract of not
more than four residentially zoned lots.[Added 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2774]
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile
home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which
have been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MONUMENT — A stone or concrete block at least four inches in
diameter or square designed and intended to establish the location of a
property line (See Detail Plate WT-M-0279).
MULCH — A layer of wood chips, dry leaves, straw, hay, plastic or
other materials placed on the surface of the soil around plants to retain
moisture, prevent weeds form growing, hold the soil in place or aid
plant growth.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created
pursuant to the act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the
"Municipality Authorities Act of 1945."
MPC — The Municipalities Planning Code found at 53 P.S. § 10101 et
seq., as amended from time to time.
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — An area on private property
designated and used for the parking or storage of one or more
79.Editor's Note: The Detail Plates are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 22-5 RESERVED § 22-5
19:705
passenger vehicles. Private off-street parking areas shall include
private garages, carports, driveways and improved accessory parking
spaces.
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — An open space, other than a
street or other public right-of-way, designed, maintained and used by
the general public for the parking of vehicles.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article IV
of the MPC.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP — The zoning map as adopted by the Board
of Commissioners which designates the location and boundaries of all
zoning districts situate within the Township.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land or an area
of water or a combination of land and water depicted within a land
development plan and designed, intended or used for the use or
enjoyment of residents of a development, not including streets, offstreet
parking areas and areas set aside for public facilities.
PARKING SPACE — An area designed and used for the parking of a
motor vehicle, exclusive of passageways, driveways and access ways
appurtenant thereto.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PERCOLATION TEST —
PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that permits full or partial
absorption of stormwater.
PHASED DEVELOPMENT — A land development which is developed in
stages over an agreed to number of years.
PHASED DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT — A written agreement
between the Township and a developer which permits the developer to
construct an approved land development in stages over an agreed to
number of years.
PLAN, FINAL — A land development plan which has received
preliminary plan approval from the Planning Commission and the Board
of Commissioners pursuant to § 22-15E or § 22-15F hereof, respectively,
and which purportedly complies with the drafting requirements of
§ 22-18A et seq., hereof.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the
Township.
(1) A test designed to determine the ability of soil to absorb water.
(2) A test designed to determine the suitability of soil for drainage.
A test designed to determine the suitability of soil for a septic
system.
(3)
§ 22-5 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-5
19:706
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A land development plan which purportedly
complies with the drafting requirements of § 22-17A et seq., hereof.
PLAN, RECORD —
PLAN, SKETCH — A land development plan which purportedly complies
with the drafting requirements of § 22-16A et seq., hereof.
PLAT — A map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
POTABLE WATER SUPPLY — Water suitable for drinking purposes.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Those publicly owned or occupied areas which
include, but shall not be limited to:
PUBLIC NOTICE — A notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and
the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.
PUBLIC STREET — A street which has been dedicated to and accepted
by the Township for public use.
PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE — An access way which is used by the public
but which has not been dedicated to or accepted by the Township.
RATIONAL METHOD — See Appendix A.80
Land development plan which has received final plan approval
from the Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners
pursuant to §§ 22-15E and 22-15F hereof, respectively.
(1)
Which complies with the drafting requirements of § 22-18A et seq.
hereto.
(2)
(3) Which applies with all other applicable provisions hereof.
Which has been endorsed by the LVPC, the Planning Commission,
the Board of Commissioners and the Mayor. [Amended 6-8-2009
by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(4)
Which is intended to be recorded in the Office of the Lehigh County
Recorder of Deeds.
(5)
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and
other public areas.
(1)
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other
publicly owned or operated facilities.
(2)
(3) Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
80.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 22-5 RESERVED § 22-5
19:707
RECREATION LAND — Land dedicated to the Township or other entity
approved by the Township for the use of the Township's residents which
is suitable for active uses such as playing fields. The term "recreation
land" shall not include areas within the 500-year floodplain, power
line or pipeline rights-of-way, quarries, road rights-of-way, buffer zones,
stormwater management facilities, areas characterized by wetlands,
hydric soils, slopes in excess of 5% or woodlands.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The 100-year flood elevation,
plus a freeboard safety factor of 2 1/2 feet.
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum compilation or similar
writing made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a
solicitor to any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose
of assisting the recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision
or determination. All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and
advisory only and shall not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer,
body or agency, nor shall any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used,
received or considered by the body, board, officer or agency for
inspection to the developer and all other parties to any proceeding upon
request and copies thereof shall be provided at cost of reproduction.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land condemned by or dedicated to the Township
or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for street purposes and for the
installation of public utilities. The phrase "right-of-way" shall include
the ultimate or future right-of-way.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, EXISTING — The line separating a lot from the
area designated for a street right-of-way.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, ULTIMATE — The line separating a lot from the area
designated for the ultimate proposed or future right-of-way.
ROADWAY — See "cartway."
RUNOFF — See "drainage."
SALDO — The Whitehall Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance (this chapter).
SANITARY SEWER — A public or private utility system designed to
collect sewage from customers in compliance with DEP regulations or
regulations of the Township, whichever is more stringent.
SCREENING — The formation of a visual or acoustical barrier using
such materials as dense evergreen shrubbery or solid fencing of
durable wood or masonry construction.
SCS — The Federal Soil Conservation Service.
SEDIMENT — Deposits of soil and other organic or inorganic material
caused by erosion.
SEPTIC SYSTEM — An underground drainage system with a septic
tank, absorption area and appurtenances used for the decomposition of
domestic wastes.
§ 22-5 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-5
19:708
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight receptacle that receives the discharge of
sewage.
SETBACK — The distance between a use, building or structure and a
lot or right-of-way line (including the ultimate right-of-way), whichever
is less.
SETBACK LINE — A line designating the minimum setback from a
particular lot line.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, CENTRALIZED — A public or private
utility system designed to collect, centrally treat and dispose of sewage
from more than one customer in compliance with DEP regulations or
regulations of the Township, whichever is more stringent.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, PRIVATE — An onlot septic tank disposal
system generally providing for the disposal of effluent for only one
building or a group of buildings on a single lot and provided in
compliance with DEP regulations or regulations of the Township,
whichever is more stringent.
SHADE (STREET) TREE — A tree in a public place, street, special
easement or public right-of-way adjoining a street.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The required length of roadway visible to the
driver of a motor vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the
view is unobstructed by traffic.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING — A building or structure
having only one dwelling unit from ground to roof, two points of
independent outside access, at least two other dwelling units built
in conjunction therewith and attached thereto by way of one or two
unpierced party walls adjoining the adjacent dwelling. The term
"single-family attached dwelling" shall include row homes and
townhouses.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling unit on a
permanent foundation occupied as a residence for only family, which
does not have a vertical wall in common with another building.
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLING — A building or
structure having only one dwelling unit from ground to roof and only
one wall in common with another building.
SINKHOLE — A localized sinking of the land surface to a variable
depth, generally characterized by a roughly circular outline and a
downward movement of soil into bedrock voids.
SITE PLAN — An accurately scaled land development plan that depicts
the existing conditions on a lot or lots as well as depicting details of a
proposed development.
SLOPE —
(1) The face of any embankment or cut section.
§ 22-5 RESERVED § 22-5
19:709
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical or structural treatment of a mass
of soil to increase or maintain its stability or otherwise improve its
engineering properties.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions of § 27-64 of Chapter 27, Zoning.
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes or other conduits which carries
intercepted surface runoff, street water or drainage, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER DETENTION BASIN — A pond, pool or impoundment
designed, intended or used to delay stormwater runoff by temporarily
storing the runoff in the pond, pool or impoundment and releasing it at
a predetermined rate.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ACT — The Pennsylvania Act of
October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), as amended; and including all
provisions of the Jordan Creek Stormwater Management Plan, the
Coplay and Spring Creek Stormwater Management Plans and the
Catasauqua Creek/Lehigh River Sub-basin Plan.
STORMWATER RETENTION — A pond, pool or impoundment for the
storage (without release) of Stormwater runoff.
STREET — A strip of land, including the entire existing and ultimate
right-of-way, intended for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic and shown on the official map or on a filed plat, whether public
or private. The word "street" shall include avenue, boulevard, road
or highway. The words "street" "highway" and "road" have the same
meaning and are used interchangeably. (See also: Arterial street or
highway, collector street, cul-de-sac, expressway, local street, loop
street and stub street.)
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the
land.
STUB STREET — A street or road within a subdivision terminating
at the subdivision boundary with no permanent vehicular turnaround.
Stub streets are provided to permit adjacent undeveloped parcels of
land to be developed later with an adequate connecting street system.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot
development.
SUBGRADE — The soil lying beneath a street.
Any ground surface which makes an angle with the plane of the
horizon.
(2)
§ 22-5 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-5
19:710
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — When, in the judgment of the
Township Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required
improvements for which financial security was posted pursuant to § 509
of the MPC) of those improvements required as a condition for final
approval have been completed in accordance with the approved plan,
so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its
intended purpose.
SUPPORT INFRASTRUCTURE — A building, structure or part thereof
or a lot, parcel or tract of land used for local government services and
services provided by Public Utility Commission regulated entities. The
phrase "support infrastructure" includes, but is not limited to sewer
lines, water lines, bus stops, train stops, stormwater sewer facilities,
etc.
SURVEYOR — A professional land surveyor licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SWALE — A low lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are
fertile soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus
debris. Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the A
Horizon.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Whitehall, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of the
Township of Whitehall.
TOWNSHIP CONSULTANTS — Those professional consultants
including, but not limited to, the following: attorneys, chemists,
engineers, geologists and hydrogeologists.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for
the Township.
TOWNSHIP SOLICITOR — That attorney or law firm appointed by the
Mayor and approved by the Board of Commissioners to act as the
attorney for the Township, the Planning Commission and the Board of
Commissioners.[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
TRIP END — A single or one direction vehicle movement with either the
original or the destination (exiting or entering) inside a study side.
WAIVER — Relief from a specific subdivision or land development
regulation granted by the Board of Commissioners as provided for
herein.
WATERCOURSE — Any channel of conveyance of surface water having
defined beds and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
§ 22-5 RESERVED § 22-5
19:711
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM, CENTRAL — A public or private utility
system designed to transmit potable water from a common source
to customers in compliance with DEP regulations or the Township
regulations, whichever is more stringent.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM, PRIVATE — An on lot water supply system
generally providing for an adequate supply of potable water on one
building or a group of buildings on a single lot and in compliance
with DEP regulations or the Township regulations, whichever is more
stringent. (A cistern shall not be deemed to be an acceptable private
water supply system.)
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM, PUBLIC — Water service provided by the
Northampton Borough Municipal Authority or the Whitehall Township
Authority.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and
that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas.
WOODLANDS — The areas comprised of:
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Whitehall Township Zoning Ordinance of
1989, as amended from time to time (see Chapter 27).
One or more acres of woodland where the largest tree measures
at least six inches in diameter (measured at 4 1/2 feet from the
ground.
(1)
A grove of trees forming one canopy where 10 or more trees
measure at least 10 inches) in diameter (measured at 4 1/2 feet
from the ground.)
(2)
A tract of land covered by trees which also contains woody shrubs,
grasses and other vegetation.
(3)
B. Tenses. Words in the present tense shall include the future tense.
C. Numbers. Unless the text clearly states otherwise, words used in the
singular shall include the plural and those in the plural shall include the
singular.
D. Undefined Terms. Any word, term or phrase used in this chapter, but
not specifically defined herein, shall be given its normal and customary
meaning as found in the most recent edition of Webster's New
Collegiate Dictionary.
§ 22-5 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-5
19:712
ARTICLE III
Procedures
§ 22-6. General procedure.
Before any permit for the erection of a structure in a land development
shall be granted, the developer or the developer's agent shall apply for and
secure approval of such proposed land development in accordance with the
requirements set forth herein.
§ 22-7. Presubmission conference.
Prior to filing an application for development with the Township, the
developer or the developer's agent is advised to meet with the Bureau
Chief of Planning, Zoning and Development. At this time, the Bureau Chief
of Planning, Zoning and Development shall advise the developer or the
developer's agent which of the procedures set forth herein must be
followed. This conference may, at the developer's or the developer's agent's
request, include the Township Engineer and/or Township Solicitor.
§ 22-8. Land development plan filing date.
For the purpose of this chapter, the land development filing date shall be the
date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission next following the
date that the application, plans, fees and support documents are received in
the Township Municipal Building; provided that should said regular meeting
occur more than 30 days following the submission of the application, plans,
fees and supporting documentation, the land development plan filing date
shall be the 30th day following the day that the application, plans, fees
and supporting documentation have been submitted. An application for land
development and all plans, fees and support documents shall be submitted
not less than 21 days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Planning Commission.
§ 22-9. Fee schedule.
A. Filing fees. All filing fees and the developer's escrow shall be submitted
in such amounts as is required by the fee schedule of the Township, as
amended from time to time.
B. Payment of fee. A filing fee shall accompany the submission of a
preliminary plan or sketch plan. No application shall be accepted or
acted upon unless payment is made in full to the Township.
C. Review escrow. The developer's escrow may be used to reimburse the
Township for providing the following services:
(1) Reviewing the engineering details of the land development plan
submitted, whether sketch plan, preliminary plan or final plan.
(2) Inspecting the layout of the site for conformance to the survey and
plan, whether sketch plan, preliminary plan or final plan.
§ 22-6 RESERVED § 22-9
19:713
§ 22-10. Classification of plans.
§ 22-11. Public notification by the Township.
Notice. Prior to each meeting at which a land development plan is
considered, the Township shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township. The notice shall state:
(3) Reviewing the results of soil tests, if applicable.
(4) Preparing cost estimates of proposed and/or required
improvements.
(5) Attendance at meetings and conferences by the Township
consultants with Township staff. Township officials, the developer,
the developer's agreement and/or developer's engineers and
attorneys.
D. Replenishing developer's escrow. The developer's escrow must be
replenished by the developer when the amount of the developer's
escrow is decreased by 50%. In the event that the developer fails,
refuses or neglects to replenish the developer's escrow as required by
this section within 30 days' written notice thereof to the developer, the
Township may suspend action on the plan, commence collection thereof
by appropriate legal proceedings, refuse to process or otherwise accept
any other application for development from the developer, or may deny
the pending application for development (whether in the form of
preliminary plan or final plan) for failure to comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
A. Sketch plan. Prior to submission of a preliminary plan, a developer may
submit a sketch plan to the Planning Commissioner (not the Board of
Commissioners) for review and comment. The purpose of a sketch plan
submission is to enable the Planning Commission to comment
informally on the general feasibility of the proposed land development.
Submission of a sketch plan is encouraged but is not mandatory.
B. Preliminary plan. Submission of a preliminary plan is mandatory. The
preliminary plan is a tentative plan, prepared in lesser detail than a
final plan, depicting the proposed streets and lot layout and such other
information as required by this chapter.
C. Final plan. Submission of a final plan is mandatory. The final plan is a
complete and exact plan of the land development, with a professional
seal affixed as required by the MPC and prepared for official recording
as required by this chapter to define property rights, streets and other
proposed improvements.
A. The time, location and date of the scheduled meeting of the Planning
Commission or the Board of Commissioners as the case may be.
B. The location of the proposed land development.
§ 22-9 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-11
19:714
§ 22-12. Action on plan.
C. That a copy of the land development plan may be inspected in the
Bureau of Development Office during normal business hours.
A. Planning Commission Act. Within 60 days of the date of a land
development plan filing date, the Planning Commission shall, unless an
extension of time is granted, review the land development plan (both
preliminary plan and final plan) and communicate its recommendations
to the Board of Commissioners for approval, conditional approval, or
disapproval thereof as required by Subsection C hereof.
B. Board of Commissioners Act. Within 90 days of the land development
plan filing date, the Board of Commissioners shall, unless an extension
of time is granted, review the land development plan (both preliminary
plan and final plan) and communicate its approval, conditional
approval, or disapproval thereof to the developer as required by
Subsection C hereof.
C. Planning Commission and Board of Commissioner decisions.
(1) All recommendations of the Planning Commission and all decisions
of the Board of Commissioners shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the developer personally or mailed to the
developer at the developer's last known address not later than 15
days following the date of the recommendations or the date of the
decisions.
(2) When the preliminary plan or final plan is not approved in terms as
filed the Planning Commission's recommendations and the Board of
Commissioners decision shall specify the defects found in the
application and the land development plan (both preliminary plan
and final plan) and describe the requirements which have not been
met and shall, in each case, cite to the provisions of the statute or
ordinance relied upon.
(3) Failure of the Board of Commissioners to render a decision and
communicate it to the developer within the time and in the manner
required in Subsection B shall be deemed an approval of the
application and the land development plan in the terms as
presented unless the developer has agreed in writing to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of
presentation of communication of the decision, in which case,
failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation of communication shall have like effect.
§ 22-11 RESERVED § 22-12
19:715

ARTICLE IV
Submission Requirements
§ 22-13. Sketch plan; fees.
A. Submission. The sketch plan is designed to offer the developer an
opportunity to informally discuss the developer's plans for a proposed
land development with the Planning Commission and Township
Engineer. The sketch plan will be reviewed for general scope and
layout. A developer seeking a sketch plan review shall comply with the
submission requirements set forth in Subsection B set forth herein
below.
B. Submission requirements. A sketch plan submission shall consist of the
following:
(1) Application form. One copy of application for plan review.
(Application forms may be obtained from the Department of
Planning, Zoning and Development.)
(2) Drafting requirements. A sketch plan shall be drafted in
accordance with § 22-16A et seq. of this chapter.
(3) Fees. Payment of those fees as required by the Township fee
schedule.
(4) Plans. Seventeen clear and legible folded paper prints of the sketch
plan and 11 copies of all support documents.
C. Bureau of development action.
(1) The Bureau of Development shall, after receiving the required
number of copies of a sketch plan:
(a) Transmit one print of the plan and one copy of all supporting
documents to the Township Engineer for review and comment.
(b) Transmit one print of the plan to the Township Zoning Officer
for review and comment.
(c) Transmit one print of the plan to the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection for review and comments, if
necessary.
(d) Transmit one print of the plan to the Lehigh Valley planning
Commission for review and comments. Any and all fees paid to
the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission shall be paid directly
by the developer to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission.
(2) The Bureau of Development shall refer the sketch plan, the
supporting documents, and any review comments of the reviewing
bodies to the Planning Commission and shall place the sketch plan
§ 22-13 RESERVED § 22-13
19:717
§ 22-14. Preliminary plan; fees.
review on the agenda of the next available scheduled meeting of
the Planning Commission.
(3) The Bureau of Development shall notify the developer of the
scheduled Planning Commissioner meeting and the need for the
developer to be represented at said meeting in order to present the
sketch plan to the Planning Commissioner and to discuss the plan
with the Planning Commission.
A. Submission. The preliminary plan is required and shall be prepared for
the entire tract on which the subdivision or development is located. The
developer shall submit the required number of prints of the preliminary
plan and all required supporting documents, as specified in Subsection
B, to the Bureau of Development.
B. Submission requirements. A preliminary plan submission shall consist
of the following:
(1) Application form. One completed, signed copy of the application for
preliminary plan review. (Application forms may be obtained from
the Bureau of Development.)
(2) Drafting requirements. A preliminary plan shall be drafted in
accordance with § 22-17A of this chapter.
(3) Fees. Payment of those fees as required by the Township fee
schedule, as amended from time to time.
(4) IRS form. A completed, signed copy of IRS W-9 form. No application
shall be deemed complete or shall be accepted without this form.
(5) Plans. Seventeen clear and legible folded prints of the preliminary
plan and 11 copies of the supporting documents. Additional copies
of supporting documents shall be furnished by the developer upon
request therefor.
C. Bureau of Development action.
(1) The Bureau of Development shall not accept an application for
preliminary plan review unless and until all required materials and
fees required by Subsection B have been submitted.
(2) Subsequent to receiving all materials and fees required by
Subsection B above, the Bureau of Development shall:
(a) Transmit one print of the plan to the district office of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for its review and
comment but only if the proposed subdivision abuts or is
traversed by a state highway or affects the stormwater
drainage of a state highway.
§ 22-13 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-14
19:718
(b) Transmit one print of the plan to each municipality in which
the land development is located and to each municipality which
is adjacent to the location of the land development for review
and comment.
(c) Transmit one print of the plan and one copy of all supporting
documents to the Township Engineer for review and comment.
(d) Transmit one print of the plan to the Township Zoning Officer
for review and comment.
(e) Transmit one print of the plan and one copy of all appropriate
supporting documents to the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection for review and comment, if
necessary.
(f) Transmit one print of the plan to the various Township
departments and applicable agencies.
(g) Transmit one print of the plan to the Lehigh Valley Planning
Commission for review and comments. Any and all fees paid to
the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission shall be paid directly
by the developer to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission.
(3) The Bureau of Development shall refer the preliminary plan, the
supporting documents, and any comments of the reviewing bodies
to the Planning Commission and shall place the preliminary plan
approval request on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Planning Commissioner provided that at least 21
calendar days shall have elapsed between the date the filing of the
complete application for preliminary plan review.
(4) The Bureau of Development shall notify the developer of the
scheduled Planning Commission meeting and the need for the
developer to be represented at said meeting in order to formally
present the developer's preliminary plan to the Planning
Commission and to answer any questions raised by Commission
members.
(5) Planning Commission action. Within 60 days of the land
development plan filing date, the Planning Commission shall review
the preliminary plan and shall report on said plan, in writing, to the
Board of Commissioners, and to the developer, recommending
approval, conditional approval, or disapproval thereof to the Board
of Commissioners, and specifying the section of this chapter
applicable in the event of conditional approval or disapproval.
Failure of the Planning Commission to act within said 60 days shall
be deemed to be a favorable recommendation of the preliminary
plan to the Board of Commissioners.
(6) No review period for a preliminary plan shall exceed the time
period as indicated in § 508 of the MPC. An extension of time may
§ 22-14 RESERVED § 22-14
19:719
§ 22-15. Final plan.
be granted by the Township upon written request therefor by the
developer.
(7) Board of Commissioners action. The Board of Commissioners shall
review the recommendations of the planning commission; shall act
on the preliminary plan, stating its approval, conditional approval
or disapproval, giving reasons for each and shall convey its
decision to the developer in writing pursuant to § 22-12 hereof.
A. Submission. Submission of a final plan is required for all subdivisions
and land developments and shall be prepared for the entire subdivision
or land development or, in the case where staging or phasing of
development is planned, the final plan may be prepared for the initial
stage of development or for subsequent stages of development provided
that such stages of development have been approved by the Board of
Commissioners as part of the preliminary plan.
B. Submission time period. Provided extensions of time are requested by
the developer and approved by the Board of Commissioners, final plans
shall be submitted for approval within 12 months of the date of a
preliminary plan has been approved by the Board of Commissioners. No
final plan can be accepted which has exceeded this time period. Plans
submitted for which preliminary plan approval was given more than 12
months prior to the date of the submission of a final plan and for which
no time extension has been granted shall be considered by the Planning
Commission as a new preliminary plan.
C. Submission requirements. Final plan submission of a subdivision or
land development shall comprise the following:
(1) Additional data. Additional information requested by the Township
Engineer or Planning Commission during the preliminary plan
review process shall be submitted with the final plan.
(2) Application form. If necessary, the original application for
development shall be updated and signed by the developer at the
time the final plan is submitted.
(3) Descriptions. Legal descriptions of all right-of-ways, easements and
dedications.
(4) Drafting requirements. The final plan shall conform to the drafting
requirements as specified in § 22-18A et seq. hereof. In addition,
the final plan shall be prepared with a 2 1/2 inch margin, for
binding, on the left side. All other margins shall be one inch outside
ruled border lines.
(5) Plans. Seventeen clear and legible folded prints of the final plan to
the Bureau of Development, and 11 copies of any support
documents.
§ 22-14 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-15
19:720
(6) Street data. Sufficient data to readily determine the location,
bearing, and length of every street, lot and boundary line and to
reproduce such lines upon the ground, including a survey tie-in to
the three nearest established street monuments.
D. Bureau of Development action.
(1) The Bureau of Development shall not accept an application for a
final plan review unless and until all required materials and fees
required by Subsection C have been submitted.
(2) Subsequent to receiving all materials and fees required by
Subsection C above, the Bureau of Development shall:
(a) Transmit one print of the plan to the district office of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for its review and
comments if the proposed subdivision abuts or is traversed by
a state highway or affects the stormwater drainage of a state
highway.
(b) Transmit one print of the plan to each municipality in which
the land development is located and to each municipality which
is adjacent to the location of the land development for review
and comment.
(c) Transmit one print of the plan and one copy of all supporting
documents to the Township Engineer for review and comment.
(d) Transmit one print of the plan to the Township Zoning Officer
for review and comment.
(e) Transmit one print of the plan and one copy of all appropriate
supporting documents to the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection for review and comment, if
necessary.
(f) Transmit one print of the plan to the various Township
departments and applicable agencies for review and comment.
(g) Transmit one print of the plan to the Lehigh Valley Planning
Commission for review and comments. Any and all fees paid to
the Lehigh Valley Planning Commissioner shall be paid directly
by the developer to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission.
(3) The Bureau of Development shall refer the final plan, the
supporting documents, and any comments of the reviewing bodies
to the Planning Commission and shall place the final plan approval
request on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the Planning Commission provided that at least 21 calendar days
shall have elapsed between the date the land development plan
filing date was issued and the scheduled date of the meeting.
§ 22-15 RESERVED § 22-15
19:721
(4) The Bureau of Development shall notify the developer of the
scheduled Planning Commission meeting and the need for said
developer to be represented at said meeting in order to formally
present the developer's plans to the Planning Commission and to
answer any questions raised by Commission.
E. Planning Commission action. The Planning Commission shall review the
final plan and shall report on the plan, in writing, to the Board of
Commissioners, and to the developer, recommending approval,
conditional approval, or disapproval and specifying the section or
sections of this chapter applicable in the event of conditional approval
or disapproval. Failure by the Planning Commission to act within 60
days shall be deemed a favorable recommendation of the final plan by
the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall endorse the
approved final plan on the signature blocks provided. The Planning
Commission signature block shall read as follows:
ON _____________________ THE PLANNING COMMISSION OF
WHITEHALL TOWNSHIP VOTED TO RECOMMEND TO THE BOARD
OF COMMISSIONERS THAT THE WRITTEN FINAL SUBDIVISION
PLAN BE APPROVED
CHAIRMAN
F. Board of Commissioners action. The Board of Commissioners shall
review the recommendations of the Planning Commission, shall act on
the final plan, stating its approval, conditional approval or disapproval,
giving reasons for each and shall convey its decision to the developer in
accordance with § 22-12 hereof. The Board of Commissioners shall
endorse the approved final plan on the signature blocks provided. The
Board of Commissioner signature block shall read as follows:
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
ON ________________ THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF
WHITEHALL TOWNSHIP ADOPTED RESOLUTION NO. _____ TO
APPROVE THE WITHIN FINAL LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN
TOWNSHIP SECRETARY PRESIDENT
MAYOR
G. Recording approved plan. The approved final plan, bearing the
signature of the developer and the developer's registered professional
consultant, the Planning Commission, the Board of Commissioners, and
the LVPC shall be filed by the developer in the office of the Lehigh
County Recorder of Deeds within 90 days of the date of approval by the
Board of Commissioners.
§ 22-15 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-15
19:722
(1) Once recorded, the developer shall submit to the Bureau of
Development:
(a) A receipt indicating that the final plan has been property
recorded.
(b) One permanent mylar and three clear and legible white paper
prints of the final plan as recorded.
(2) Building permits shall not be issued for the land development until
the receipt from the Office of the Lehigh County Recorder of Deeds
has been submitted to the Bureau of Development, improvements
and maintenance agreements have been signed and insurance
certificates, improvements security and inspection security have
been posted.
§ 22-15 RESERVED § 22-15
19:723

ARTICLE V
Drafting Requirements
§ 22-16. Sketch plan.
A. Sketch plan. A sketch plan for a development shall be drafted in
accordance with this section and show, at a minimum, the following
information on a plan, which shall be black line on white paper, or blue
prints, at a size no greater than 30 inches by 42 inches: [Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2774]
(1) Location Map. The plan shall include a location map to show the
general location of the subdivision tract in relation to adjacent
properties, streets, and streams and current zoning district
boundary lines. The location map shall be drawn at one of the
following scales:
1 inch = 800 feet; 1 inch = 1,000 feet; 1 inch = 2,000 feet
(2) Title block. A title block at the bottom center or at the bottom right
of the plan showing:
(a) Proposed name of the subdivision/land development.
(b) Scale.
(c) Date of plan.
(d) Name and address of the owner and of the developer, if
different.
(e) Name of engineer, surveyor, architect or preparer of the plan.
(f) Name of municipality in which subdivision/land development
will be located.
(3) Developer's statement. A signed statement that the developer is
the owner, equitable owner or authorized by the owner to make
application for the land development. See Appendix C81 attached
hereto.
(4) Site data. Site data including:
(a) Total acreage of all tracts subject to the land development.
(b) Number of lots proposed and area in square feet or acres for
each lot.
(c) Linear feet of new streets proposed.
(d) Type of water supply system proposed.
81.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 22-16 RESERVED § 22-16
19:725
§ 22-17. Preliminary plan.
(e) Type of sewage disposal system proposed.
(f) Zoning district or zoning district boundary lines.
(g) Tax map sheet, block, and lot number from Lehigh County tax
assessment records.
(5) Magnetic north arrow near the upper right hand corner.
(6) Topographic contours from available data (may be obtained from
United States Geological Surveys unless otherwise required by the
Township Engineer).
(7) Proposed lot and street layout with dimensions of lots and street
rights-of-way to the nearest foot.
(8) Property boundaries within the site and within 200 feet of the site
(which may be obtained from the Lehigh County tax assessment tax
maps or similar source).
(9) Phasing plan, if proposed.
A. Preliminary plan. A preliminary plan for a development shall be drafted
in accordance with, and show at a minimum in addition to that
information required by § 22-16 hereof, the following information on a
plan which shall be black line on white paper, or blue prints, at a size no
greater than 30 inches by 42 inches: [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2774]
(1) Proposed subdivision name or identifying title subject to Township
approval.
(2) Completed standard signature blocks for the Planning Commission,
the Board of Commissioners and the Lehigh Valley Planning
Commission. (See Appendix C82 attached hereto.)
(3) Name, address, license number, seal, signature and certificate of
registered engineer, land surveyor or architect responsible for
preparation of the plan.
(4) Identification of adjoining subdivisions, if any.
(5) Identification of adjoining landowners, if any.
(6) Lehigh County tax assessment tax map lot and block numbers of
adjoining lands.
(7) Address of owners and deed block volume and pages numbers of
adjacent lands.
82.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 22-16 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-17
19:726
(8) All municipalities in which subdivision is located.
(9) A signed statement that the developer is the owner, equitable
owner or authorized by the owner to make application for the land
proposed to be subdivided (see Appendix C attached hereto).
(10) Original plan date, division date(s).
(11) If phases are proposed, sequencing of phases.
(12) Graphic scale.
(13) Page numbers.
(14) Bearings and distances of total tract boundary.
(15) Existing land use or uses of adjacent properties.
(16) Location map, which shall include the following:
(a) Relation of tract to adjoining property.
(b) Related road and highway system within 1,000 feet of subject
property.
(c) Municipal boundaries within 1,000 feet of subject property.
(d) Zoning districts within 1,000 feet of subject property.
(e) Watercourses and any areas subject to flooding.
(17) Statement of average daily p.m. peak traffic trip ends.
(18) Location(s) of all existing and/or repaired sinkholes/subsidence/
pits with similar features.
(19) Site data table, which shall include:
(a) Percent of lot coverage characteristics.
(b) Density, dwelling units/acres.
(c) Proposed use.
(d) Setback dimensions.
(e) Within PennDOT approval is required.
(20) All existing building(s) or structure(s) on site and within 100 feet of
site.
(21) All significant natural features (watercourses, forested areas, etc.).
(22) All existing easements, including owner, deed book and page
number and dimensions.
(23) All existing utilities on site and within 100 feet of site.
§ 22-17 RESERVED § 22-17
19:727
(24) Contour lines at vertical intervals of not more than two feet.
(25) Elevation datum shall be identified as mean sea level or Coplay
Whitehall Sewer Authority and shall show benchmark location(s).
(26) Contour lines should be extended beyond the property to be
subdivided/developed in order to provide accurate information of
significant off-site features.
(27) Location and width of proposed streets, rights-of-way, easements,
etc.
(28) Proposed lot lines with bearings and distances shown.
(29) Proposed building setback lines.
(30) Lot and block numbers.
(31) Proposed street/alley/parking lot names (subject to Township
approval).
(32) Proposed utility systems including, but not limited to, water,
sanitary sewer and storm sewer.
(33) Areas to be dedicated for or offered for public use including, but
not limited to, stormwater management areas.
(34) Parks and play areas.
(35) Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of the developer's
entire holdings, a sketch shall be submitted of the prospective
street layout for the remainder of the tract.
(36) Typical street, utility, detention basin(s) and drainage swale(s)
cross sections.
(37) For curved boundaries and all curves on the plan, sufficient data to
enable the reestablishment of the curves. The curve data should
include the following:
(a) Chord bearing and length.
(b) Delta angle of curve.
(c) Length of curve.
(d) Point of curvature.
(e) Point of tangency.
(f) Radius of curve.
(g) Tangent length.
(38) ISO-Photometric data, if applicable.
§ 22-17 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-17
19:728
(39) Note on all plans that where right-of-way is proposed to be
dedicated that all areas of right-of-way outside curb must be
maintained by lot owner.
(40) Any additional information requested by the Township during the
preliminary plan review process shall be submitted with the final
plan.
(41) Any documents or reports which approve the design of proposed
improvements (i.e., drainage report, erosion and sedimentation
report, traffic analysis, etc.).
(42) On-site sewage disposal systems. When sewage disposal service for
the proposed land development is to be by individual sewage
disposal systems, the following requirements must be followed:
(a) Prior to submission of a preliminary subdivision or
development plan, the applicant or developer shall submit to
DEP, Form ER-BWQ-359, "Application for Planning Module for
Land Development," commonly known as the "postcard"
submission, whereby DEP will indicate to the developer which
module components to complete and make other guiding
recommendations, as well as establish a DEP code number for
the project.
(b) The developer shall meet with a representative from DEP and
the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer (SEO) to discuss
the land development with relationship to the Sewage
Facilities Act "Official Plan."
(c) The developer shall provide all information as required by the
Planning Module for Land Development (PMLD). The
developer shall submit the completed PMLD to the Township
as part of the supporting data of the preliminary plan
submission. Under certain circumstances, a PMLD is not
required. The Township SEO shall be contacted to verify those
conditions.
(d) The Township shall review the PMLD and take municipal action
within 30 days of receipt of the completed module.
(e) Preliminary plan shall not be approved by the municipality
until written approval of the PMLD is received from DEP
modules will be reviewed for completeness and conformance
to the requirements of the Sewage Facilities Act and
Regulations promulgated there under 25 Pa. Code, Chapters
71, 72 and 73. Incomplete module submissions will be returned
to the applicant and will not be considered for review until
complete.
(f) The number and spacing of soil profile studies and percolation
tests required for module preparation shall be sufficient to
§ 22-17 RESERVED § 22-17
19:729
§ 22-18. Final plan drafting requirements.
justify adequate sewage facility planning for the proposed land
development and shall contain general site suitability and soil
mapping designations.
(g) All soil testing information shall be indicated and clearly
represented on plans and supporting documents, for
evaluation.
(h) The developer shall retain a soil scientist, hydrogeologist, or
other competent professional to perform soil evaluations,
percolation tests and additional studies, if required, by DEP or
Township SEO. If soil testing is to be performed by someone
other than the Township SEO, then the Township SEO will
function only to observe the soil tests and review submitted
material in accordance with this chapter.
(i) Prior to plan approval, the developer shall test and locate, on
each lot, a suitable primary and secondary absorption area.
These areas shall be staked in the field and protected until
such time as the system(s) are constructed and final grading
completed on the lot. No permit will be issued until the site is
adequately marked. Any disturbance to the site by grading,
equipment, traffic or material storage may be cause for permit
denial.
A. Final plan drafting requirements. A final plan for development shall
comprise the following:
(1) Drafting requirements. The submitted final plan shall conform to
the drafting requirements as specified in §§ 22-16 and 22-17. In
addition, the final plan shall be in accordance with and show the
following information on a plan which shall be black line on white
paper, or blue prints, at a size no greater than 30 inches by 42
inches. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2774]
(a) A signed, notarized statement by the legal owner of the land to
be subdivided or developed to the effect that he is the legal
owner, whether the land is subject to any litigation or lien, that
the final plan has been processed with his free consent, and
that it is his desire to record the same. (See Appendix C83
attached hereto)
(b) Sufficient data to readily determine the location, bearing, and
length of every street, lot and boundary line and to reproduce
such lines upon the ground.
83.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 22-17 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-18
19:730
(c) Excepted parcels shall be marked "not included in this plat"
and the boundary completely indicated by bearings and
distances.
(d) Proposed street address numbers shall be shown subject to the
Township approval.
(e) The date must be shown on which all required public
improvements within the land development under
consideration for final approval are to be completed.
§ 22-18 RESERVED § 22-18
19:731

ARTICLE VI
Design and Construction Standards
§ 22-19. Application.
§ 22-20. Block design standards.
A. General. The design standards and requirements outlined in this
section will be utilized in determining the adequacy of all plans for
proposed subdivisions and land developments.
B. Compliance with Laws, Ordinances and Statutes. Development shall be
planned, reviewed and carried out in conformance with all Township,
county, state, federal and other applicable regulations.
C. Conflicting Provisions. Whenever other ordinances and regulations
impose more restrictive standards and requirements than those
contained herein, the more restrictive standards and regulations shall
apply. Whenever the standards and requirements contained herein are
more restrictive than those imposed in other ordinances and
regulations, the more restrictive standards and regulations herein shall
apply.
A. Block layout.
(1) The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
(a) Provision of adequate locations for buildings of the type
proposed.
(b) Township zoning requirements.
(c) Topography.
(d) Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, including the reduction of intersections
with arterial streets.
(e) Consideration for connection of streets and emergency service
access.
B. Block length.
(1) Residential blocks shall ordinarily be no less than 500 feet in length
or more than 1,600 feet in length.
(2) In the design of blocks longer than 1,000 feet, special consideration
shall be given to the requirements of satisfactory fire protection.
(3) Where practicable, blocks along arterial and collector streets shall
not be less than 1,000 feet long.
C. Block depth.
§ 22-19 RESERVED § 22-20
19:733
§ 22-21. Lot design standards.
(1) Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two
tiers of lots, except:
(a) Where reverse frontage lots are required.
(b) Where prevented by the size or topographical conditions of the
property.
D. Block design exceptions. If a waiver is requested and approved by the
Board of Commissioners, blocks may vary from the elements of design
detailed above if required by the nature of the use. In all cases,
however, adequate provisions shall be made for traffic circulation, offstreet
parking and loading areas and rear yard access by alleys or
easements.
A. General standards.
(1) Within the requirements of Chapter 27, Zoning, the size, shape and
orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the type of development
and use contemplated.
(2) Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street
lines or radial to curved street lines. Any lot line along a curve
which is not radial, shall be labeled "nonradial."
(3) Where feasible, lot lines shall follow municipal and zoning district
boundary lines rather than cross them, in order to avoid
jurisdictional issues.
(4) The depth of residential lots shall be not less than one nor more
than three times their width.
(5) Depth and width of parcels intended for nonresidential uses shall
be adequate for the use proposed and sufficient to provide
satisfactory space for onsite parking, loading and unloading,
setbacks, landscaping, etc.
(6) Remnants of land shall not be permitted and shall either be:
(a) Incorporated into existing or proposed lots by subdivision; or
(b) If acceptable to the Township, dedicated to public use.
B. Lot frontage.
(1) All lots have direct access to a continuous public street or to a
private street which is built to the street standards of this chapter.
(2) Reverse frontage lots shall be required to provide separation of
residential development from collector or arterial streets or to
overcome specific disadvantages of topography or other natural
§ 22-20 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-21
19:734
§ 22-22. Street design standards.
features of the proposed land development. Access to lots of this
nature shall be designated on the plan.
C. Lot access.
(1) Where direct access to an arterial or collector street cannot be
avoided, adequate turnaround space shall be provided behind the
right-of-way line.
(2) Driveways to a single-family residence shall intersect streets at
angles of no less than 60°. All other driveways or access roads shall
intersect streets at right angles, where practicable, and in no case
less than 75°.
(3) Widths of access roads or driveways shall be in accordance to
Chapter 27, Zoning.
(4) To provide safe and convenient ingress and egress access roads
and driveway entrances:
(a) Interior access road intersections for multifamily residential
developments, mobile home parks, and all nonresidential
subdivisions shall be rounded at a minimum radius of 20 feet at
edge of pavement.
(b) If curbed, driveway entrances for single-family residential
subdivisions shall be a depressed curb.
(5) Interior access road grades and driveway grades shall not exceed
15% between the future street right-of-way line and any other point
within the confines of the lot area being served.
(6) The center line of an access road or driveway, at the point of access
to a street, shall not be located closer to the center line of a street
intersection than the following distances (as also required in
§ 27-110 of Chapter 27, Zoning), unless an existing lot is entirely
within the prescribed distances (in which case the driveway shall
be separated from the intersection by the greatest distance
possible):
(a) Two hundred feet if either intersecting street is an arterial
street.
(b) One hundred feet if both streets are collector streets.
(c) Fifty feet if one street is a collector street.
(d) Thirty-five feet if both streets are local streets.
(7) An access road or driveway intersecting a PennDOT roadway shall
only do so in accordance with PennDOT Standards.
§ 22-21 RESERVED § 22-22
19:735
A. General requirements.
(1) Proposed streets shall be properly related to the road and highway
plans of PennDOT and the official map, as amended from time to
time. Streets shall be designed to provide adequate vehicular
access to all lots or parcels and with due regard for topographic
conditions, projected volumes of traffic and further subdivision
possibilities in the area.
(2) The street system of a proposed land development shall be
designed to create a hierarchy of street functions with include
collector and local streets.
(3) The street system of a proposed land development shall be
designed so as to minimize street intersections and pedestrian
vehicular conflict points.
(4) In designing local streets, the developer shall give adequate
consideration to the extension and continuation of arterial,
collector and local streets into and from adjoining properties.
(5) When providing for street access to an adjoining property, streets
shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property.
The streets shall meet the requirements of § 22-25J hereof.
(6) Where a land development abuts an existing road with a right-ofway
and/or cartway width not meeting the requirements of § 22-25J
hereof, sufficient right-of-way shall be dedicated so that the
distance between the edge of the right-of-way and the road center
line equals 1/2 of the ultimate required width, and/or the cartway
will be widened as per the specifications of this chapter so that the
distance between the edge of the cartway and road center line
equals 1/2 of the required width. Where a land development abuts
an existing road not meeting the requirements of § 22-25J,
sufficient right-of-way to correct the alignment deficiency shall be
dedicated.
(7) Where a land development abuts or contains an arterial road, the
use of marginal access streets, reverse frontage lots, or other such
treatment as will provide protection for abutting properties,
reduction in the number of intersections with the arterial street,
and separation of local and through traffic shall be required.
(8) Private streets (streets not to be offered for dedication) shall meet
the street design and improvement standards set forth in this
chapter. In addition, when a private street is proposed, the
developer shall provide the Township with proposed deed
covenants (which shall be noted on the plan and included in all
deeds related thereto), in a form satisfactory to the Township,
obliging the owners of all lots to be served by the street to provide,
at their expense, perpetual street maintenance including, but not
limited to, timely snow removal.
§ 22-22 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-22
19:736
§ 22-23. Street right-of-way and cartway width.
(9) If the lots in the development are large enough for resubdivision or
if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, suitable access and street
openings for such an eventuality shall be provided. The openings
shall be at intervals consistent with the block length standards of
§ 22-20B.
A. Street right-of-way and cartway widths. Street right-of-way and cartway
widths in proposed land developments shall conform to the standards
set forth in Table 1.
Table 1
Type of Road:
Local*
Type of Road:
Collector
Type of Road:
Arterial
Streets and
Expressways
Land Uses All Uses All Uses All Uses
Right-of-Way
Width
55 feet 60 feet 80 feet**
Cartway Width 36 feet+ 42 feet 50 feet**
*Except for culs-de-sac which are addressed in § 22-23F.
**Greater width as per AASHTO and PennDOT design standards may
be required.
+If approved by the Township Engineer, cartway width may be
decreased to 32 feet.
B. Horizontal curves.
(1) Whenever street center lines are deflected more than 5°,
connection shall be made by horizontal curves.
(2) Horizontal curves shall have the following minimum center line
radii:
(a) Local streets: 150 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 300 feet.
(c) Arterial streets and expressways: as per then current AASHTO
standards.
(3) A minimum tangent of 100 feet shall be required between reverse
curves on all streets. A minimum tangent of 100 feet shall separate
horizontal curves from intersections, as measured from the point of
intersecting center lines.
C. Parking lot and street grades.
§ 22-22 RESERVED § 22-23
19:737
(1) There shall be a minimum center line grade on all streets of 0.75%.
(2) Center line grades shall not exceed the following:
(a) Local Streets: 10%.
(b) Collector Streets: 7%.
(c) Arterial streets and expressways: as per then current AASHTO
standards.
(3) Slopes in parking areas shall not exceed 5%, inclusive of vehicular
parking spaces, aisles and pedestrian access areas.
(4) Intersections shall be approached on all sides by leveling areas
which shall have a minimum length of 75 feet (measured from the
intersection of the center lines), within which no grade shall exceed
a minimum of 3%.
(5) Cross-slopes for roadways shall be 2% and cross slopes for
shoulders shall be 4%.
D. Vertical curves.
(1) Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade exceeding 1%.
(2) Vertical curves shall be designed to produce the following minimum
sight distances; as per current AASHTO Standards:
(a) Local streets: 200 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 400 feet.
(c) Arterial streets and expressways: as per then current AASHTO
standards.
E. Street intersections.
(1) All streets shall intersect at 90°.
(2) Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two
streets are prohibited.
(3) Two streets intersecting a third street from opposite sides shall
either intersect with a common center line or their center lines
shall be offset according to the following standards:
(a) The two streets shall be separated by a distance of 150 feet
between center lines measured along the center line of the
street being intersected when all three streets involved are
local streets.
(b) The two streets shall be separated by a distance of 400 feet
between center lines measured along the center line of the
§ 22-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-23
19:738
street being intersected when one or more of the streets
involved is a collector street.
(c) The two streets shall be separated by a distance of 800 feet
between center lines measured along the center line of the
street being intersected when one or more of the streets
involved is an arterial street.
(4) Street curb intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arch with
a minimum radius of:
(a) Local streets: 20 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 40 feet.
(c) Arterial streets and expressways: 50 feet.
(5) Street right-of-way lines, whenever possible, shall be parallel to
(concentric with) curb arcs at intersections and shall, at
intersections, be rounded by a tangential arch.
(6) Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street intersections.
Within such triangles, no object greater than two feet in height and
no other object that would obscure the vision of the motorist shall
be permitted. Such triangles shall be established as measured from
road center lines a distance of:
(a) Seventy-five feet from the point of intersection of the center
line of two streets where both are local streets.
(b) One hundred feet from the point of intersection of the center
line of two streets where one or both is a collector street.
(c) One hundred fifty feet from the point of intersection of the
center lines of two streets where one is an arterial street.
(7) Whenever a portion of the line of a clear site triangle coincides with
a proposed building setback line, such portion shall be shown on
the final plan of the land development and shall be considered a
building setback line. Signs and landscaping which would obscure
vision shall not be placed within the clear sight triangle.
F. Culs-de-sac, dead end streets, stub streets.
(1) Culs-de-sac, loop roads, and other street networks which have a
single point of access to the surrounding road network shall not
serve more than 25 dwelling units and shall not exceed a total
length of more than 1,000 feet as measured from the center line of
the intersection at the single point of access to the farthest point
served.
(2) All cul-de-sac streets, whether permanently or temporarily
designed as such, shall be provided at the closed end with a fully
§ 22-23 RESERVED § 22-23
19:739
§ 22-24. Lighting standards.
paved turnaround. The turnaround may be offset to the left or
centered. Turnarounds offset to the right shall be prohibited.
(a) The minimum radius to the pavement edge or curbline shall be
50 feet and the minimum radius of the right-of-way line shall be
60 feet.
(b) Minimum curbline radius of a return in a cul-de-sac shall be a
minimum of 50 feet. The curbline or pavement edge radius
shall be a minimum of 160 feet.
(c) Building setback lines for lots abutting a temporary cul-de-sac
shall be measured from the temporary cul-de-sac right-of-way
line.
(3) Dead-end streets are prohibited except those meeting the
standards of § 22-25J.
(4) Stub streets may be constructed for future access to an adjoining
property or a subsequent section of the development at a suitable
location as approved by Township Engineer. Stub streets shall be
built to the standards of § 22-25J. The length of stub streets shall
not exceed the depth of one lot. No more than one lot shall front on
each side of the stub street, and such lots shall also have full
frontage along another public street. Stub streets shall be designed
to include a temporary turnaround which shall be constructed and
maintained by the developer until the through street is
constructed, at which time the temporary turnaround shall be
eliminated.
G. General street design standards. See Detail Plates WT-R-01 and WTR-
02.84
H. The Board of Commissioners desires to reduce stormwater runoff and
increase infiltration where appropriate. This goal can be furthered by
reducing the cartway width of proposed roads and exchanging the use
of curbing and sidewalks for improved roadway shoulders and roadside
swales. Areas of Whitehall Township are zoned for low-impact
residential development (one-plus-acre lots) and have soil types and
geology that are compatible with favorable infiltration rates. When an
applicant can demonstrate the benefits of this alternate design while
providing for safe roadways and effective stormwater management, the
Board of Commissioners may, with the concurrence of the Township
Engineer, permit the applicant to incorporate the low-impact roadway
standard, per Standard Detail WT-R-01C.85 [Added 1-12-2015 by Ord.
No. 2995]
84.Editor's Note: The Detail Plates are included in Appendix C at the end of this chapter.
85.Editor's Note: Standard Detail WT-R-01C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 22-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-24
19:740
A. Lighting and glare limitations.
(1) No direct glare shall be permitted beyond the property lines of a
lot, with the exception that parking areas and walkways may be
illuminated by luminary so hooded or shielded so that the maximum
angle of the cone of direct illumination shall be 60° drawn
perpendicular to the ground. Such luminary shall be placed not
more than 35 feet above the ground level. The maximum
illumination at ground level shall not be in excess of three
footcandles.
(2) A luminary of less than four feet above the ground may have a cone
angle of 90°.
(3) Indirect glare, as defined in this chapter, produced by illuminating
or reflecting surface shall not exceed 0.3 footcandle instantaneous
maximum measurement or 0.1 footcandle, average measurement.
(4) The provisions of this section shall apply to commercially used or
zoned property and multi-family vertically attached structures, but
shall not apply to other residential uses.
B. Footcandles.
(1) Unless stated herein or otherwise required by the Board of
Commissioners, all lighting systems shall utilize high-intensity
discharge sources. Average minimum maintained footcandle levels
shall be no less than 1.00 footcandle and no more than 3.00
footcandles.
(2) Outdoor sales areas shall not be permitted to exceed 50 footcandles
at any specific point on the front line display area. General parking
and storage areas shall not exceed 20 footcandles at any specific
point. In no case shall floodlights be utilized to illuminate front
sales line or general area.
(3) Maximum candlepower. No lighting source, including signs, shall
spill over a lot line in such a way as to cause an illumination of
greater than the following amounts, measured at night on the
surface of the receiving residential lot line:
(a) Three-tenths footcandle spillover at 10 feet inside a residential
lot line between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
C. Shielding diffusing.
(1) All light sources, including signs, shall be properly diffused as
needed with a translucent or similar cover to prevent exposed
bulbs from being directly visible from streets, public sidewalks,
dwellings or adjacent lots.
§ 22-24 RESERVED § 22-24
19:741
(2) All light sources, including signs, shall be shielded around the light
source and to prevent the lighting from shining into the eyes of
passing motorists.
D. Height.
(1) Maximum height of freestanding fixtures shall not exceed 35 feet.
Fixture heights shall be measured from the bottom of the fixture to
ground level.
(2) No luminary, spotlight or other light source that is within 200 feet
of a dwelling or residential district shall be placed at a height
exceeding 35 feet above the average surrounding ground level.
This limitation shall not apply to lights needed for air safety nor
lights intended solely to illuminate an architectural feature of a
building.
E. General.
(1) Lighting shall be provided along public streets, within parking
facilities and recreational facilities as required by Whitehall
Township Board of Commissioners.
(2) All parking areas, walkways, and passageways serving commercial
or residential land developments shall be illuminated to the
satisfaction of the Whitehall Township Board of Commissioners and
the Township Lighting Consultant.
(3) A lighting plan for all facilities other than streetlighting shall be
prepared and provided to the Township Lighting Consultant and
the Township Engineer and must include:
(a) Fixture cut sheets.
(b) Overall point by point isocandle layout.
(c) Individual isocandle curve.
(d) Individual isocandella curves.
(4) All streets and driveways except driveways for single-family
detached dwellings, semidetached dwellings (twins) and singlefamily
attached dwellings (townhouses) shall be illuminated
adequately during the hours between sunset and sunrise when the
use is in operation.
(5) Measurement. The maximum illumination levels of this section
shall be measured with a photoelectric photometer having spectral
response similar to that of the human eye. A "footcandle" is defined
as a unit of measurement equaling the illumination on a surface
one square foot in area where there is a distribution of light having
a candlepower of one candela.
F. Streetlighting.
§ 22-24 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-24
19:742
(1) Where required by the Board of Commissioners, streetlights and all
accessory equipment shall be provided at the expense of the
developer, at all intersections, ends of culs-de-sac, and between all
intersections at spacing approved by the Township Lighting
Consultant. As a minimum, all residential developments (or other,
as required by the Board of Commissioners) shall be constructed
with a minimal number of connections (to the power source),
underground streetlight wiring system (wire protected by conduit)
including all accessory equipment required for future installation
of streetlights (and foundations) by others. Plan for residential
lighting and underground wiring system (energizing plan) shall be
prepared by the Township Lighting Consultant and presented to
the developer upon receipt of the development's underground
wiring layout when supplied by the electric service provider (i.e.,
PP L). Supply of this underground wiring plan to the Township
Lighting Consultant is the responsibility of the developer.
(2) All streetlights, where required by the Board of Commissioners,
shall have a high-pressure sodium vapor lighting source (pole
mounted) which supplies a minimum maintained average
footcandle (fc) level of 0.30 footcandle. All lighting and accessory
equipment shall be standard equipment as approved by the
Township Lighting Consultant or variations as approved by the
Board of Commissioners.
(3) Streetlights shall be energized at time of fifty-percent occupancy of
the development. All fees for connection and operation of such light
shall be the responsibility of the developer until Whitehall
Township formally accepts dedication of public improvements.
Whitehall Township shall coordinate energizing of the lights in
accordance with the approved energizing plan. Request for
electrical connection shall only be made by Whitehall Township.
Whitehall Township shall pay all associated connection and
operation fees for which the developer shall reimburse the
Township under rate SLS, on a monthly basis, including
appropriate administration fees. This payment arrangement shall
continue until such time as formal acceptance of dedication of
public improvements, at which time, Whitehall Township shall
assume these responsibilities. The developer shall warranty all
parts and associated labor for the streetlighting system for the
period of time from the date of installation until 18 months from the
date of formal acceptance of public improvements by the Township.
(4) Upon completion of streetlight installation, the developer or his
designated representative shall notify the Township Lighting
Consultant and the Township Engineer, in writing, of completion of
lighting facilities. Copy of the Electrical Underwriter's certificate
shall also be included with this notification.
(5) All other proposed lighting, such as building lights, general parking
areas, sidewalk/walkway/pathway illumination, driveway
§ 22-24 RESERVED § 22-24
19:743
§ 22-25. Construction standards.
illumination, signs or other ornamental lighting, shall be shown
in sufficient detail on the lighting plan, to allow determination of
the effects on adjacent properties, traffic safety, and overhead sky
glow.
A. General provisions.
(1) Cement concrete structures. All poured in place concrete
structures shall be cured and protected as specified in PennDOT
Pub. 408, § 1001.3.
(2) Construction season. General construction season: The installation
of all improvements shall begin on March 15th and shall end on
December 31st, of any year, except with written permission of the
Township Engineer.
(3) Construction standards. The improvements shall be provided,
constructed and installed by the developer as shown on the final
plan pursuant to the construction standards as set forth herein
below.
(4) Placement of paving mixtures. Bituminous paving mixtures shall
not be placed between October 31st and April 1st, of any year,
except with the written permission of the Township Engineer. Also,
bituminous paving mixtures shall not be placed when prohibited by
weather as specified in PennDOT Pub. 408, § 401.3.
(5) Quality of improvements. All improvements offered to the Township
or required to be made shall be of the best quality and undamaged
condition at the time of acceptance by the Township.
(6) Limit of open trench. Not more than 100 feet of trench shall be
excavated in advance of pipe or utility installation and backfilling.
All trenches shall be closed at the end of each working day or
appropriate safety precautions shall be taken to guard against
accidents or collapse of trench walls.
(7) Safety. Compliance with all state and federal and/or local
regulations and rules regarding the safety of all the people and the
construction site is the developer's and/or contractor's
responsibility.
(8) Observation of work and approvals. The Township Engineer or the
Township Engineer's inspectors shall have a right to make
observation of the work in progress and perform or observe
performance of tests as necessary to record compliance or
noncompliance of construction of improvements for use in making
decisions as to whether the developer is in compliance with
approved land development plans, specifications and/or local
ordinances.
§ 22-24 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-25
19:744
(9) Observation of the construction and/or performance or observation
of tests can be conducted by the Township and/or its inspectors or,
(as appropriate) by the public utility authority or public utility
company responsible for a particular required service utility. The
Township Engineer may order tests to aid in determination of
compliance of applicable construction improvement specifications.
All testing shall be performed by an independent laboratory of the
developers choosing; however, the appointment of said laboratory
is subject to Township approval. The Township remedies for
noncompliance or ordinance violations include but are not limited
to:
(a) Nonapproval of occupancy certificates.
(b) Nonrelease of improvements security.
(c) Requesting additional improvements security.
(d) Nonacceptance of improvements.
(e) Those remedies specified in the improvements and
maintenance agreements.
(10) Reference to other specifications. Throughout this chapter
references will be made to various industry standard specifications.
When such standards are referenced, such standards are to be
considered as being fully incorporated and repeated into and as a
part of this chapter, as amended from time to time.
(11) PennDOT Pub. 408. Shall mean the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Standard Specification Publication 408, as
amended from time to time. This document shall be known and
cited herein as "PennDOT Pub. 408."
B. Construction standards.
(1) Curbs shall be constructed pursuant to the provision of Subsection
C hereof.
(2) Erosion and sedimentation controls shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with those Township standards set forth
in Article VIII hereof.
(3) Fencing shall be constructed pursuant to the provisions of
Subsection D hereof.
(4) Improvements shall be maintained pursuant to the provisions of
Subsection E hereof.
(5) Monuments must be constructed and markers shall be placed
pursuant to the provisions of Subsection F.
(6) Sidewalks shall be constructed pursuant to the provisions of
Subsection G hereof.
§ 22-25 RESERVED § 22-25
19:745
(7) Sinkholes shall be repaired pursuant to the provisions of
Subsection H.
(8) Sanitary sewers and all related appurtenances shall be constructed
in accord with the specifications as may be adopted from time to
time by the Coplay-Whitehall Sewer Authority or its successors,
which are expressly incorporated herein by reference, as the same
may be amended from time to time.
(9) Stormwater sewers shall be constructed pursuant to the provisions
of Subsection I hereof.
(10) Streets shall be constructed pursuant to the provisions of
Subsection J hereof.
(11) Streetlights shall be installed pursuant to the provisions of
Subsection K hereof.
(12) Street signs shall be installed pursuant to the provisions of
Subsection L hereof.
(13) Street trees shall be planed at such locations and in such manner
consistent with the provisions of Subsection M hereof.
(14) Surface restoration shall be accomplished pursuant to the
provisions of Subsection N.
(15)Water supply and distribution related improvements including fire
hydrants, shall be constructed in accord with the specifications as
may be adopted from time to time by the Northampton Borough
Municipal Authority, the Whitehall Township Authority or their
successors, which standards are expressly incorporated herein by
reference, as the same may be amended from time to time.
C. Curbs. All upright curb and underdrains shall be constructed pursuant
to Detail Plates WT-R-03 and WT-R-0486 and the following standards:
(1) Curb cut sheets shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for his
review a minimum of three working days prior to forming the curb.
The stakeout for the curb shall have stakes at a maximum of 10 feet
on all curve and 20 feet on all straight or tangent sections. Stakes
shall be set at all points on curve and points on tangent of all curves
and their station numbers shall be provided.
(2) Taper of curbs shall be as set forth on Detail Plates WT-R-03 and
WT-R-04.
(3) Radii of corners and driveways shall be as directed by the Township
Engineer.
86.Editor's Note: The Detail Plates are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 22-25 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-25
19:746
(4) Depressed curb shall be provided for the full sidewalk width where
sidewalks abut curbs at intersections for handicapped access (See
Detail Plate WT-R-08), shall have a maximum curb reveal at the
pavement of 1 1/2 inch and curb depression must be fully formed
on both the front and backsides.
(5) Radius curb forms shall be used on all returns, culs-de-sac, and
street curves with a center line radius of 500 feet or less, unless a
power curb machine is used to install the curbing.
(6) Construction joints shall be spaced (by saw cut or tooled) at equal
intervals between expansion joints, not to exceed 10 feet and shall
be formed by division plates.
(7) Expansion joints shall be 1/2 of one inch premolded, shall be made
of bituminous, expansion joint material, and shall be spaced at 30
foot intervals or less for flatwork and formed curb and at 100 foot
intervals or less for machined curb.
(8) Underdrain, where required by the Township Engineer, shall be
made of six inch perforated plastic pipe, shall have filter fabric
wrapped around the aggregate backfilled on the pipe, with outlet to
daylight or storm sewer structure, as directed by the Township
Engineer.
(9) Concrete shall be provided, placed, cured and finished to PennDOT
Pub. 408, §§ 704 and § 1001. Type A concrete (300 p.s.i., 28-day
strength) shall be used.
(10) All exposed surfaces of curbs shall be finished.
D. Fencing. All fencing provided shall be installed in accordance with the
following specifications, unless the approved land development plan
depicts alternate method of fencing.
(1) Fencing. Fencing shall be four feet in height and shall be chain link.
(2) Chain link fabric. The fabric shall be aluminum coated chain link
No. 9 gauge wire woven in a 1 1/4 inch mesh. The top and bottom
selvages of the fabric shall be knuckled; the basic steel to be of
medium high carbon quality. The aluminum coating shall be a
minimum of 0.40 ounces per square foot of wire surface and have
proper adherence to withstand wrapping coating wire on its own
diameter without cracking or flaking of the coating. The fabric shall
conform to A.S.T.M. designation A 491-80 in its entirety.
(3) Framing and hardware. All steel pipe, posts and appurtenances
used in the construction of all fences and gates shall be hot dipped
galvanized, with a minimum zinc coating of 2.0 ounces per square
foot of surface area. Comer, line and gate posts — 2 1/2 inches
outside diameter ("O.D."), 3.65 lbs/linear foot ("LNFT").
(a) Fence top rail: 1 5/8 inches O.D., 2.27 lbs. LNFT.
§ 22-25 RESERVED § 22-25
19:747
(b) Tension wire: (bottom selvage offence) #7 gauge aluminum
coated coil spring.
(c) Tension bars: 3/16 inch x 3/4 inch bar.
(d) Gate frames: 1 5/8 inches O.D., 2.27 lbs./LNFT.
(4) Miscellaneous accessories. The chain link fabric shall be securely
fastened to all corner and end posts with tension bars and heavy 11
gauge tension bands. There shall be one band for each foot in
height of fabric. The fabric shall be fastened to all line posts with
nine gauge aluminum wire ties, spacing not to exceed 14 inches
apart. Fabric shall be tied to all rails with nine gauge aluminum
wire ties, spacing not to exceed 24 inches. Fabric shall be attached
to tension wire and aluminum hog rigs at intervals not to exceed 24
inches. Gate latches shall be steel and shall be of lockable design.
Double gate latches shall be equipped with a center drop bar and
positive locking device with a suitable attachment to retain both
gates in parallel position while closed. Drop bar center stops shall
be installed in concrete.
(5) Installation. The posts shall be erected online and plumb in every
direction. All posts shall be capped and spaced at 10 feet centers,
and shall be set in concrete. The footings are to be of Class W
concrete (PennDOT Standard), with minimum 28 day strength of
3,300 p.s.i. poured in place. Footers shall be a minimum 12 inches
in diameter and 30 inches deep. Chain link fabric shall be installed
on the outside of the posts and shall be hung so that the bottom of
the fabric is no more than two inches or no less than one inch from
finished grade.
(6) The tension wire shall be stretched taut from end post to end post
and securely fastened to each line post six inches above finished
grade.
E. Improvements maintenance. After construction and approval of the
improvements, the developer be responsible for maintenance of
improvements for a period of time that is specified in the developer's
agreement(s). After the expiration of the developer's responsibilities,
the maintenance responsibilities for improvements shall be as follows:
(1) For any public utility such as water service, sanitary service,
electric or gas, the maintenance by the public utility authority or
public utility company shall extend to the limit of a public right-ofway
line or public easement line or a shutoff valve or terminal
connecting manhole or other similar private line connection point,
unless otherwise regulated in the public utility owners rates, rules,
and regulations, or other specific ordinances or agreements which
are currently in effect or which may be approved in the future.
(2) For public street rights-of-way, the Township or state maintenance
responsibility shall extend to the limit of the traveled cartway and
§ 22-25 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-25
19:748
shoulders. In the case of a curbed road, the Township or state
maintenance responsibility shall extend to the curb face. The
Township, along Township roads and the state, along state roads
have a right to take on additional maintenance beyond the curb or
shoulder limits as they might determine necessary to desirable, on
a case by case basis.
(3) The curb, sidewalk, and street trees and planting screens and grass
located in or along the edge of the roadway is the maintenance
responsibility of the abutting private property owner, unless
otherwise specifically defined by existing or future ordinances or
amendments.
(4) Public parks or dedicated and accepted open space, recreation
areas, or stormwater management areas accepted by fee simple
deed of special warranty and by Township ordinance as public
lands, shall be maintained by the Township.
(5) Storm drainage easements or rights-of-way, emergency access
easements or rights-of-way, and/or pedestrian easements or rightsof-
way located on a private property shall be maintained by the
owner of the private property. The owner of the private property
shall maintain the easement or right-of-way in grassed or improved
condition in accordance with the elevations, grades and designs
shown on the approved development plans. The Township shall
have the right to maintain, alter or improve these easements or
rights-of-way or amend the approved development plans for these
areas.
F. Monuments. Monuments shall be constructed pursuant to Detail Plate
WT-M-02.87
G. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with Detail
Plates WT-R-03, WT-R-04 and the following standards:
(1) Concrete is to be provided, placed, cured and finished to PennDOT
Pub. 408 § 704 and § 1001. Type A concrete (3,300 p.s.i., 28 day
strength) shall be used.
(2) Sidewalk thickness: five inches. At all driveways: six inches. Finish
with float, broom finish for all surfaces. The concrete sidewalk shall
be placed upon a four inch thick compacted stone base, six inches
at all driveways, consisting of Type 2B stone.
(3) Drainage slope to be maintained at 1/4 of one inch per foot towards
curb.
(4) Expansion joints shall be 1/2 of one inch premolded, shall consist of
bituminous expansion material at 30 foot intervals and shall be
installed next to buildings, poles, structures and curbs, around
87.Editor's Note: The Detail Plates are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 22-25 RESERVED § 22-25
19:749
intersections of two walks, driveway aprons, curbs, and sidewalks,
including radii of curbs and all cold joints.
(5) Construction joints shall be spaced at equal intervals between
expansion joints and shall not exceed 1/4 entire depth of slab for
sidewalks formed by division plates, cutting groves or tooling.
(6) Minimum No. 6, six-inch by six-inch mesh to be used in all
nonresidential driveway apron construction.
(7) Sidewalks along local streets or sidewalks required outside of
street right-of-way in pedestrian easements or open space and
recreation areas can be constructed of ID-2 wearing course
bituminous paving substituted for cement concrete, upon special
approval by the Board of Commissioners. Such sidewalk shall
conform to the requirements of Subsection G(3) outlined above.
This sidewalk shall consist of a six-inch 2B stone base compacted
and the thickness of paving shall be 2 1/2 inches. Such stone and
paving shall be provided according to PennDOT specifications.
(8) Handicap access ramps shall be provided at all intersections and
shall be constructed consistent with Detail Plate WT-R-08.88
H. Sinkholes. All sinkholes which exist within a site or any easement or any
area being dedicated to the Township shall be repaired in accordance
with the provisions of Detail Plate WT-M-01. Sinkholes may not be filled
with construction waste materials or any other type of debris. Sinkholes
must be repaired immediately upon discovery.
I. Stormwater Sewers. All storm sewer facilities, including piping, inlets,
structures and other facilities shall be constructed in accordance with
the following standards:
(1) Pipe. All storm sewer pipe shall be new reinforced concrete pipe
with mortared joints meeting or exceeding ASTM C76 Class III
Requirements, or "O" ring joints.
(2) Bedding. All storm sewer pipe shall be laid in Type 2A modified
stone. See Detail Plate WT-R-05, WT-R-06 and WT-R-07.89
(3) Endwalls, end sections, inlets and manholes. All storm sewer
structures and appurtenances shall be precast or build in place in
accordance with § 605 of PennDOT Pub. 408 and PennDOT's
Standards for Roadway Construction."
(a) Endwalls: see Detail Plates WT-D-10 and WT-D-11.
(b) End sections: see Detail Plates WT-D-09.
(c) Inlets: see Detail Plates WT-D-01 to WT-D-05, inclusive.
88.Editor's Note: The Detail Plates are included at the end of this chapter.
89.Editor's Note: The Detail Plates are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 22-25 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-25
19:750
(d) Manholes: see Detail Plates WT-D-06 to WT-D-08, inclusive.
(4) All flow channels must be installed in all concrete structures during
construction of the storm sewer system.
(5) Special structures such as culverts, inlet boxes, junction boxes, or
detention basin outlet structures shall be detailed completely on
approved land development plans and shall be constructed in
accordance with those plans.
(6) All pipe endwalls, wingwalls, and end sections, and all detention
basin outlet structures shall be protected from frost related
movement and scour activity by the construction of a concrete
footer where appropriate.
(7) All grade adjustments or structures shall be done with precast
adjustment rings and mortar, no brick shall be used.
J. Streets. All streets and roads shall be constructed and built in
accordance with the following standards:
(1) Subgrade. Developers shall comply with those specifications set
forth in PennDOT Pub. 408, § 210. Subgrade density will be
checked for conformance to § 210(3) prior to the installation of the
required subbase. Cross-slope shall be 2%.
(2) Subbase. Developers shall comply with those specifications set
forth in PennDOT Pub. 408, § 350.
(a) A six inch subbase shall be installed on a properly graded and
prepared subgrade The subbase shall consist of a four inch
course of 3A stone, rolled and compacted, followed by a two
inch layer of 2B modified stone, rolled and compacted, to
achieve final shape of subbase.
(b) Where subgrade conditions dictate, the use of underdrain may
be required when specified by the Township Engineer. Where
required, the underdrain shall be constructed in accordance
with of PennDOT Pub. 408, § 610.
(3) Base course. Developers shall comply with those specifications set
forth in PennDOT Pub. 408, § 305. Base course shall consist of
three inches compacted depth bituminous concrete base course
(B.C.B.C.) constructed in accordance with § 305.
(4) Surface course. Developers shall comply with those specifications
set forth in PennDOT Pub. 408, § 305. The surface or wearing
course shall consist of 1 1/2 inches compacted depth ID-2 wearing
course constructed in accordance with § 305.
(a) The surface course shall not be placed until the base course
has weathered at least one year. This practice will allow for
§ 22-25 RESERVED § 22-25
19:751
imperfections to appear, and be repaired, prior to the
placement of the surface course.
(b) Any distressed or failing areas of the base course must be
repaired prior to the placement of the surface course. The
Township Engineer shall field mark such areas and witness the
repairs. In certain areas, a leveling course may be required.
(c) Prior to the placement of the surface course, the base course
must be cleaned and swept, free of all loose particles, and
coated with a bituminous tack coat as per PennDOT Pub. 408,
§ 460.
(d) If the surface course is not placed within 18 months of the
completed base course, the Township Engineer may, from time
to time, require an application of bituminous tack coat to
recondition the base course until the placement of the surface
course occurs.
(e) The area around inlets, manholes and valve boxes shall be
milled to a minimum depth of 1 1/2 inches extending two feet
from inlets and manholes, and one foot from valve boxes, prior
to the placement of the wearing course.
(f) All structures within the cartway must be ramped-up with
bituminous material immediately following the placement of
the base course. Cold Patch may be used for ramps. Ramps
shall extend two feet from manholes and inlets, and one foot
from valve boxes.
(5) Inlet top placement. All inlet tops used in the Township right-of-way
shall be PennDOT Type 'C', Type 'M' or Type 'S.' The inlet shall be
set at an interim elevation as per § 706.71 prior to placement of
base course. Inlets shall be set at final elevation prior to placement
of surface course. (See Detail Plate WT-D-0290). All adjustments to
inlet tops shall be made with concrete adjustment rings and mortar.
Brick shall not be used. Adjustment rings and mortar shall not
exceed eight inches in height, or a precast riser section must be
used. Weep holes in inlets shall be formed at appropriate elevations
to drain the subgrade.
(6) Repairs. Repairs to the streets shall be accomplished with the same
material as listed above. The area to be repaired shall be cut along
neat perimeter lines outside of the damaged area. Pneumatic
chisels and spades may be used to cut base course prior to
placement of surface course. Only saw cuts are permitted in
surface course. Joints in the surface course shall be sealed with hot
bituminous material known as "AC-20." The seal is to be 12 inches
wide and coated with sand to absorb excess material.
90.Editor's Note: The Detail Plates are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 22-25 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-25
19:752
(7) Performance specifications. Developers shall comply with those
specifications set forth in PennDOT Pub. 408.
(8) Right-of-way section. Shoulders to drain towards curb. Edge of
right-of-way to be not less than four inches nor more than six inches
above the top of curb. Top of curb elevation difference to be not
more than one inch in any section. Reveal of curb to be seven
inches with tolerance of minus 1/2 of one inch to plus one inch
permitted with uniform transitions.
(9) Cartway crown. Typical crown elevation to be 4 1/2 inches above
edge of pavement from local streets and 5 1/4 inches above edge of
pavement for collector streets.
(10) As-built surveys records. As-built surveys signed by a registered
engineer or surveyor shall be furnished to the Township Engineer
certifying that all construction conforms to Township standards.
Such data shall include profile grades for right-of-way lines, top of
curbs or shoulder edges, gutter lines and center line of cartway
with control stations at 50 foot intervals or less, storm sewer inlets,
manholes, etc. Once approved, the developer shall furnish a set of
reproducible mylar drawings to the Township Engineer.
(11) Street construction on fill. Any embankment material shall be
placed in accordance with the requirements of PennDOT Pub. 408,
§ 206.
(12) Utility trench backfill. Within all streets rights-of-way, backfilling
shall be done in accordance with the requirements of PennDOT
Pub. 408, § 601.3(e).
(13) Fully paved shoulders. Shoulder paving thickness should be
designed to meet load and soil characteristics and/or PennDOT
requirements for fully paved shoulders with a full depth bituminous
concrete base course.
(14) Street and stop signs. Street signs and stop signs shall be provided
and installed in accordance with Township specifications and shall
be installed at the locations shown of the approved final plans
within five days of the installation of street base paving.
(15) Sealer. The wearing course adjacent to curbs shall be sealed with
hot bituminous material of the class and type designated for the
wearing curse, extending to six inches form the curb and apply
evenly. Class E-1, E-6, or E-8 emulsified asphalt will be permitted in
place of the hot bituminous material. Material shall be applied as
specified in PennDOT Pub. 408 § 401.3(e).
(16) Cross section. See Detail Plates WT-R-01 and WT-R-02.91
91.Editor's Note: The Detail Plates are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 22-25 RESERVED § 22-25
19:753
K. Streetlights. Streetlight style and locations shall be subject to Township
approval.
L. Street signs. Street signs shall be as per Detail Plate WT-R-09.
M. Street trees. Street trees and shrubs proposed to be situated in any
public right-of-way shall be selected, located and planted pursuant to
the following standards:
(1) Only those trees and shrubs listed in Appendix B92 shall be selected
by the developer to be used as street trees. The Board of
Commissioners may, upon recommendation from the Township
Shade Tree Commission, approve species of trees other than those
listed herein if the developer proves to the satisfaction of the Board
of Commissioners that the trees would be sturdy, suitable and
resistant to blight and disease.
(2) All street trees shall be long stemmed, headed with limbs at least
seven feet above the ground and with clearance provided on both
the street and sidewalk sides.
(3) Street tree locations are depicted on the sidewalk standard typical
cross-section Detail Plates WT-R-01 and WT-R-02.
(4) No tree shall be planted within 50 feet of the intersection of any
street or road cartway.
(5) Street trees shall be planted and staked pursuant to the provisions
of Detail Plate WT-L-01.
(6) Shrubs located in any public right-of-way shall be planted pursuant
to the provision of Detail Plate WT-L-02.
(7) Street trees or shrubs shall only be bagged and balled nursery
quality stock, shall be properly watered upon placement, nutrients
and mulch shall be added as necessary or as directed by the
Township Engineer and all stems shall be wrapped.
N. Surface restoration.
(1) All surface areas being dedicated to the Township shall be restored
with topsoil and grass.
(2) PennDOT Pub. 408 specifications shall be followed for topsoil
installation; seed bed or sod bed preparation, fertilization, seeding
or sodding and mulching.
(3) Subsoil grading shall be done to a smooth and uniform condition,
without sharp breaks and with five to one slopes or flatter, unless
otherwise approved on the development plans.
(4) Topsoil shall be at least six inches thick.
92.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 22-25 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-25
19:754
§ 22-26. Traffic signal design standards. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2774]
(5) Type "D" seed shall be used in drainage ways and Type "B" seed
shall be used in other areas.
(6) Sod may be used as desired or as needed to stabilize erosion prone
areas.
(7) The Township shall not accept dedication of any surface area
referenced herein unless the grass or approved ground cover has
satisfactorily grown and stabilized the soils.
A. This section describes the general requirements pertaining to the work
of furnishing and installation of an operational traffic signal or signal
system. The work will include the controller assembly, traffic signal
supports, traffic signal heads, electrical distribution, detectors,
communications, systems, testing, and start-up of the system. All work
shall be in accordance with the requirements of this specification and
PennDOT in accordance with the signal permit.
B. Materials. Traffic signal shop drawings for materials, wiring diagrams,
and shop tests results, shall be submitted to the Engineer for approval.
Also to be submitted to the Engineer are all material certifications and
warranties for equipment utilized on the traffic signal system. These
submissions shall comply with PennDOT Publication 408 and Traffic
Standards - Signals TC-7800 (current issue).
(1) Traffic signal, general, shall comply with the requirements of
PennDOT Publication 408.
(2) Traffic signal supports shall comply with PennDOT Publication 408.
The traffic signal pole bases shall have wire mesh with stainless
steel banding for rodent protection The minimum clearance from
the face of vertical curb to the face of pole shall be two feet to five
feet.
(3) The controller assembly shall comply with the requirements of
PennDOT Publication 408. The controller assembly shall provide
for the signal phases and timing as indicated on the contract
drawings and PennDOT permit.
(a) The traffic signal controller shall be a Multi Sonics 820A traffic
responsive secondary controller unless a different controller
manufacturer is required to be a part of the signal system.
(b) The controller and back panel shall be capable of volume
density operation, traffic signal preemption, two- to eightphase
signal operation, plus pedestrian operation.
(c) The traffic signal controller cabinet shall also contain an
emergency generator hookup (see detail) and battery backup.
§ 22-25 RESERVED § 22-26
19:755
(d) The traffic signal controller cabinet shall be equipped with a
hand-held police control device.
(e) The traffic signal controller cabinet shall comply with
PennDOT publication 408.
(f) The traffic signal controller cabinet shall meet TS-1
specifications with a Type 1 pad mounting as shown on Detail
Plate WT-M-03.93
(4) Traffic signal systems and equipment shall comply with PennDOT
Publication 408.
(5) Electrical distribution system and components shall comply with
the requirements of PennDOT Publication 408. 7/C wiring shall be
provided for future left turn signalization.
(6) Signal heads shall comply with PennDOT Publication 408.
(a) The signal heads shall be equipped with red, yellow and green
LEDs. Pedestrian signal heads shall be equipped with Portland
orange and Lunar white LED man-hand indications.
(b) The signal heads shall be equipped with backplates in
accordance with the signal permit. Signal indications shall be
in accordance wit the traffic signal permit.
(7) Traffic detectors shall comply with the requirements of PennDOT
Publication 408.
(8) Traffic signal communications shall comply with the requirements
of PennDOT Publication 408.
(9) Traffic signal preemption.
(a) The traffic signal shall be equipped with preemption
equipment in order to function in accordance with the traffic
signal permit as directed by the Township Board of
Commissioners.
(b) The traffic signal preemption equipment shall conform to the
3M Opticon Preemption system specifications, current edition,
or PennDOT approved equivalent.
(c) The phase selector shall be 3M Opticon Model 754 and be
capable of recording the date, time and vehicle code for the
activating vehicle or PennDOT approved equivalent.
(d) The detector shall be 3M Opticon Model 711, one direction,
single channel model or PennDOT approved equivalent.
93.Editor's Note: The Standard Detail Plates are included in Appendix C at the end of this
chapter.
§ 22-26 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-26
19:756
(e) The detector cable shall be 3M Opticon Model 138 Cable or
PennDOT approved equivalent.
(f) The card rack shall be 3M Opticon Model 760 or PennDOT
approved equivalent.
(g) Confirmation lights shall be installed on each mast arm for
each direction of preemption.
(10) Fiber optic line. If the signals are being interconnected with a fiber
optic line, the interconnection shall be made using a six-strand
multimode fiber optic cable meeting the requirements of PennDOT
Publication 408. The system shall also include a phone drop.
(11) Construction.
(a) The traffic signal shall comply with the requirements of
PennDOT Publication 408.
(b) Traffic signal supports shall be constructed in accordance with
PennDOT Publication 408 and at the locations indicated on the
contract drawings. Current and future handicap ramps shall be
shown on the plan. The location of supports shall be outside of
the handicap ramp area.
(c) Controller assembly shall be constructed in accordance with
PennDOT Publication 408 and in accordance with the
conditions of the contract drawings and traffic signal permit.
(d) Traffic signal systems and equipment shall comply with the
requirements of PennDOT Publication 408.
(e) Electrical distribution system and components shall be
constructed in accordance with PennDOT Publication 408 and
in accordance with the conditions of the contract drawings. A
spare three-inch conduit may be required to be installed in the
trench across the major street for future wiring modifications
or additions.
(f) Signal heads shall be constructed in accordance with PennDOT
Publication 408 and at the locations indicated on the contract
drawings.
(g) Traffic detectors shall be constructed in accordance with
PennDOT Publication 408 and the locations as indicated on the
contract drawings.
(h) Traffic signal communications shall comply with the
requirements of PennDOT Publication 408.
(12) Programming, testing coordination and start-up. After the traffic
signal is completed and ready for operation, the developer shall
coordinate, schedule and attend a system test, start-up and thirty-
§ 22-26 RESERVED § 22-26
19:757
§ 22-26.1. Private Street Standards. [Added 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2774]
day test period. The traffic signal shall operate in strict accordance
with the approved signal permit. The system test, advance flashing
period, and date of operation shall be monitored and approved by
the Township, the Township Engineer and PennDOT and shall be
in accordance with PennDOT Publication 408. The maintenance
period for the traffic signal installation, associated equipment,
signing and pavement markings shall be in accordance with the
developer's subdivision improvements agreements.
(13) Miscellaneous.
(a) Signposts for all street signs, regulatory signs and warning
signs shall be galvanized square posts (breakaway design) in
accordance with the latest PennDOT standards.
(b) Pavement markings and legends including the following:
twenty-four-inch stop bars (white), twenty-four-inch transverse
median and/or gore markings (white or yellow), six-inch
crosswalks (white), arrow legends (white) and ONLY legends
(white) shall be installed using hot thermoplastic material and/
or heat tape material in accordance with the latest PennDOT
standards. Existing material shall be eradicated prior to
placement of new markings, if required.
(c) Removal of traffic signal poles, mast arms, junction boxes,
conduits and traffic signal foundations to a depth of two feet
below subgrade. Existing traffic signal poles, mast arms, and
controller cabinets must be returned to the Township.
(d) Other traffic control devices shall be per the current PennDOT
MUTCD publication.
A. Only local streets may be considered for private streets.
B. Private street cartway widths. Private street cartway widths in
proposed land developments shall conform to the standards set forth in
Table 2.
Table 2
Cartway Widths
Single-Family
Residential
(feet)
Multifamily
Residential
(feet)
Commercial/
Industrial
(feet)
30 36 361
§ 22-26 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-26.1
19:758
NOTES:
1No on-street parking
C. Horizontal curves.
(1) Whenever street center lines are deflected more than 5º,
connection shall be made by horizontal curves.
(2) Horizontal curves shall have the following minimum center-line
radii:
(a) Local streets: 150 feet.
(3) A minimum tangent of 100 feet shall be required between reverse
curves on all streets. A minimum tangent of 100 feet shall separate
horizontal curves from intersections, as measured from the point of
intersecting center lines.
D. Street grades.
(1) There shall be a minimum center-line grade on all streets of 0.75 of
1%.
(2) Center-line grades shall not exceed 10%.
(3) Intersections shall be approached on all sides by leveling areas
which shall have a minimum length of 75 feet, measured from the
intersection of the center lines, within which no grade shall exceed
a maximum of 6%.
E. Vertical curves.
(1) Vertical curves shall be designed in changes of grade exceeding
1%.
(2) Vertical curves shall be designed to produce a minimum sight
distance of 200 feet for a local street, as per AASHTO standards.
F. Street intersections.
(1) All streets shall intersect at 90°.
(2) Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two
streets are prohibited.
(3) Two streets, either public or private, intersecting a third street
from opposite sides shall either intersect with a common center
line, or their center lines shall be offset according to the following
standards:
(a) The two private streets shall be separated by a distance of 100
feet between centerlines measured along the center line of the
street being intersected when all three streets are local
streets.
§ 22-26.1 RESERVED § 22-26.1
19:759
(b) The two private streets shall be separated by a distance of 400
feet between center lines measured along the center line of the
street being intersected when one or more of the streets
involved is a public collector street.
(4) Sheet curb intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arch with
a minimum radius of:
(a) Private local streets: 20 feet.
(b) Private/public collector streets: 40 feet.
(5) Sight distance at any intersection shall be calculated using
PennDOT Formula Sight Distance Measurements, from M-950S, as
last revised.
G. Culs-de-sacs, dead-end streets, stub streets.
(1) Culs-de-sacs, loop roads, and other street networks, public or
private, which have a single point of access to the surrounding road
network shall not serve more than 25 dwelling units, and shall not
otherwise exceed a total length of 1,000 feet, as measured from the
center line of the intersection at the single point of access to the
farthest point served.
(2) All cul-de-sac streets, whether permanently or temporarily
designed as such, shall be provided at the closed end with a fully
paved turnaround. The turnaround may be offset to the left or
centered. Turnarounds offset to the right shall be prohibited.
(a) The minimum radius at the curbline shall be 40 feet.
(b) The minimum curbline radius of a return in a cul-de-sac shall
be 40 feet.
(3) All streets must be constructed to the standards of § 22-25,
Construction standards.
(4) Stub streets may be constructed for future access to an adjoining
property or a subsequent section of the development at a suitable
location as approved by the Township Engineer. Stub streets shall
be built to the standards of § 22-25. The length of the stub street
shall not exceed the depth of one building lot, or serve more than
one building lot on either side of the stub street. Stub streets shall
provide a temporary turnaround which shall be constructed and
maintained by the developer until the through street is
constructed, at which time the temporary turnaround shall be
eliminated.
H. General private street design standards. See Detail Plate WT-R-01P.94
94.Editor's Note: Detail Plates are included in Appendix C at the end of this chapter.
§ 22-26.1 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-26.1
19:760
ARTICLE VII
Stormwater Drainage
§ 22-27. General requirements.
§ 22-28. Design criteria.
Designs of storm drainage systems shall be prepared by a professional
engineer, licensed to practice in Pennsylvania. Complete, detailed
calculations shall be signed and sealed by the preparer and submitted with
the preliminary plans.
§ 22-29. General requirements.
A. General. Any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration or
development of land which may affect stormwater runoff
characteristics shall implement such measures consistent with the
provisions of this chapter, Pennsylvania Act 167, Stormwater
Management and any other applicable statutes and applicable
watershed stormwater plan. In addition thereof, developers shall:
(1) Assure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is no greater
after development than prior to development activities.
(2) Permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses, except as may be
modified by stormwater detention pond requirements in § 22-31.
(3) Ensure drainage of all points along streets.
(4) Intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals related to the
extent and grade of the area drained.
(5) Provide positive drainage away from onsite sewage disposal
systems.
(6) Take surface water from the bottom of vertical grades and lead
water away from springs. Cross gutters at public street
intersections and elsewhere shall not be permitted.
(7) In any instance where the Township is forced by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation to be the permit applicant for a
highway occupancy permit for drainage facilities to be constructed
by a private developer on a state roadway, the developer shall be
required to enter into an indemnification agreement with the
Township, which shall identify maintenance responsibilities for the
structures. This document shall be in a form acceptable to the
Township Solicitor, and the Township will not agree to be a permit
applicant to any such construction unless and until this agreement
has been executed by both parties. [Added 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2774]
§ 22-27 RESERVED § 22-29
19:761
A. Drainage plan. A site drainage plan for the proposed land development
shall be prepared which illustrates the following information:
(1) Mapping of the watershed area or areas in which the proposed
subdivision or land development is located including topography
(at two foot intervals) of the proposed subdivision or land
development and those areas within 400 feet of the proposed
subdivision or land development.
(2) Calculations of runoff for all points of runoff concentration.
(3) Complete drainage systems for the land development. All existing
drainage features which are to be incorporated in the design shall
be identified. If the land development is to be developed in stages, a
general drainage plan for the entire subdivision shall be presented
with the first stage and appropriate development stages for the
drainage system indicated.
(4) The existing points of natural drainage discharge and the mode of
drainage onto adjacent property shall not be altered, unless the
notarized, written consent of affected landowner(s) is obtained by
the developer.
B. Diversion of runoff. No stormwater runoff or natural drainage shall be
so diverted so as to overload existing drainage systems, create flooding
or create the need for additional drainage structures on other private
properties or public lands, without safe and adequate provisions being
made by the developer for properly handling such conditions and the
developer obtaining the written consent of downstream landowners.
C. Deed restrictions. Where a land development is traversed by
watercourses other than permanent streams, there shall be provided a
deed restriction conforming substantially with the line of such
watercourse. The width of the restricted area shall be adequate to
provide for unimpeded flow of storm runoff based on the 100-year storm
and to provide a freeboard allowance as determined by using the
calculations set forth in Appendix A.95 The terms of restriction shall
require periodic cutting and maintenance of the vegetation by the
landowner and shall prohibit the alteration, obstruction or
encroachment of any kind within the restricted area. The restriction
shall further reserve a right-of-entry to the Township in the event of
danger to public safety, exercisable only in the case of breach of
responsibility by the landowner. These terms shall be secured through
covenants included in the deeds of conveyance. If such area is
determined by the Township Engineer to be integral to the stormwater
system of the Township, a drainage easement must be provided.
(1) Drainage structures that are located in state highway rights-of-way
shall be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
95.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 22-29 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-29
19:762
§ 22-30. Calculation of storm runoff and design storm frequency.
(2) All streets shall be so designed as to provide for the collection and
conveyance of surface water from their rights-of-way.
D. Erosion of watercourse channels. Storm drainage facilities and
appurtenances shall be so designed and provided so as to minimize
erosion in watercourse channels and at all points of discharge.
E. Storm drainage easements. All storm drainage systems must be located
within a public right-of-way or easement. The minimum easement width
shall be 20 feet centered over the system.
F. Identification of storm drainage easements. All easements shall:
(1) Be shown on the record plan and utility plan.
(2) Be identified as to their purpose.
(3) Appear shaded or hatched on the record plan.
(4) Identify the easement holder.
G. DEP approval. Any proposal storm drainage plans which affect the
drainage basin of any watercourse shall be approved by Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Dam Safety and
Waterway Management, if the drainage basin so affected has an area of
0.5 square miles or more.
A. Applicability of Act 167. If the land development is within a watershed
with an approved Stormwater Management Plan enacted pursuant to
Act 167, the criteria in the applicable plan shall be used.
(1) Any downstream analysis conducted to determine adequacy for
accepting increased rates of runoff shall consider the 100-year
storm event.
(2) The design or analysis of all natural or man-made overland
drainage systems shall have adequate capacity for the 10- to
100-year return storm.
(3) For all development, the extent of the 100-year storm event shall be
shown. Items such as overland flow (width and depth) and inlets
which would backsurge shall be identified.
B. Design to protect from 100-year storm. In lieu of the requirements set
forth in this § 22-30, storm drainage systems required by this chapter
shall be designed to provide protection from a 10- to 100-year storm,
unless a more conservative design is required by another regulation, or
is required because of conditions particular to an individual
development.
C. Design criteria standards. See Table 2.
§ 22-29 RESERVED § 22-30
19:763
§ 22-31. Stormwater detention.
Table 2
Area
Design Storm Return
(years)
Residential Areas: Fixed Pipe 10
Total Conveyance 100
Nonresidential Area: Fixed Pipe 25
Total Conveyance 100
D. Watersheds less than 200 acres. Stormwater runoff from watersheds of
200 acres or less shall be calculated by the rational method (See
Appendix A96), except as the watershed size criteria may be modified by
an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan.
E. Watersheds greater than 200 acres. Stormwater runoff from
watersheds of more than 200 acres shall be calculated using the soil
cover complex method developed by the Soil Conservation Service or
other appropriate method acceptable to the Township Engineer.
F. Verification. The design of any detention facility shall be verified by
routing the proposed post-development hydrograph through the basin
using storage indication techniques.
G. Submission of calculations. Complete detailed drainage calculations
and applicable charts and hydrographs certified by the design engineer
shall be submitted to the Township Engineer with the preliminary plan
submission.
A. Compliance with Act 167. Whitehall Township has been designed in its
entirety as a provisional no detention area pursuant to Act 167. As such
all proposed developments must adhere to the regulations stated
therein and in the attached watershed plans. (See Appendix C97).
B. When required. Stormwater detention facilities may be required for all
land development proposals whenever the following two criteria have
been met:
(1) The proposed rate and volume of runoff cannot be accommodated
by all downstream fixed pipe or surface drainage system.
(2) Written permission has not been granted by the adjoining
downstream owner(s) where runoff discharges onto the adjoiner,
via a subsurface and/or surface drainage system to the main
channel.
96.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
97.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 22-30 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-31
19:764
C. Maximum post peak rates. Whenever stormwater detention facilities
are required, the maximum post-development peak rates of flow shall
be governed by the following provisions:
(1) Post-development rates of runoff for the 2- , 5- , 10- , 25- , 50- and
100-year storm events shall not exceed predevelopment rates.
(2) Within watersheds for which there is an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan, the detention facilities shall at
minimum be designed to discharge post-development peak runoff
rates consistent with the plan criteria except in the instance of offsite
detention facilities implemented as per Subsection C(4).
(3) Within watersheds for which there is not an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan, the detention facilities shall be
designed to provide that the peak rate of runoff at all points of
discharge from the site, when developed, will not exceed the peak
rate of runoff at each of those points prior to development, except
in the instance of off-site detention facilities implemented as per
Subsection C(4).
(4) In certain instances, regional detention facilities and other off-site
stormwater management facilities to provide runoff control for
multiple development sites may be implemented in lieu of
individual development site detention basins. Peak runoff rates of
discharge from regional detention basins and other off-site
stormwater management facilities shall be based upon maintaining
existing peak runoff rates for the tributary area, except that other
criteria for discharge may apply for regional detention facilities
and other off-site stormwater management facilities located within
a watershed with an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management
Plan.
D. Design requirements. Where stormwater detention facilities are
included as part of the storm drainage system, the following provisions
will apply:
(1) Detention basins shall be designed so that they empty completely
and no standing water remains.
(2) The developer shall demonstrate that such basins are designed,
protected and located to assure that public safety is maximized and
health problems are prevented. The following minimum criteria
shall apply:
(a) Top berm width shall be minimum of 10 feet.
(b) Side slopes shall be three horizontal to one vertical or flatter.
(c) Any basin shall be enclosed with a four foot high durable chain
link fence that includes a 10 foot wide gate with locking device
and vehicle access to floor of the pond.
§ 22-31 RESERVED § 22-31
19:765
(d) All basins shall be screened from view with a dense, low
maintenance, year round vegetative screen that will reach a
height of four feet within two years.
(e) All basins shall incorporate a four inch impervious clay liner
with a permeability coefficient of 1 x 10-7 cm/sec, verified by
test results and a minimum of four inches of topsoil over the
clay.
(f) All basins shall be seeded with PennDOT, formula B.
(3) The developer shall verify that the operation of the stormwater
detention facility will not aggravate potential downstream peaking
conditions.
(4) An emergency overflow spillway weir, constructed of concrete, six
inches in thickness, shall be provided for stormwater detention
facilities to handle runoff in excess of 100-year storm.
(5) If a portion of the land development will remain in common
ownership, the developer shall provide an annotation on the record
plan imposing a covenant running with the land requiring
perpetual maintenance of the stormwater detention basin by either
the owner of the development or lot owner.
(6) All detention basins in all areas must contain easements for
Township emergency maintenance. Routine maintenance such as
mowing of grass, etc., will be the responsibility of lot owner.
(7) All stormwater detention basin outlet structures shall be
constructed of concrete.
(8) The bottom of the stormwater detention basin must slope to the
outlet structure at a grade not less than 1%.
(9) Stormwater retention basins are not permitted.
(10) When the outflow of a stormwater detention basis flows
downstream and into another detention basin the routed outflow
hydrograph must be added to the existing inflow hydrograph and
routed through the existing stormwater detention basin to
determine the impact, if any. If there is a negative impact on the
existing detention basin, the proposed stormwater detention basin
must be altered to eliminate this impact.
(11) All stormwater detention basins must be provided with a minimum
of one foot of freeboard above the maximum water elevation over
the emergency spillway.
(12) All stormwater detention basin outlet structures smaller than four
inches must be fitted with a debris deflector.
§ 22-31 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-31
19:766
§ 22-32. Fixed pipe collection system.
(13) Underground detention must be constructed with inspection ports
(no less than 12 inches in diameter) and a clean out access hatch
(no less than 36 inches in diameter).
(14) Regulations for the pumping of stormwater detention facilities.
(a) The stormwater detention facility shall provide sufficient
capacity to hold runoff volume from the 100-year storm event
plus an additional 40% thereof, without the pumps being in
operation.
(b) All pumping systems shall be housed in a separate chamber.
(c) All pumping systems shall be a duplex model (two pumps).
(d) An emergency generator shall be part of the system, with
automatic switchover feature.
(e) The pumping system shall, in the event of the failure of the
pump or the generator, provide an alarm which shall send a
signal to a monitoring service which shall immediately
authorize and effect a service call. The name, address,
telephone number and contact person of the then current
monitoring service and the then current service company shall
be provided to the Township.
(f) The pumping system shall be capable of completely dewatering
the drainage facility within 48 hours after a storm event.
(g) A note shall be placed on the final plan stating that: the owner
of this property shall, at the property owner's sole cost and
expense, operate, maintain, repair and keep in proper working
order, the stormwater drainage facility and the pumping
system so as to properly accommodate and remove, in a timely
and safe manner, the stormwater collected in the stormwater
detention facility situate on this property. This obligation shall
be a covenant running with the land and shall bind the owner
and the owner's successors, heirs and assigns.
(h) In the event the property is abandoned, the pumping system
shall remain functional. To that end, the electrical supply to the
pump shall be designed to accept a separate and
independently metered service without energizing any other
equipment on the site.
(i) The developer shall execute an easement in favor of the
Township, in form and content acceptable to the Township
Solicitor, that permits the Township to have access to the
property in order to facilitate the changes to said electrical
service to the pump station.
§ 22-31 RESERVED § 22-32
19:767
A. Flanking inlets. When inlets are placed at a low point on a vertical
curve, flanking inlets shall be provided two feet above the low point
inlet or a maximum of 100 feet on either side of the low point inlet(s).
B. Design requirements. All storm sewer pipes must be reinforced cement
concrete pipe and a minimum of 15 inches diameter. Pipes must be
provided with a minimum of two feet of cover. When pipe sizes change
in a junction, the crown of the pipes must match. If the pipe size does
not change, developer shall provide a 0.10 foot minimum drop through
the junction. If the Township Engineer deems it necessary, the energy
grade shall control.
C. Safety grates. See Detail Plate WT-D-05.98
D. Inlet capacity. Inlet capacity calculations must be provided for all inlets
involved in a stormwater drainage system.
E. Minimum velocity. All storm sewer pipes shall be designed so as to have
a minimum velocity of 3.0 f.p.s.
F. Construction and materials.
(1) The following construction practices and materials shall be
prohibited:
(a) Use of bubbler inlets.
(b) Use of flared end sections in sumps.
(c) Use of trench drains (and cross gutters) in Township streets or
streets proposed to be dedicated to the Township.
(2) Unless otherwise permitted by the Township Engineer in writing,
all pipe used in the construction of collection systems shall be RCP
pipe.
G. Sumping of inlets. All inlets shall be sumped one inch below final road
grade elevation. Initially, all inlets within the cartway shall be sumped
one inch below the elevation of the base course. This practice will allow
the inlets to effectively collect stormwater runoff prior to the placement
of the wearing/surface course. Immediately prior to the placement of
the wearing/surface course, the inlets tops shall be raised to achieve
the one inch sump required herein. The developer shall ensure that
sufficient clearance is provided in order to set the inlet top at the
interim elevation required hereinabove. (See Detail Plate WT-D-02.99)
98.Editor's Note: The Detail Plates are included at the end of this chapter.
99.Editor's Note: The Detail Plates are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 22-32 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-32
19:768
ARTICLE VIII
Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
§ 22-33. Erosion and sediment pollution control.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article shall be to control accelerated
erosion and the resulting sediment pollution to waters of the Township
and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that occur on earthmoving
sites within the Township.
B. Scope. It shall be unlawful for any developer, person, landowner,
business or corporation to undertake any earthmoving activities in
excess of 2,000 square feet without developing, implementing and
maintaining erosion and sediment pollution control measures and
facilities that effectively minimize accelerated erosion and prevent
sediment contained in an erosion and sedimentation control plan that
meets the requirements of the applicable Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) chapter on erosion control regulations.
A copy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan must be available
at the earthmoving site at all times.
C. Prior approval required. Prior to the approval of by the Township of any
land development plan or the issuance of any building permit (but only
if required by any state, federal or local statute, ordinance, law, rule,
regulation or order), an erosion and sedimentation control plan must be
submitted to and approved by the Lehigh County Conservation District
(LCCD). This requirement will be waived by the Township upon receipt
of a copy of a DEP earth disturbance permit for sites involving more
than 25 acres of earthmoving. If the Township Engineer determines
that said plan is not properly implemented a stop work order may be
issued to cease all construction activity at the proposed subdivision or
land development.
D. Plan contents. Erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be
developed in accordance with DEP's Chapter 102. A complete
explanation of the regulations and recommendations for preparing
plans is available in DEP's Publication "Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Program Manual." This manual is available through the LCCD.
E. Definitions. Definitions of terms commonly used in the field of erosion
and sediment pollution control are contained in DEP's Chapter 102
regulations. Two additional terms that are often used and herein
defined are:
WATERCOURSE — A channel of conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed waters, wetlands, ponds, springs and other bodies or channels
§ 22-33 RESERVED § 22-33
19:769
of conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of this Commonwealth.
F. Administration. Applications for approval of an erosion and
sedimentation control plan under the requirements of this chapter, shall
be made through LCCD. No building permit will be approved by the
Township unless and until an erosion and sedimentation control plan is
approved by LCCD.
§ 22-33 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-33
19:770
ARTICLE IX
Landscaping, Street Trees and Buffer Requirements
§ 22-34. Purpose.
§ 22-35. Landscaping plan; filing and processing.
§ 22-36. General standards.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to require well designed
landscaping plantings, which in turn, provide an attractive, aesthetic
appearance of the developed property.
A. Filing of plan. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a
landscaping plan for any proposed development project in the Township
shall be filed concurrently with the submission of a land development
plan.
B. Plan requirements. To ensure that principles of good landscaping and
design are adhered to and implemented, each site plan submitted for
approval shall:
(1) Identify and locate irrigation and drainage system components, if
any.
(2) Preserve existing trees and shrubs, if possible.
(3) Preserve natural rock outcropping and natural topographic
features, if possible.
(4) Depict the location, size and variety (name identification) of
existing trees over six inches in caliper.
(5) Identify which existing trees (or shrubs) are to be retained and the
method of protection thereof during construction.
(6) Provide construction details including the specific identification,
location and height of all landscaping materials as installed.
(7) Provide a complete planting list outlining the botanical and
common name of all proposed landscaping plantings.
(8) Provide adequate planting density.
(9) Provide for proper selection and diversification of plant species to
minimize the possibility of damage due to insects and disease.
(10) For all plants, meet the requirements as set forth in the latest
edition of "American Standard for Nursery Stock" by American
Association of Nurserymen, as amended.
A. Landscaping materials. All landscaping materials shall be compatible
with the general conditions of the site. The following minimum
standards, with exceptions of dwarf varieties which shall not be used
§ 22-34 RESERVED § 22-36
19:771
unless otherwise permitted by the Township, shall be met concerning
required plant materials used by the developer:
(1) Street trees. Two and one half to three inches (caliper) measured
six inches above the root crown. Trees shall have a minimum of a
seven-foot single straight stem to the first lateral branches, above
ground level.
(2) Ornamental trees. Six feet to eight feet in height.
(3) Pyramidal evergreen trees. Six feet to seven feet in height. White
pine must be lightly sheared.
(4) Columnar evergreen trees. Four feet to five feet in height.
(5) Evergreen and semievergreen shrubs. Eighteen inches to 24 inches
in height.
(6) Broadleaf evergreen shrubs. Two feet to three feet in height.
(7) Deciduous shrubs. Two and one half to three feet in height.
(8) Synthetic or artificial material in the form of trees, shrubs, ground
cover, vines or turf shall not be used.
(9) The use of stationary, permanent architectural planters (in contact
with soil so that water can pass through the planter to the ground)
is permitted in fulfillment of landscaping requirements, provided
that such planters shall be of material and design specifically
intended for landscaping use.
B. Minimum landscaping requirements for parking area. The off-street
parking and loading area shall have a minimum of 5% of the area
represented by approved plantings. Said landscaped area shall be
located in such manner as to divide and interrupt the expanse of paving.
In addition:
(1) Landscaping or grassed areas adjacent to front and rear lot lines
shall be required.
(2) All areas utilized for landscaping in the parking area shall be
surrounded by concrete curbing.
(3) A minimum of 10-foot wide landscaped berms or landscaping strips
shall be constructed between the right-of-way line and parking
areas of commercial properties. This landscaping shall minimize
the visibility of such parking from the street right-of-way and the
parking area. No such landscaping shall constitute a violation of
the "clear sight triangle" as defined in Chapter 27, Zoning, as
amended from time to time.
(4) Sight distance for landscaping adjacent to public right-of-way and
points of access. When an access way intersects a public right-ofway
or when a access way intersects a public right-of-way or when
§ 22-36 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-36
19:772
the subject property abuts the intersection of two or more public
rights-of-way, no landscaping shall be installed within the clear
sight area, other than grass and/or lower level plantings.
(5) Credit for existing trees. Trees that are newly planted or already
established and growing shall be credited against the landscaping
requirements, provided that such trees are of an acceptable variety.
C. Buffer strips and screening.
(1) Buffer strips.
(a) Buffer strips shall be established and maintained in
accordance with § 27-89 of Chapter 27, Zoning.
(b) Screening shall be installed according to § 27-89 of Chapter
27, Zoning.
(c) Recommended buffer and screening materials are indicated in
Subsection A of this section.
(d) Trees of deciduous hardwood varieties shall be planted within
the street right-of-way in areas by the developer in accordance
with plans approved by the Board of Commissioners. In no
event shall street trees be located in a manner which will
restrict the view of any permitted traffic signage.
(e) Street trees shall be planted at minimum intervals of between
30 and 40 feet, depending upon the type of tree as approved by
the Township.
D. Planting standards. All landscaping shall be planted conforming with
good nursery and landscape practice and to the standards established
by the American Association of Nurserymen in the "American Standard
of Nursery Stock" as revised.
E. Street trees. Street trees shall be planted along all new lots. Street
trees shall be installed prior to entering into the maintenance period of
the subject to the following:
(1) For land developments in which there is no land development
improvements agreement the required tree(s) shall be planted
prior to the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy.
(2) Street trees shall grow (or be pruned to be) symmetrical and be
free of insects, pests and disease.
(3) Only those trees listed in Appendix B,100 "Permitted Street Trees,"
will be acceptable street trees. Those street trees listed in
Appendix B, "Undesirable Street Trees," shall, under no
circumstances, be planted.
100. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 22-36 RESERVED § 22-36
19:773
F. Maintenance. All landscaping materials for a subdivision or land
development shall be installed in accordance with the landscaping plan.
Final installation of all such landscaping material shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Engineer. A maintenance period of 18 months
shall be required to assure the proper establishment of all landscaping,
during which 15% of the required security shall be retained for the
purpose set forth in this article. Improvements security shall include
the cost of said materials. During the maintenance period, the
developer shall replace dead trees and dead landscaping. If the
particular season makes such replacement unfeasible, then it shall be
accomplished within a reasonable period of time not to exceed six
months thereafter.
§ 22-36 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-36
19:774
ARTICLE X
Impact Regulations
§ 22-37. Recreation; fee. [Amended 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2520]
A. Open space, community, recreation and public area dedication
standards and fees. As a condition precedent to approval of a final plan
of a residential subdivision or land development which includes
proposed residential units, the developer shall either: (1) provide public
dedication of land suitable for (a) recreational uses or (b) the
construction of recreational facilities, or, in the alternative, upon
agreement with the Township, (2) provide payment of recreational fees
in lieu thereof as set forth herein or as set forth in any subsequent
Township fee schedule ordinance.
B. Park, open space and recreation plan. Whitehall Township formally
adopts the Comprehensive Plan of Whitehall Township, and the Park,
Open Space and Recreation Plan for Whitehall Township, as amended
from time to time.
C. Park planning standards and criteria. In planning and locating a park
within a subdivision or land development the following general
standards and criteria shall apply:
(1) In accordance with § 503(11) of the MPC Code, and the Township's
formally adopted Park, Open Space and Recreation Plan, all land
designated for park and recreational facilities within a subdivision
or land development shall be suited for its intended purpose.
(2) All proposed block parks and neighborhood parks and playgrounds
shall be located in accordance with the Township's Park and
Recreation Plan, and, at a minimum, shall have the following:
(a) Well-drained soils free of wetlands, floodplains and hydric
soils;
(b) A slope of 5% or less;
(c) A minimum street frontage of 100 feet for block parks and 250
feet for neighborhood parks and playgrounds;
(d) Adequate visibility from public or private streets, or from
public areas as necessary to promote a safe environment
within the park;
(e) Block parks shall be located on local streets only;
(f) To the greatest extent practicable, be located adjacent to or
connected with the Township's system of footpaths, parks,
public lands, bikeways or trails as indicated in the Township's
Park, Open Space and Recreation Plan; and
(g) Have an established lawn prior to acceptance by the Township.
§ 22-37 RESERVED § 22-37
19:775
D. Park and recreation contributions. In order to further the principles and
standards established in the Township's Park, Open Space and
Recreation Plan, as amended, as herein incorporated by reference in
accordance with § 503(11) of the MPC, Act 247 as amended, the
following requirements shall apply to all new residential subdivisions
and land developments within the Township unless otherwise specified
herein:
(1) Fair-share contribution: A fair-share contribution towards the
continuation of the current level of park and recreational service
within the Township shall be required of all residential subdivision
and land development projects in the amount of 1,107 square feet
per dwelling unit or a flat fee of $2,000 per dwelling unit, as the
case may be. In the event that a dedication of land is involved, such
deed of dedication shall be filed with the Township and held until
the improvements to be constructed thereon, if any, are completed
and then the Township will accept this dedication. In the event that
a monetary contribution is made in lieu of a dedication of land, said
contribution shall be paid in the following manner:
(a) Developments consisting of up to and including five building
lots, the fee must be paid prior to recording the final plan with
the Lehigh County Recorder of Deeds Office.
(b) Developments of more than five building lots will be required
to pay 50% of the fee prior to recording the final plan with the
Lehigh County Recorder of Deeds Office, and subsequently pay
the remaining 50% within 180 days of the recording of the final
plan with the Lehigh County Recorder of Deeds Office, or prior
to the issuance of any certificates of occupancy for any
structure within the development, whichever first occurs. This
remaining 50% shall be secured in the form of a letter of credit
or other acceptable security to the Township in order for any
building permits to be issued.
(2) Method of contribution: The preferred method of allocation of the
fair-share contribution should be in accordance with the findings,
standards and principles contained in the Park Planning Guide
section of the Township's Park, Open Space and Recreation Plan, as
amended from time to time.
(3) Use of collected park and recreation funds: In accordance with
§ 503(11) of the MPC, all funds collected for use in the Township's
Park and Recreation System shall be deposited into an interest
bearing Park and Recreation Trust Fund. Interest earned on said
account shall become funds of that account and said funds shall be
expended by the Township within three years of their collection for
the capital improvements, including but not necessarily limited to
the development, improvement, or construction of park and/or
recreational facilities for which the funds were collected.
§ 22-37 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-37
19:776
§ 22-38. Traffic.
E. Exemptions. Subdivisions of land which involve parcels upon which an
existing, occupied residential structure is to remain may be entitled to
an exemption of the required recreation fee payment for the existing,
developed lot. No vacant lots which are divided into more than one
parcel shall be eligible for such an exemption.
F. Administrative procedures. In processing a fair-share contribution, the
following procedures shall apply:
(1) All park land dedication shall be in accordance with all Township
requirements relating to public land dedications. See § 22-37C.
(2) For the payment of a fee in lieu of land dedication, the fee shall be
payable as set forth in § 22-37D(1)(b) hereof.
(3) Where the Township has established target areas or zones for park
land, the lands to be dedicated should be configured to fall within
these zones. If no target park areas are designated for a parcel,
dedicated recreation land should adjoin neighboring footpaths,
bike ways, public trails or other public lands.
(4) Where lands are identified for dedication, recommendations for the
location and improvement thereof from the Whitehall Township
Recreation Commission shall be applied by the Planning
Commission in the review of said subdivision or land development
plan.
A. Short title. The traffic regulations set forth in this § 22-38 shall be
known and may be cited as the "Whitehall Township Traffic Impact Fee
Ordinance."
B. Applicability. The provisions of the Whitehall Township Impact Fee
Ordinance are applicable to all subdivisions and land developments
submitted to the Township for approval; provided that, however, the lot,
parcel, tract or area of land subject to the subdivision or land
development is located within a traffic impact zone (as hereinafter
defined).
C. Purpose. The purpose of the Whitehall Township Traffic Impact Fee
Ordinance is to establish an impact fee program to ensure that the
transportation system situate within the Township and servicing its
residents and the general public is and continues to be available and
adequate to support new growth and development. To advance this
objective, there is hereby created an impact fee as hereinafter
calculated which shall be payable to the Township at the time of and as
a condition precedent to building permit issuance.
D. General findings and conditions. The Board of Commissioners hereby
finds and declares that:
§ 22-37 RESERVED § 22-38
19:777
(1) The conditions and standards for the determination and imposition
of the impact fee set forth herein are consistent with and comply
with those set forth in the Act of December 19, 1990, P.L. 1343, No.
209, § 1, 53 P.S. § 10501-A et seq., and any and all amendments
thereto (hereafter the "Act"), and consist of:
(a) The analysis, advice and recommendations of the Whitehall
Township Capital Improvements (Impact) Fee Advisory
Committee.
(b) The Whitehall Township Land Use Assumptions Report
adopted by Res. 1637, 12/14/1992.
(c) The Whitehall Township Roadway Sufficiency Analysis,
adopted by Res. 1694, 9/13/1993.
(d) The Transportation Capital Improvements Plan, adopted by
Res. 1695, 9/13/1993.
(e) Such other conditions and standards as the Board of
Commissioners may by resolution or otherwise identify from
time to time as being relevant and material to the imposition of
an impact fee and consistent with the provisions of the act and
any amendments thereto.
(2) The Township has experienced considerable sustained growth in
the form of residential, commercial and industrial development in
recent years.
(3) The Township continues to experience significant demands in the
nature of subdivision and land development plan submissions and
review requests and it is therefore, anticipated that such
development will continue.
(4) The level of such future development will create a substantial and
sustained adverse impact upon the transportation facilities, roads,
streets, bridges and traffic control devices within certain areas of
the Township driving them below service Level "D."
(5) Successful adherence to this charge by the Board of
Commissioners will entail a substantial cost directly attributable to
and almost solely a consequence of the impact of new development.
(6) The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has empowered the Board of
Commissioners to impose all or a portion of any cost for
transportation facilities improvement upon new development and
has delegated such authority unto the Township pursuant to the Act
of December 19, 1990, P.L. 1343, No. 209, § 1, 53 P.S. § 10501-A et
seq.
(7) The amount of the fee (hereinafter "impact fee") to be imposed has
been determined by establishing the cost of additional
transportation improvements necessary to meet the minimum
§ 22-38 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-38
19:778
safety and capacity standards, which public facilities have been
identified in the Whitehall Township capital improvement plan,
taking into consideration the anticipated and projected growth
and development in the Whitehall Township transportation service
areas.
(8) An "impact fee" shall be established and imposed upon residential
and nonresidential subdivision and land development and
construction to provide for or assist in financing specified
transportation capacity capital improvements in transportation
service areas Number 1 and Number 2, the demand for which is
uniquely attributable to and created by such development, and is in
the best interest of the Township, its residents, and property
owners is equitable, and does not impose an unfair burden on such
development.
(9) The Board of Commissioners is charged with the responsibility and
obligation to keep roads open, in repair and usable for the safe and
convenient travel by the public.
(10) The collection, disbursement and accounting of impact fees shall
be administered by the office of the Mayor, subject to supervision,
review, oversight and control by the Board of Commissioners.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(11) The time, method and procedure for payment of impact fees shall
be consistent with the Act and any amendments thereto and are set
forth in Subsections J and Q.
(12) The procedure for credits against or refunds of impact fees shall be
consistent with the Act and any amendments thereto and are set
forth in Subsections R and S.
(13) Exemptions, if any, shall be at the discretion of the Board of
Commissioners and such exemptions as the Board shall choose to
enact shall be consistent with the Act and any amendments thereto
and are set forth in § 22-45 hereof.
E. Definitions.
(1) The terms and definitions set forth in 53 P.S. § 10502-A of the Act
are hereby adopted and incorporated, as though more fully set
forth in this chapter by reference.
(2) Additional definitions. [Added 1-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2452]
DIVERTED LINK TRIPS — Trips attracted from the traffic volume
on roadways within the vicinity of the generator but which require
a diversion from that roadway to another roadway to gain access to
the site. These roadways could include streets or freeways adjacent
to the generator but without access to the generator.
§ 22-38 RESERVED § 22-38
19:779
NON PASS-BY TRIPS — The total of the primary trips and the
diverted link trips. This term is used when diverted link trips are
not quantified, but pass-by trips are quantified (i.e., the non passby
trips are equal to the total trips minus the pass-by trips).
PASS-BY TRIPS — Trips made as intermediate stops on the way
from an origin to a primary trip destination. Pass-by trips are
attracted from traffic passing the site on an adjacent street which
contains direct access to the generator. These trips do not require
a diversion from another roadway.
PRIMARY (DESTINATION) TRIPS — Trips made for the specific
purpose of visiting the generator. The stop at that generator is the
primary reason for the trip. For example, a home-to-shopping-tohome
combination of trips is a primary trip set.
F. Imposition. There is hereby enacted an impact fee to be imposed upon
any subdivision, land development or construction for the purpose of
off-site transportation capital improvements as may be authorized by
the Act and as described in the Transportation Capital Improvement
Plan adopted by the Board of Commissioners. Said impact fee shall
apply to all subdivisions, developments and construction within the
transportation service area identified herein and shall be a condition
precedent to final approval of a land development plan, a subdivision
plan or issuance of a building permit or use and occupancy permit as
may be necessary.
G. Uses. Impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be expended
for such costs, fees and expenses as may be incurred for improvements
attributable to subdivision, land development and construction within
the transportation service area and designated in the Transportation
Capital Improvements Plan adopted by the Board of Commissioners in a
resolution. Additionally, such fees may be used for the acquisition of
land and rights-of-way, engineering, legal and planning costs, and all
other costs, including debt service related to road improvements within
the designated service area and including such proportionate amount of
the roadway sufficiency analysis as is allowed under the provisions of
the Act.
H. Documents adopted by the Board of Commissioners. The following
documents, previously adopted by the Board of Commissioners, are
hereby incorporated by reference in this chapter:
(1) Recommendations of the Whitehall Township Capital
Improvements (Impact) Fee Advisory Committee.
(2) Land Use Assumptions Report as adopted by Township Res. 1637,
12/14/1992, as may be amended from time to time.
(3) Roadway Sufficiency Analysis as adopted by Township Res. 1694, 9/
13/1993, as may be amended from time to time.
§ 22-38 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-38
19:780
(4) The Transportation Capital Improvements Plan as adopted by
Township Res. 1695, 9/13/1993, as may be amended from time to
time.
(5) The Impact Fee Schedule as set forth in Township Ord. 1853, 9/13/
1993 as may be amended from time to time.101
(6) Designation of transportation districts as set forth in the
transportation service area map identified as transportation
service areas and incorporated herein as though more fully
depicted herein by reference (Appendix C102).
(7) Addendum C, dated September 18, 2006, and as recommended
approved by the Whitehall Township Traffic Impact Advisory
Committee on September 14, 2006, amending the Township's
Traffic Impact Regulations, the Capital Improvements Plan and the
Land Use Assumptions Report.103 [Added 11-13-2006 by Ord.
No. 2653]
I. Special traffic studies.
(1) Where necessary and intended to assist in determining the
appropriate amount of traffic impact fees, the Township at the
discretion of the Board of Commissioners may require the
preparation of special transportation studies to determine the
traffic generation or circulation patterns in new nonresidential
developments; provided, however, that studies may be waived as
part of the planning procedure where the proposed development
will not require deviation from the land use assumptions approved
by the Township as the basis of the program. Any such studies
required by the Township shall be submitted prior to the imposition
of the impact fee and shall be considered in the determination of
the fee. In addition, a developer or the Township may, at any time,
voluntarily prepare and submit a traffic study for a proposed
development or may have such a study prepared at its expense
after the development is completed to include actual trips
generated by the development for use in any appeal as provided for
in the Act or under this section. The special transportation study
shall be prepared by a qualified traffic or transportation engineer
using procedures and methods acceptable to the Township. Where
a development is proposed which will generate 1,000 or more new
peak p.m. hour trips, net of pass-by trips as defined by the current
edition of the Institute of Traffic Engineers Trip Generation
Manual, the applicant may be required to perform a traffic analysis
of development traffic impact on abutting roadways as well as
101. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2749, adopted 12-8-2008, provided that the impact fee be as
set forth in Addendum C. Addendum C and any amendments thereto are on file in the
Township offices.
102. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
103. Editor's Note: Said Addendum C and any amendments thereto are on file in the Township
offices.
§ 22-38 RESERVED § 22-38
19:781
highways, roads or streets outside the transportation service area,
but within the boundaries of the Township. Any such highways,
roads or streets or parts thereof outside the transportation service
area which will accommodate 10% or more of development traffic
and 100 or more new peak hour trips may be required to be
studied, and the applicant shall mitigate the traffic impacts of the
development on such highways, roads and streets to maintain the
predevelopment conditions after completion of the development.
[Amended 1-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2352]
(2) Follow-up studies. For purposes of more accurately determining
the trip generation rate that a proposed use will have, the Township
will allow for the developer to pay up front the assessed impact fee
with an agreement to further study the use once it is in operation.
This is considered a follow-up study. This follow-up study could
result in either an increase or reduction in the amount of the fees
paid. Such a study will be required to be conducted with the
oversight of the Township Engineer, and shall have the following
requirements: [Added 1-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2452]
(a) The study must be performed at least six months after but
within one year of the opening of the facility and shall not be
conducted between November 15 and January 15 to avoid the
seasonal traffic peaks.
(b) The study must collect traffic data for a minimum of three
weekday peak hour periods.
(c) The study will include a questionnaire approved by the
Township Engineer which clearly will identify the trip purpose,
whether it is a primary trip, diverted link trip, or a pass-by trip.
(d) The study will clearly designate who will collect and oversee
the collection of data. This aspect of the study must be
approved by the Township Engineer.
J. Applicability of impact fee. This chapter shall, except to the extent
provided herein, be uniformly applicable to all subdivision,
development and construction that occurs within the designated
transportation service area.
K. Imposition of impact fee. No building permit or use and occupancy
permit shall be issued for a development or construction in a
designated transportation service area, as herein defined, unless the
applicant therefor has paid the impact fee imposed by and calculated
pursuant to this chapter.
L. Exemptions, waivers. Exemptions or waivers, if any, shall be
determined at the sole discretion of the Board of Commissioners
consistent with the terms of the Act and this chapter. This impact fee
ordinance is intended to apply to all growth and development in
Whitehall Township after September 15, 1993. In the event that there is
§ 22-38 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-38
19:782
an unanticipated hardship not of the developer's own making as a
result of the enactment of this chapter, which results in a manifest
injustice, the developer may request a waiver in writing pursuant to
the procedures set forth in § 22-45 hereof. All such requests shall first
be presented to the Board of Commissioners. If the Board deems the
request to be of merit, the request shall be submitted to the Whitehall
Township Traffic Impact Advisory Committee for review and
recommendation. [Amended 1-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2352]
M. Calculation of impact fees.
(1) The impact fee for transportation capital improvements shall be
based upon the total costs of the road improvements included in
the adopted Transportation Capital Improvements Plan within a
given transportation service area attributable to and necessitated
by a subdivision development or construction within the service
area as defined, divided by the number of anticipated peak-hour
trips generated by the subdivision development or construction
consistent with the adopted land use assumptions and calculated in
accordance with the Trip Generation Manual published by the
Institute of Transportation Engineers, 4th or subsequent editions,
which is hereby adopted as though more fully set forth herein at
length by the Township, to equal a per-trip cost for transportation
improvements within the service area.
(2) The specific impact fee for a subdivision, development or
construction within the service area for road improvements shall
be determined, as of the land development plan filing date (See
§ 22-8), by multiplying the per trip cost established for the service
area by the estimated number of trips to be generated by the
subdivision, development or construction using generally accepted
traffic, engineering standards.
(3) The Board of Commissioners may at its discretion, authorize or
require the preparation of a transportation study to determine
traffic generation or circulation for a nonresidential development
or construction to assist in the determination of the amount of the
fee of such subdivision, development or construction.
(4) The Board of Commissioners may periodically, but no more
frequently than annually, request that the Impact Fee Advisory
Committee review the Capital Improvements Plan and impact fee
charges and make recommendations for revisions for subsequent
consideration and adoption by the Board, based only upon the
following: [Amended 1-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2352]
(a) New subsequent development which has occurred in the
Township.
(b) Capital improvements contained in the Capital Improvements
Plan, the construction of which has been completed.
§ 22-38 RESERVED § 22-38
19:783
(c) Unavoidable delays beyond the responsibility or control of the
Township in the construction in the construction of capital
improvements contained in the plan.
(d) Significant changes in the land use assumptions.
(e) Changes in the estimated costs of the proposed transportation
capital improvements, which may be recalculated by applying
the construction cost index as published in the American City/
County Magazine or the Engineering News Record.
(f) Significant changes in the projected revenue from all sources
listed needed for the construction of the transportation capital
improvements. [Amended 1-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2352]
N. Establishment of transportation service areas. The transportation
service areas are established as shown on the Transportation Service
Area Map (attached hereto as part of Appendix C104 and incorporated
herein by reference).
O. Additional transportation service areas. Additional transportation
service areas or designation of transportation service areas may be
designated by the Board of Commissioners from time to time consistent
with the procedure set forth in the Act and this chapter and in
consideration of the following factors:
(1) The comprehensive plan, as the same may be amended, restated or
replaced from time to time.
(2) Any standards for adequate public facilities in this impact fee
program.
(3) The projected build-out and timing of subdivision, development and
construction within the transportation service area.
(4) The need for the cost of unprogrammed transportation
improvements as may be determined necessary by special traffic
studies or changed physical condition which support projected
subdivision, development and construction.
(5) Such other factors as the Board of Commissioners may deem
relevant. Fees collected from development in the transportation
service area will be used exclusively to fund transportation
improvement projects scheduled for that district.
P. Nonbinding impact fee estimate. Prior to making an application for a
building permit or use and occupancy permit, a developer may request
a nonbinding impact fee estimate from the Township, which will be
based upon the maximum development potential of the site pursuant to
existing zoning regulations, unless the developer specifies and
documents a lesser use or development within said zoning regulations.
104. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 22-38 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-38
19:784
Q. Method of payment. Payment of the transportation capital
improvements impact fee shall be made by the traffic generator prior to
and as a precondition for the issuance of a building permit or use and
occupancy permit by the Township for development or construction on
the applicable site.
R. Administration of impact fee. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
(1) Upon receipt of impact fees, the Mayor shall be responsible for the
separate and proper accounting such fees. All such fees shall be
deposited in an interest bearing account identified relative to the
transportation service area in a bank authorized to receive deposits
of the Township funds. Interest earned by such account shall be
credited to the account and shall be used solely for the purpose
specified for funds of such account.
(2) The Mayor shall establish appropriate fund accounts and shall
maintain records whereby impact fees collected can be segregated
for each transportation service area.
(3) The Mayor shall maintain and keep adequate financial records for
such accounts as will show the source and disbursement of all
revenues, which shall account for all monies received, and which
shall ensure that the disbursement of the funds from each account
shall be used solely and exclusively for the provision of projects
specified in this impact fee program for the particular
transportation service area.
S. Credit. Any developer who shall perform, at such developer's own
expense and with the consent and agreement of the Board of
Commissioners (which shall be within the sole discretion of the Board),
off-site traffic improvements, as herein defined, shall be eligible for a
credit from the impact fee otherwise due in the amount of the actual
cost of such off-site traffic improvements as approved by the Township
Engineer. Such credit shall not exceed the amount of the impact fee.
Credits are subject to the following:
(1) Prior to the developer making such improvements, the developer
must enter into a written agreement with the Board of
Commissioners and post improvements security therefor. The
agreement must establish the estimated cost of the improvement,
the schedule of initiation and completion of the improvement, the
financial security for the said improvement, a requirement that the
improvement be completed to Township and Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standards and design criteria and
such other terms and conditions as deemed necessary by the Board
of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners must review the
improvement plan, verify costs and time schedules, determine if
the improvement is an eligible improvement and determine the
amount of the applicable credit for such improvement to be applied
§ 22-38 RESERVED § 22-38
19:785
to the otherwise applicable impact fee prior to issuance of any
building permit or use and occupancy permit. In no event shall the
Board of Commissioners provide a credit which is greater than the
applicable impact fee.
(2) A developer shall be entitled to credit against impact fees in an
amount equal to the agreed upon fair market value of land
dedicated by the developer and accepted by the Township (in its
sole and absolute discretion) for future off-site right-of-way,
realignment or widening of existing roadways.
(3) A developer shall be entitled to credit against impact fees an
amount equal to the value of any road improvement construction
which is contained in the Transportation Capital Improvements
Plan and which was performed at the developer's expense and with
the consent and approval of the Board of Commissioners.
(4) Notwithstanding any other provisions of these regulations, the
Township may expend impact fees paid by an applicant on projects
not contained in the adopted Transportation Capital Improvements
Plan, or may provide credit against fees for the value of any
construction projects not contained in the Transportation Capital
Improvements Plan which are performed at the applicant's
expense, if all of the following criteria are met: [Amended
1-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2352]
(a) The applicant has provided written consent to use of its
collected impact fees, or the provision of such credit against
the applicant's impact fees, for specific transportation projects
which are not included in the Transportation Capital
Improvements Plan.
(b) The alternative transportation projects, whether highway or
multimodal, have as their purpose the reduction of traffic
congestion or the removal of vehicle trips from the roadway
network.
(c) The Township amends the Capital Improvement Plan to
provide replacement of the collected impact fees transferred to
transportation projects outside the approved Transportation
Capital Improvements Plan from sources other than impact
fees or developer contributions within three years of
completion of the alternative projects to which the transferred
fees were applied or for which credit was provided. [Amended
1-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2352]
(5) Pass-by credit. When forecasted trips based on the trip generations
rates or equations are distributed to the adjacent streets, some
reduction is made to account for those trips already there which
will be attracted to the proposed development. Pass-by rates are to
be determined from the Institute of Transportation Engineers
§ 22-38 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-38
19:786
Manual Trip Generation or from other sources approved by the
Township Engineer and Township Traffic Consultant. [Added
1-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2452]
(6) Existing use credit. If the development of a site results in the
removal of an existing use, a credit may be given for the trips
eliminated from the site. The credit amount shall be based upon the
last use of the building and shall extend no more than three years
from the date that the last use terminated for a vacant structure.
The credit amount shall be determined by the Township Engineer
and Township Traffic Consultant by utilizing industry accepted
methods, studies, and the Institute of Transportation Engineers
(ITE) Trip Generation Manual as well as documentation of any fees
previously paid or improvements constructed as a result of the
previous development. [Added 1-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2452]
T. Refunds. Impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be
refunded, together with interest earned thereon, to the payor of the
fees under the following circumstances:
(1) In the event the Township completes or terminates the
Transportation Capital Improvements Plan without adoption of a
new or amended Transportation Capital Improvement Plan and
there remain undisbursed funds, the respective payors shall be
entitled to a share of the fund balance in the same portion as the
payor's impact fee payment plus interest earned bears to the total
impact fees collected plus interest.
(2) In the event any road improvement project within the
transportation service area not the subject of additional
improvement plans is completed at a cost to the Township less than
95% of the budgeted cost of the road project, the Township shall
refund an amount equal to the excess budgeted cost over actual
cost to the payors, pro rata, plus accumulated interest at the same
pro rata value.
(3) In the event that the Township fails to commence construction
within three years of the scheduled construction date of the project
as set forth in the Transportation Capital Improvements Plan,
without revision of said plan and construction date, the Township
shall refund the portion of the fee paid by any payor making written
request therefor, with accumulated interest, provided no refund
shall be paid with respect to any project annually begun prior to the
receipt of such refund request even if said initiation date shall be
more than three years beyond the scheduled construction date.
(4) With respect to refunds arising out of Subsection T(1), (2) and (3)
hereof, any funds unclaimed within one year after notice as
required by law shall be transferred to the general fund account of
the Township, and the payor's entitlement to said refund shall
§ 22-38 RESERVED § 22-38
19:787
lapse. It is the responsibility of the payor to provide the Township
with payor's current address at all times.
U. Effect of impact fee on zoning and subdivision regulations. This chapter
shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density
of development, previously adopted design and improvement standards
and requirements or any other aspect of the development of land or
provision of public improvements which remain subject to applicable
zoning and subdivision regulations of the Township, which shall
continue to be operative and remain in full force and effect without
limitation with respect to all such development.
V. Impact fee as additional and supplemental requirement. The impact fee
is additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other
requirements imposed by the Township on the development of land or
the issuance of building permits or use and occupancy permits. Nothing
herein contained shall be deemed to alter or affect the Township's
existing ordinances and regulations regarding on-site improvements. In
no event shall a property owner be obligated to pay for transportation
capital improvements in an amount in excess of the amount calculated
pursuant to this chapter; provided, however, that a property owner may
be required to pay, pursuant to the Township ordinances, regulations or
policies for other public facilities, fees or charges in addition to the
impact fee as provided.
W. Liberal construction. The provisions of this § 22-38 shall be liberally
construed to effectively carry out its purposes which are hereby found
and declared to be in furtherance of the public health, safety and
welfare and convenience.
§ 22-38 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-38
19:788
ARTICLE XI
Improvement Specifications
§ 22-39. General requirements.
§ 22-40. Agreement or contract.
A. Conveyance of right-of-way. All existing or new rights-of-way within the
boundaries of a subdivision or land development shall be conveyed to
the Township by fee simple deed of special warranty, free of all liens and
encumbrances with reservation of rights that all property owners
adjacent thereto are responsible to maintain all rights-of-way between
the property line and the curb.
B. Improvements. Physical improvements to the proposed subdivision or
land development tract shall be provided, constructed and installed as
shown on the final plan and in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
C. Improvements agreements. As a condition for the approval of the final
plan, the developer shall execute an agreement with the Board of
Commissioners as to the installation of all improvements shown on the
plan and required by this chapter. Before the final plan may be
endorsed by the Mayor, the improvements agreement and maintenance
agreement shall be executed by the developer and the Mayor and
recorded with the Lehigh County recorder of deeds office. The
improvements and maintenance agreement shall be in such form as is
acceptable to the Township Solicitor. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
D. Construction of improvements. All improvements installed by the
developer shall be constructed in accordance with all design
specifications set forth herein or as may be otherwise approved by the
Board of Commissioners subject to the recommendations of the
Township Engineer.
E. Supervision of construction of improvements by Township Engineer.
The supervision of the installation of the improvements as required by
this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Township Engineer, except
that the installation of those improvements which are to be dedicated to
governmental entities other than the Township shall be supervised by
engineers representing those entities.
A. General. No final plan of a major subdivision or land development shall
be approved by the Board of Commissioners until the developer has
constructed and completed all required improvements as required by
this chapter and that are shown on the final plan to be recorded or the
supporting documents submitted with the application for final plan
approval. In lieu of the completion of any of these required
improvements, the developer shall submit to the Township a subdivision
improvements agreement, a maintenance agreement, and construction
§ 22-39 RESERVED § 22-40
19:789
security, all in form acceptable to the Township Solicitor. The developer
shall fully execute these agreements before submitting them to the
Township. No final plan shall be finally approved and recorded until
all agreements required hereby are fully executed by all parties and,
escrows and financial security have been posted.
B. Improvements agreement. The subdivision improvements agreement,
or a contract approved by the Board of Commissioners, shall bind the
developer to construct the required improvements as required by this
chapter and that are shown on the plan to be recorded or on the
supporting documents submitted with the application for final plan
approval. This agreement includes a security agreement which shall
provide for, and secure to the public, the completion of all required
improvements. This agreement shall indemnify the Township and hold
the Township harmless from any and all liability including, but not
limited to, any and all aspects of stormwater management, design and
implementations thereof.
C. Maintenance agreement. The improvement maintenance agreement
shall provide that the developer agree to maintain the required
improvements for a period of 18 months, and that the developer provide
suitable security to guarantee that the improvements will be
maintained during this period.
(1) The time period for maintenance shall commence on the day the
Township Engineer and the Mayor give the developer final approval
on all of the required improvements identified in the subdivision
improvements agreement. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(2) Security shall be in an amount equal to 15% of the total amount of
the actual cost of the required improvements, as defined in the
subdivision improvements agreement. The form of security shall be
subject to the approval of the Township Solicitor and Board of
Commissioners.
(3) The Township shall release the maintenance security pursuant to
§ 22-43.
D. Improvements or performance guarantee.
(1) No plan will be finally approved unless the improvements required
hereby or otherwise required by the MPC shall have been installed
or appropriate financial security pursuant to § 509 of the MPC,
shall have been posted with the Township. Such security shall be in
a form acceptable to the Township Solicitor.
(2) In the case where development is projected over a period of years,
the governing body may authorize submission of final plans by
sections or stages of development subject to the limitations
imposed by the MPC, and also subject to such requirements or
§ 22-40 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-40
19:790
§ 22-41. Financial security.
guarantees as to the completion of improvements in future sections
or stages of the development as the governing body finds essential.
E. Phased development. If development is proposed to occur over a period
of years, the developer shall phase or stage portions of the development
plan and coordinate with these said phases or stage the posting of
appropriate financial security and the payment of portions of the
required recreation and traffic impact fees. In regard thereto, the
developer shall be required to comply with the following minimum
standards established by the Board of Commissioners, which shall
include, but may not be limited to:
(1) Execute a phased development agreement, improvements and
maintenance agreements for each phase and prior to commencing
work, post necessary financial security.
(2) Indicate a completion schedule for the development as part of
preliminary plan. If this schedule involves an extension to the
maximum five-year plan life as established in the MPC the Board
will determine what time period is acceptable.
(3) Record each section of phased plan as final approval is granted by
the Board of Commissioners. Prior to commencing construction of
any improvements in each phase, improvements in the current
(active) phase must be substantially complete as determined by the
Township Engineer.
(4) The maintenance period for each phase shall not commence until
so indicated by the Township Engineer.
(5) Any recreation areas or stormwater management facilities shall be
part of the first phase.
A. General. Prior to endorsing the final plan, the Township shall require
that the developer post adequate, acceptable financial security
(collectively referred to herein as "financial security") with respect to
the following:
(1) Cost of those improvements depicted on the final plan, which
security may be in the form of cash, letter of credit or bond.
(2) Legal and engineering costs, which security shall be no greater
than 15% of the costs of improvements secured (as determined by
the Township Engineer) and which shall be in the form of cash. At
no time shall the value of the escrow be less than 25% of the value
of the escrow as initially established. In the event that the legal/
engineering escrow is reduced to less than 25% of the amount
initially established, the developer shall replenish the account in
cash to 25%.
§ 22-40 RESERVED § 22-41
19:791
§ 22-41.1. Remedies to effect completion of improvements;
standards for default. [Added 9-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2746]
(3) Project completion costs, which costs shall include but shall not be
limited to costs for administration, as built plans and surveys
preparation, advertising, and filing of ordinances, deeds of
dedication, deed of confirmation, which security shall be no greater
than 2% of the costs of improvements secured and which security
may be in the form of cash, letter of credit or bond.
(4) Maintenance security, which shall be in such amount as set forth in
§ 22-40C hereof.
B. Use of financial security. The financial security referenced in
Subsection A hereinabove shall be used for the purposes for which
same was posted; provide, however, that any financial security may be
used as and when necessary to abate any nuisance or violation which
exists in, on, at or emanates from the land being developed. In the event
that any financial security is used as aforesaid, the developer shall,
within five days of written request from the Township, replenish such
security to the amount that existed immediately prior to the Township
abating the nuisance or violation.
C. Form of financial security. The financial security required hereby shall
be in such amount and form as is acceptable to the Township Solicitor.
D. Financial security. In the event that the developer has failed, refused or
neglected to replenish the financial security (as and when required by
Subsection A or Subsection B hereof) complete the improvements
required by the final plan, or extended the financial security for an
additional term of one year (or such lesser amount of time as may be
approved by the Township Solicitor) within 10 days of the expiration of
the financial security, the Township may
(1) Realize upon the same.
(2) Issue a stop work order with respect to all construction related to
the improvements.
(3) Refuse to issue permits.
(4) Refuse to perform any and all inspections related to the land
development. All costs related to the Township realizing upon the
financial security shall be charged to the developer and taken from
the financial security upon receipt of the same.105
A. Remedies to effect completion of improvements. In the event that any
improvements which may be required have not been installed as
provided in the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance or in
105. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Remedies to effect completion of improvements,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 9-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2746. See
§ 22-41.1 for current provisions.
§ 22-41 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-41.1
19:792
accord with the approved final plat, Whitehall Township is granted the
power, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, to
enforce any corporate bond, or other security by appropriate legal and
equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond, or other security are
insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections
to all the improvements covered by said security, Whitehall Township
may, at its option, install part of such improvements in all or part of
the subdivision or land development and may institute appropriate legal
or equitable action to recover the moneys necessary to complete the
remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting
from the security or from any legal or equitable action brought against
the developer, or both, shall be used solely for the installation of the
improvements covered by such security, and not for any other municipal
purpose.
(1) Whitehall Township may, in its sole discretion, extend the
completion date or allow additional time for the owner and/or
developer or correct any event of default. If necessary in such case,
the owner and/or developer shall obtain an extension or renewal of
the construction security instrument so that the instrument is
extended for a period of at least 60 days from the date of the
deadline for the correction of the event of default.
(2) The Township, in effecting the completion of improvements under
default, shall have the right to complete the improvements itself or
contract with a third party for completion, and the developer, in the
improvements agreement, shall grant to the Township, its
successors, assigns agents contractors and employees, a
nonexclusive right and easement to enter the property to construct,
maintain, and repair such improvements. Alternatively, the
Township may assign the proceeds of the construction security
instrument to a subsequent developer or lender who has acquired
the development by purchase, foreclosure or otherwise who will
then have the same rights of completion as the Township, provided
such assignment shall occur if and only if the subsequent developer
or lender agrees in writing to complete the unfinished
improvements.
(3) Until the improvements that are under default are completed, and
accepted by the Township, the Township may suspend final plan
approval, and the developer will not be permitted to sell, transfer,
or otherwise convey lots or homes within the property without the
express written approval of the Township.
B. Events of default. The following shall be considered events of default:
(1) The improvements as identified on the approved land development
plan and as further outlined in the construction cost estimate are
not completed by the owner/developer to the satisfaction of the
Township Engineer on or prior to the completion date as set forth
§ 22-41.1 RESERVED § 22-41.1
19:793
§ 22-42. Inspection.
and agreed upon in the subdivision improvements and maintenance
agreements.
(2) The improvements are not constructed in accordance with the
approved plans and/or specifications.
(3) The owner and/or developer abandons or vacates construction of
improvements for a period of more than 90 days during the term of
the subdivision improvements agreement, unless said
abandonment is caused by fires, floods, storms, accidents or acts of
God, and Whitehall Township reasonably believes that the
remaining improvements cannot be completed by the completion
date.
(4) The owner and/or developer fails to correct to the satisfaction of
the Township Engineer any failure, fault, or deficiency in the
improvements within 60 days or other specific time period
established by same after written notice from the Engineer to the
owner and/or developer to correct such failure, fault or deficiency.
(5) The owner and/or developer fails to maintain adequate
construction or maintenance security.
(6) The owner's and/or developer's insolvency, the appointment of a
receiver for the owner and/or developer or the filing of a voluntary
or involuntary petition in bankruptcy respecting the owner and/or
developer.
(7) Foreclosure of any lien against the property or a portion of the
property or assignment or conveyance of the property in lieu of
foreclosure.
(8) Failure of the owner and/or developer or their lender to extend or
renew the construction security as required pursuant to these
regulations as well as the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
A. General. All improvements and utilities will be inspected by the
Township Engineer to ensure satisfactory completion and maintenance.
B. Costs. The cost of all legal service for the negotiation, preparation,
modification or review of any legal agreements relating to a subdivision
or land development whether finally approved or not and all
engineering costs of engineer inspections of improvements shall be
paid to the Township by the developer.
C. Paving. In no case shall any paving work be done without permission
from the Township Engineer. At least three working days notice shall be
given to the Township Engineer prior to any such construction, so that
§ 22-41.1 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-42
19:794
the Township Engineer may be present at the time the work is to be
done.
D. Notification milestones. The Township Engineer shall be notified prior
to and after each of the following phases of the work has been
commenced and completed, so that the work may be inspected:
(1) Grading of rights-of-way.
(2) Setting forms of crosswalks, sidewalks and curbs and placement
and finish of concrete.
(3) Preparation of road subgrade and cross slopes including, but not
limited to, rolling and compaction.
(4) Setting curb forms and/or stringlines and placement and finish of
concrete.
(5) Road paving and sealing.
(6) Installation of drainage pipe and other drainage structures and
before backfilling.
(7) Installation, repair, stabilization and seeding, where applicable, of
erosion and sedimentation controls.
(8) Installation of underground conduits for electric, streetlights,
telephone and television cable lines and before backfilling.
(9) Installation of water and sanitary sewer submains, laterals and
appurtenances before backfilling and wells and pumping storage
facilities before activating same.
(10) Back filling of all utility trenches in the right-of-way, both existing
and proposed.
(11) Installation of street trees.
E. Final inspection. When all the improvements and utilities depicted on
the final plan and supporting documents have been installed, a final
inspection shall be made by the Township Engineer and Mayor to
determine whether the work is satisfactory and in substantial
compliance with the approved final plans and specifications. The
general condition of the site shall also be considered. [Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
(1) When the developer has completed all of the necessary and
appropriate improvements depicted on the final plan and
supporting documents, the developer shall notify the Board of
Commissioners, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the
completion of the same and shall send a copy thereof to the
Township Engineer.
§ 22-42 RESERVED § 22-42
19:795
(2) The Board of Commissioners shall within 10 days after receipt of
such notice direct and authorize the Township Engineers to inspect
all of the aforesaid improvements.
(3) The Township Engineer shall thereupon file a report, in writing,
with the Board of Commissioners, and shall promptly mail a copy of
the same to the Developer by certified, or registered mail.
(4) The Township Engineer's report shall be made and mailed within
30 days after receipt by the Township Engineer of the aforesaid
authorization from the Board of Commissioners; said report shall
be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said
improvements either in whole or in part, and if said improvements
or any portion thereof shall not be approved or shall be rejected by
the Township Engineer, said report shall contain a statement of
reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
(5) The Board of Commissioners shall notify the developer, in writing,
by certified or registered mail within 15 days of receipt of the
Engineer's report, of The Board's action with regard thereto.
(6) If the Board of Commissioners or Township Engineer fails to
comply with the time limitations set forth herein, all improvements
will be deemed to have been approved and the developer shall be
released from all liability pursuant to the developer's financial
security posted with respect to such improvements.
(7) If any portion of the said improvements shall not be improved or
shall be rejected by the Board of Commissioners, the developer
shall proceed to complete the same, and upon completion, the same
procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
F. Maintenance inspection. A maintenance inspection of all the
improvements and utilities will be made by the Township Engineer and
Mayor to determine whether the improvements have been constructed
to acceptable standards of workmanship, with acceptable materials and
maintained to withstand reasonable materials and maintained to
withstand reasonable use. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776,
approved 11-3-2009]
(1) The maintenance inspection shall take place no sooner than 15
months after the day the Township Engineer and the Mayor give
the final approval on all required improvements.
(2) Within 10 days of maintenance inspection, the Township Engineer
shall report, in writing, the Township Engineer's findings to the
Board of Commissioners and to the developer granting approval or
disapproval, each with reason for the stated action.
(3) The developer shall be notified by certified letter, return receipt
requested, of all required improvements which fail to pass the
maintenance inspection of the Township Engineer. All such
§ 22-42 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-42
19:796
§ 22-43. Release of improvements security.
§ 22-44. Release of maintenance security.
The Township shall release the maintenance security provided that:
improvements shall be repaired by the developer to specifications
acceptable to the Township Engineer within 60 days of such
notification by the Township Engineer.
(a) All such repairs shall be performed and inspected in
accordance with the within regulations.
(b) Thirty days prior to the expiration of the maintenance period,
the Township Engineer shall perform a final inspection of all
improvements. Any deficiencies shall be communicated, in
writing, to the developer for his immediate action. If
circumstances are such that such repairs cannot be made
before the end of the maintenance period, the maintenance
period shall be extended by the Township Engineer (provided
that such maintenance security remains in effect), or, in the
alternative, the Township may realize on the maintenance
security.
A. Release of improvements security. The Township shall release the
financial security related to the improvements provided that:
(1) The installation of all required improvements has occurred prior to
the expiration of the financial security and passed the inspection of
the Township Engineer.
(2) Developer has paid the Township for all costs which are the
developer's obligation under this or other applicable ordinances.
(3) Developer has supplied maintenance security.
A. The condition of the required improvements listed in the subdivision
improvements agreement has been approved by the Township
Engineer.
B. All improvements, easements and rights-of-ways which are to be
dedicated to the Township as shown on the final plan shall have been
dedicated to the Township by the delivery of a special warranty deed
conveying the same to the Township in fee simple, plus developer's
attorney's opinion of record title (or title insurance) that the land
conveyed is good and marketable and free of all liens and
encumbrances, or in such other manner recommended by the Township
Solicitor and approved by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 22-42 RESERVED § 22-44
19:797

ARTICLE XII
Administration
§ 22-45. Amendments.
Effective date of amendments. Amendments to this chapter shall become
effective only after a public hearing held pursuant to public notice in the
manner prescribed for enactment of a subdivision and land development
ordinance by the MPC. In addition, in case of an amendment other than that
prepared by the Planning Commission, the Board of Commissioners shall
submit each such amendment to the Planning Commission and to the LVPC
for recommendation at least 30 days prior to the date fixed for the public
hearing on such proposed amendment.
§ 22-46. Appeals.
The decisions of the Board of Commissioners with respect to the approval
or disapproval of a land development plan may be appealed directly to the
Court of Common Pleas as is provided for in the MPC.
§ 22-47. Fees.
§ 22-48. Waivers.
A. Fee schedule. See Whitehall Township fee schedule, as amended from
time to time.
B. Approval contingent on payment of fees. No final plan shall be endorsed
or released to the developer unless all accrued fees and charges are
paid in full.
A. Approval of waiver requests. The Board of Commissioners may grant a
waiver to modify the requirements of one or more provisions of this
chapter if the literal enforcement will impose unreasonable
requirements or exact undue hardship upon the developer because of
peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in questions; provided,
however, that such modifications will not be contrary to the public
interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is observed.
B. Requests to be in writing. All requests for waivers shall be in writing
and shall accompany and be a part of the preliminary plan application.
The waiver requests shall state in full the grounds on which the waiver
is based, and provision or provisions of the ordinance involved, and the
minimum modifications necessary.
C. Recommendations of Planning Commission. The Board of
Commissioners, in considering requests for waivers, shall consider the
recommendations of the Planning Commission and the Township
Engineer.
D. Record of waiver requests. The Board of Commissioners shall keep a
written record of all requests for waivers.
§ 22-45 RESERVED § 22-48
19:799

ARTICLE XIII
Penalties
§ 22-49. Violations and penalties; remedies.
A. Preventive remedies.
(1) In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and
maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct
or abate violations hereof, to prevent unlawful construction, to
recover damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building,
structure or premises. The description by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of
selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor
from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
(2) The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which
has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following:
(a) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(b) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee
had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(c) The current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to
whether such current owner had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
(d) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who
acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation
without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual
or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting
of an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee
for the development of any such real property, the Township may
require compliance with the conditions that would have been
applicable to the property at the time the developer/owner
acquired an interest in such real property.
B. Jurisdiction. District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction in
proceedings brought under this chapter.
C. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership, or corporation who or which has violated
the provisions of this chapter or prior enabling laws shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
§ 22-49 RESERVED § 22-49
19:801
commenced by this Township, pay a judgment of not more than
$500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute
a separate violation, unless the district justice determining that
there has been a violation further determines that there was a
good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating
the chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in
which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such
violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination
of a violation by the district justice and thereafter each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
(2) The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per them judgment pending a
final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the municipality the
right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this
section.
§ 22-49 WHITEHALL CODE § 22-49
19:802
Chapter 23
RESERVED
Chapter 24
TAXATION
§ 22-49 RESERVED § 22-49
23:803

ARTICLE I
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 12-12-1988 by Ord. No. 1638]
§ 24-1. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Whitehall Business Privilege Tax
Ordinance."
§ 24-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS — Any activity carried on or exercised for gain or profit in the
Township of Whitehall including, but not limited to, the sale of merchandise
or other tangible personalty, the performance of services and the rental of
property.
CALENDAR YEAR — The period January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
COSTS OF COLLECTION — Any and all fees including, but not limited
to, filing fees, court costs, actual attorney's fees and expert witness fees
incurred by the Township in connection with the enforcement of this
article.[Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No. 1987]
LICENSE YEAR — Each period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the Township of Whitehall.[Amended 6-8-2009
by Ord. No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
MILL — One one-thousandth of $1 or $0.001.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, limited partnership, association,
firm or corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing
a penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations, firms, partnerships
and limited partnerships shall also mean the partners or members thereof
and as applied to corporations shall mean the officers thereof.
PRECEDING YEAR — With respect to any given tax year, the calendar year
immediately preceding such tax year.
TAXPAYER — A person who conducts business within the Township, other
than person who only conducts businesses which are exempt from the
business privilege tax under § 24-8 of this article.
TAX YEAR — Each period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Whitehall, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
TREASURER — The Treasurer of the Township of Whitehall.
WHOLESALE DEALER — Any person who sells to dealers in, or vendors of,
goods, wares and merchandise and to no other person.
§ 24-1 RESERVED § 24-3
23:805
§ 24-3. Levy of tax.
There is hereby imposed for each tax year for general revenue purposes
on the privilege of doing business, as herein defined, in the Township of
Whitehall, as follows:
A. Rate of tax. Except in the case of wholesale dealers, each taxpayer shall
pay to the Township for each tax year an amount equal to 0.1% (or one
mill per dollar) of the taxpayer's estimated gross volume of business for
such tax year. Each wholesale dealer shall pay to the Township for each
tax year an amount equal to 0.075% (or 3/4 if a mill per dollar) of such
wholesale dealer's estimated gross volume of business for such tax
year.
B. Estimated gross volume of business.
(1) The estimated gross volume of business for a given tax year of a
taxpayer who commenced his business prior to the beginning of the
preceding year shall be the actual whole or gross volume of
business transacted by such taxpayer within the territorial limits of
the Township during the preceding year.
(2) The estimated gross volume of business for a given tax year of a
taxpayer who commenced his business at least 90 days prior to the
beginning of the tax year but after the beginning of the preceding
year shall be equal to the monthly average of the actual whole or
gross volume of business transacted by such taxpayer within the
territorial limits of the Township during the calendar months of the
preceding year in which he transacted business, multiplied by 12.
(3) The estimated gross volume of business for a given tax year of a
taxpayer who commenced his business prior to the beginning of the
tax year but fewer than 90 days before the end of the preceding
year shall be equal to the actual whole or gross volume of business
transacted by such taxpayer within the territorial limits of the
Township during the 90 calendar-day period commencing with the
day the taxpayer commenced his business, multiplied by four.
(4) The estimated gross volume of business for a given tax year of a
taxpayer who commences his business on or after the beginning of
the tax year and before October 1 of such year shall be equal to the
actual whole or gross volume of business transacted by such
taxpayer within the territorial limits of the Township during the 90
calendar day period commencing with the day the taxpayer
commences his business, divided by three and multiplied by the
number of calendar months; from (and including) the month in
which the taxpayer commences his business through the end of the
tax year.
(5) The estimated gross volume of business for a given tax year of a
taxpayer who commences his business before the end of the tax
year but after September 30 of such year shall be equal to the
§ 24-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-3
23:806
actual whole or gross volume of business transacted by such
taxpayer within the territorial limits of the Township during the tax
year.
(6) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Subsection B(2),
the estimated gross volume of business for a given tax year of a
taxpayer who engages in a business which is temporary, seasonal
or itinerant by nature shall be an estimate of the whole or gross
volume of business to be transacted by such taxpayer within the
territorial limits of the Township for the period during the tax year
in which such taxpayer expects to engage in such temporary,
seasonal or itinerant business. The Mayor is hereby authorized to
promulgate, from time to time, one or more reasonable methods to
produce such an estimate. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2776, approved 11-3-2009]
C. Whole or gross volume of business. Whole or gross volume of business
upon which the business privilege tax imposed by this article is
computed shall include the gross consideration credited or received for
or on account of sales made, services performed, rentals of property
and/or other business transactions, within the territorial limits of the
Township, subject only to the following allowable deductions and
exemptions:
(1) The dollar volume of business transacted by wholesale and retail
dealers derived from the resale of goods, wares and merchandise
taken by any dealer as trade-in or as part payment for other goods,
wares and merchandise, except to the extent that the resale price
exceeds the trade-in allowance.
(2) Refunds, credits or allowances given by a taxpayer to a purchaser
on account of defects in goods, wares or merchandise sold or on
account of goods, wares or merchandise returned.
(3) Commissions paid by a broker to another broker on account of a
purchase or sales contract initiated, executed or cleared with such
other broker.
(4) Bad debts, where the deduction is also taken for Federal income
taxation purposes in a Federal income tax year which includes all
or part of the period for which whole or gross volume of business is
being measure for purposes of the Whitehall Township business
privilege tax.
(5) Taxes collected as agent for the United States of America, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Township.
(6) The dollar volume of all business transactions excluded from the
business privilege tax under § 24-8 of this article. Where the whole
or gross volume of business in its entirety cannot be subjected to
the tax imposed by this article by reason of the provisions of the
Constitution of the United States, or by any other provisions of law,
§ 24-3 RESERVED § 24-3
23:807
§ 24-4. Returns.
the Mayor shall establish rules and regulations and methods of
allocation and evaluation so that only that part of the whole or
gross volume of business which is properly attributable and
allowable to doing business in the Township shall be taxed
hereunder. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2776, approved
11-3-2009]
D. Records. The taxpayer shall maintain such records and books of
account as will enable him to make a true and accurate return in
accordance with the provisions of this article. Such accounts and
records must disclose in detail the gross receipts and other data
pertaining to the taxpayer's whole or gross volume of business, and
must be sufficiently complete to enable the Treasurer to verify all
transactions. In order to obtain the exclusions and deductions set forth
in Subsection C, the taxpayer shall keep books and records of his
business so as to show clearly, accurately and separately the amount of
such sales, services and other transactions as are excluded from the tax
and the amounts of such sales, services and other transactions which he
is entitled to deduct from the whole or gross volume of business.
E. Due date. The business privilege tax imposed under § 24-3 shall be due
and payable in each tax year on the date the taxpayer is required to file
a return for such tax year under § 24-4B of this article.
A. Filing of returns. Every person subject to the business privilege tax
imposed by this article shall file with the Treasurer, for each tax year in
which he conducts business in the Township, a return setting forth his
name, his business, his business address and such other information as
may be necessary in arriving at his estimated gross volume of business
for such tax year and the amount of tax due. Every return shall be made
upon a form furnished by the Treasurer and shall be accompanied by a
copy of Schedule C or E (or the portion thereof listing gross volume of
business) of the taxpayer's federal income tax return for the most
recent calendar or fiscal year. Every person making a return shall
certify the correctness thereof by affidavit.
B. Due dates. The return required under Subsection A for any given tax
year shall be filed on or before:
(1) The first day of June of the tax year if the taxpayer commenced his
business prior to the beginning of the tax year.
(2) The later of the first day of June of the tax year or the date 100
calendar days after the date the taxpayer commenced his business
if the taxpayer commenced his business after the beginning of the
tax year, but in no event later than January 10 of the calendar year
immediately following the tax year.
§ 24-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-4
23:808
§ 24-5. Cessation of business during tax year.
Notwithstanding the provisions of §§ 24-3 and 24-4 of this article:
§ 24-6. Penalties for late payment.
If the business privilege tax imposed under § 24-3 or 24-5 is not paid on or
before the date it is due, the amount of tax due shall be increased by 5%
plus an additional 1% per month or fractional part of a month from the date
due until the tax is paid in full.
§ 24-7. License; fee. [Amended 2-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2538;
8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
(3) The date the taxpayer files an application for a business privilege
license under § 24-7 of this article (or should have so filed an
application) if the taxpayer engages in a business temporary,
seasonal or itinerant by its nature, notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in Subsection B(1) and (2).
A. The amount of tax due for a given tax year by a person who goes out of
or ceases to do business with the Township during such tax year shall
be the amount determined under § 24-3A of this article, except that the
phrase "actual whole or gross volume of business" shall be substituted
for the phrase "estimated gross volume of business" each time the latter
appears therein.
B. Within seven days from the date the taxpayer goes out of or ceases to do
business in the Township, the taxpayer shall file a return with the
Treasurer setting forth his name, his business, his business address and
such other information as may be necessary in arriving at his actual
whole or gross volume of business for such tax year and the amount of
tax due. Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the
Treasurer. Every person making a return shall certify the correctness
thereof by affidavit.
C. If the taxpayer has previously paid the business privilege tax for such
tax year based on his estimated gross volume of business, he shall
receive a credit in the amount of such payment against the tax due
under this section. If the amount previously paid exceed the amount
due under this section, the taxpayer shall be entitled to a refund of such
excess.
D. The taxpayer shall pay the amount of all tax due under this section to
the Treasurer on or before the date his return is due under Subsection
B.
A. Any person desiring to conduct or to continue to conduct any business,
as defined herein, within the Township in any given license year shall
file with the Treasurer an application for a business privilege license for
such license year. The fee for such license shall be in an amount as
§ 24-4 RESERVED § 24-7
23:809
§ 24-8. Exemptions.
established by resolution, from time to time, by the Board of
Commissioners. The license issued shall be conspicuously posted in the
place of business for which the said license is issued and shall remain
in effect until the end of the license year for which it was issued. If the
person maintains more than one place of business in the Township, a
separate license shall be required for each place of business. No license
shall be issued to any taxpayer who is in default in the payment of the
business privilege tax imposed under this article until such tax is paid
in full. No license shall be required for a business if all the business'
activities are exempt from the business privilege tax under § 24-8 of this
article.
B. Any person obtaining a business privilege license shall also be required
to comply with all other applicable laws of the Township, and secure all
other necessary approvals for the business operation, including but not
limited to zoning and building code regulations, and the mere issuance
of a business privilege license shall not imply compliance with all other
Township regulations.
A. Wages and salaries; nonprofit organizations; governmental bodies.
Persons employed for a wage or salary, nonprofit corporations or
associations organized for religious, charitable or educational
purposes, agencies of the government of the United States or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the business of any political
subdivision or any authority created or organized under and pursuant
to any act of the Pennsylvania General Assembly are exempt from the
business privilege tax.
B. Constitutional and statutory exemptions. No business privilege tax shall
be assessed or collected to the extent it is prohibited by the
Constitution of the United States or any other applicable law. Nothing
contained in this article shall be construed to empower the Township to
levy and collect the business privilege tax on any person, or any
business or any portion of any business not within the taxing power of
the Township under the Constitution and laws of the United States and
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. If the business privilege tax, or any
portion thereof, imposed upon any person under the provisions of this
article shall be held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in
violation of the Constitution or laws of the United States or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the decisions of the court shall not
affect or impair the Township's right to impose the taxes, or the validity
of the taxes so imposed, upon other persons as herein provided.
C. (Reserved)106
106. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, Subjects of state taxes or license fees, was repealed
4-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2769.
§ 24-7 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-8
23:810
§ 24-9. Receipts.
Upon the payment of any business privilege tax or business privilege license
fee, the Treasurer shall give a receipt therefor to the person making such
payment.
§ 24-10. Payment under protest.
The Treasurer is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest of the
amount of business privilege tax claimed by the Township in any case where
the taxpayer disputes the validity or amount of the Township's claim for tax.
If it is thereafter judicially determined by a court of competent jurisdiction
that the Township has been overpaid, the amount of the overpayment shall
be refunded to the taxpayer. This section shall remain applicable to cases in
which the facts are similar to those of a case previously litigated in a court
of competent jurisdiction, notwithstanding such litigation.
D. Utilities. No business privilege tax shall be assessed or collected on the
gross receipts from utility service of any person or company whose
rates of service are fixed and regulated by the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission or on any public utility service rendered by any such
person or company or on any privilege or transaction involving the
rendering of any such public utility service.
E. Tangible property subject to state tax. No business privilege tax shall be
assessed or collected on the privilege of employing such tangible
property as is subject to a Pennsylvania State tax, except on sales of
admission to places of amusement or on sales or other transfers of title
to or possession of property.
F. Production, manufacture, etc. Within the Township. No business
privilege tax shall be assessed or collected on goods, articles, products
or by-products of manufacture, minerals, timber, natural resources, or
farm products manufactured, produced or grown in the Township or on
the preparation or processing thereof for use or market. No business
privilege tax shall be assessed or collected on any privilege, act or
transaction related to the business of manufacturing or the production,
preparation or processing of minerals, timber, natural resources or
farm products by manufacturers, producers or farmers with respect to
the goods, articles and products of their own manufacture, production
or growth within the Township or any privilege, act or transaction
relating to the business of processing by-products of such manufacture
or the transportation, loading, unloading, dumping or storage of such
goods, articles, products or byproducts.107
107. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection G, Incidental use of residential property, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 2761.
§ 24-8 RESERVED § 24-11
23:811
§ 24-11. Confidentiality of returns.
Any information gained by the Treasurer or any other official, agent or
employee of the Township as a result of any returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications required or authorized under this article shall be
confidential, except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law.
§ 24-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall conduct, transact or engage in
any business subject to the business privilege tax imposed by this article
during any license year without first having secured a business privilege
license for such license year, or any person who shall fail to file a business
privilege tax return as required by the provisions of this article or any
person who shall willfully file a false return shall, upon conviction thereof,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
30 days. Each day that a violation of this section continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
§ 24-13. Duties of Treasurer.
A. The Treasurer is charged with the duties of collecting and receiving the
taxes, fees, additions and penalties imposed under this article. It shall
be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him from
each person paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The Treasurer and his duly appointed deputies are hereby empowered,
with the approval of the Board of Commissioners or the Township of
Whitehall, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate additional rules and
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this article, including provisions for the examination
and correction of returns and payments alleged or found to be incorrect
or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred.
C. In the event any person subject to the business privilege tax neglects or
refuses to file a return, the Treasurer shall assess said person on such
volume of business as the Treasurer deems reasonable and appropriate.
In all cases of assessment, the Treasurer shall give the person assessed
a notice which shall state the person's trade, business, occupation or
class and the amount of business privilege tax imposed or levied.
D. The Treasurer is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and
records of any person he believes may be subject to the tax imposed by
this article in order to verify the accuracy of any returns made or to
ascertain the tax due for any tax year in which no return was made.
E. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Treasurer shall have the
right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas as in other cases.
§ 24-11 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-14
23:812
§ 24-14. Suits for enforcement.
§ 24-15. Authority for enactment.
The business privilege tax imposed by this article is enacted by the
Township under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 6901 et seq.
A. The Mayor or his appointed deputies shall have the power in the name
of the Township to institute proceedings against any and all persons
who violate the provisions of this article. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
B. If for any reason the business privilege tax is not paid when due and suit
is brought for the recovery of any such tax, and any additions and
penalties, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the
costs of collection.
§ 24-14 RESERVED § 24-15
23:813

ARTICLE II
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 6-8-1987 by Ord. No. 1588]
§ 24-16. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of
Whitehall Township."
§ 24-17. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within Whitehall
Township, regardless of where the documents making the transfer are
made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate Transfer
Tax, 73 P.S. § 101-D et seq.
§ 24-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
Commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments or like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. Document shall also include a
declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
§ 24-16 RESERVED § 24-18
23:815
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any subsection prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment,
or both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which meets any
of the following:[Amended 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2966]
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Township including,
without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently
attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Is primarily engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real
estate, in which 90% or more of the ownership interest is held by 35 or
fewer persons and which:
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the
ownership or disposition of real estate; or
(1)
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of
the value of its entire tangible asset holdings, exclusive of tangible
assets which are freely transferable and actively traded on an
established market.
(2)
A.
Ninety percent or more of the ownership interest in the corporation
or association is held by 35 or fewer persons, and the corporation
or association owns, as 90% or more of the fair market value of its
B.
§ 24-18 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-18
23:816
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
assets, a direct or indirect interest in a real estate company. An indirect
ownership interest is an interest in a corporation or association, of
which 90% or more of the ownership interest is held by 35 or fewer
persons whose purpose is the ownership of a real estate company.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold.
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof, where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate. Provided, that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual money worth of
the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purpose for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations.
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value
of which is not determinable under Subsections A or B, the actual
monetary worth of such interest.
C.
§ 24-18 RESERVED § 24-18
23:817
§ 24-19. Imposition of tax; interest. [Amended 12-11-2006 by Ord.
No. 2660]
§ 24-20. Exempt parties.
The United States, the Commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
person existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, associations or partnership and the grantee existing
before or effective with the transfer.
D.
A. Whitehall Township adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the Tax
Reform Code of 1971108 and imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized
under that Article subject to the rate limitations therein. The tax
imposed under this section shall be at the rate of 1.00% of the value of
the real estate represented in a document to be executed, delivered,
accepted or presented for recording in such a manner as is expressed in
this section.
B. The tax imposed under Subsection A and all applicable interest and
penalties shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of
December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511, as amended, known as the
"Local Tax Enabling Act"109), provided that if the correct amount of the
tax is not paid by the last date prescribed for timely payment, Whitehall
Township, pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971
(72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce
the tax, interest and penalties.
C. Any tax imposed under Subsection A that is not paid by the date the tax
is due shall bear an interest as prescribed for interest on the delinquent
municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53
P.S. § 7101 et seq.) as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and
Tax Liens Act." The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate
imposed upon delinquent commonwealth taxes as provided in Section
806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as
amended, known as the "Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate
permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act for such
claims.
108. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
109. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 24-18 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-21
23:818
§ 24-21. Excluded transactions.
A. The tax imposed by this section shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the Commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments, provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which Whitehall Township is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
or property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
covenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of final decree of divorce, between parent and child or
the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or spouse of a
brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devises or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exception shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
§ 24-21 RESERVED § 24-21
23:819
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) Principal and agent or straw party.
(a) A transfer:
[1] For no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party.
[2] From or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or
straw party were his principal, no tax would be imposed
under this article.
(b) Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee or
statement of value fails to set forth that the property was
acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit of, his
principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property
is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the
grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association or real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee of a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
§ 24-21 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-21
23:820
§ 24-22. Documents of transfer.
Except as otherwise provided in § 24-21, documents which make, confirm or
evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations
or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders
thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article, corporations
and associations are entities separate from their members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders.
§ 24-23. Acquired company.
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture.
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt pursuant
to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 [68 Stat. 3, 26
U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary purpose
preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural
or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 24-21 RESERVED § 24-23
23:821
§ 24-24. Credits against tax.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company, and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recordings. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder or residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of a new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is conveyance by deed of real estate which was previously
sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the amount of tax
paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor toward the tax due
upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
§ 24-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-24
23:822
§ 24-25. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 24-26. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the Sheriff, or other
officer conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first monies paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 24-27. Duties of recorder of deeds.
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40. No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to Whitehall
Township based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer
Tax, without compensation from Whitehall Township, except as
hereinafter set forth.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the tenth of each month, the recorder shall pay over to
Whitehall Township all local realty transfer taxes collected, less sums
reasonably retained for use of the county together with a report
containing the information as is required by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer
tax. The commission to be paid to the county shall be in such sum or
sums as the Township shall deem acceptable in writing.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the recorder shall re-record the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
State and local amount and a re-recording or recording fee has been
tendered.
§ 24-24 RESERVED § 24-28
23:823
§ 24-28. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement of
value executed by an attorney at law, or by affidavit executed by a party
to the transaction showing such person's connection to the transaction and
setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if
any, why such document is not subject to tax under this article. A copy of
the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value may be submitted
for this purpose. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any
excludable real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on
family relationship. Other documents presented for the affixation of stamps
shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the document and statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article.
§ 24-29. Penalties.
§ 24-30. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of Whitehall Township, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable, and continue until discharge by
payment, or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is authorized to
file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County,
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of
1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 20% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of the failure to record a declaration required under this
article on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such
failure is due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of
the amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month,
with an additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof
during which such failure continues, not exceeding 20% in the
aggregate.
C. All taxes imposed by this article not paid when due shall bear interest
from the date of transfer at the rate of 1% per month until paid.
§ 24-28 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-31
23:824
§ 24-31. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 24-32. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 24-33. Regulations.
The Treasurer of Whitehall Township is charged with enforcement and
collection of tax, is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax and may designate
any Township employee or official to fulfill the obligations set forth in this
section.
§ 24-34. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or of any regulation
or requirement promulgated pursuant hereto and authorized hereby, in
addition to other penalties provided by law, upon conviction thereof, shall
be sentenced to a fine not to exceed $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30
days. Further, he shall be required to pay the amount of the tax together
with all interest and penalties thereon which should have been paid in the
transfer or transfers involved and, upon default of the payment of the same
for a period of 10 days, shall be subject to imprisonment for not more than
30 days.
A. Make use of any rubber stamp to denote payment of any tax imposed by
this article, unless authorized by the Secretary, as required by this
article.
B. Fraudulently cut, tear, deface or remove the stamp denoting payment of
the tax from the deed.
C. Fraudulently affix to any deed any stamp which not been authorized by
the Secretary.
D. Knowingly or willfully prepare, keep, sell, offer for sale, have or possess
any counterfeited rubber stamp.
E. Make a fraudulent statement as to the true, full, complete and actual
value of any transfer as herein defined.
§ 24-31 RESERVED § 24-34
23:825

ARTICLE III
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
[Adopted 12-11-1967 by Ord. No. 877; amended in its entirety
6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2865]
§ 24-35. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARTICLE XIII TAX OFFICER — The tax officer authorized by the Township
to collect income taxes levied prior to January 1, 2012.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
BUSINESS ENTITY — A sole proprietorship, corporation, joint-stock
association or company, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability
company, association, business trust, syndicate or other commercial or
professional activity organized under the laws of this commonwealth or any
other jurisdiction.
CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANT or PUBLIC ACCOUNTANT — A
certified public accountant, public accountant or firm, as provided for in the
act of May 26, 1947 (P.L. 318, No. 140), known as the "CPA Law."
CLAIM — A written demand for payment made by a tax officer or tax
collection district for income taxes collected by another tax officer or tax
collection district.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency. The term shall include
an entity which is classified as a corporation for federal income tax
purposes.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community and Economic
Development of the commonwealth.
DOMICILE — The place where a person lives and has a permanent home
and to which the person has the intention of returning whenever absent.
Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place
of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. Domicile is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce the person to
adopt some other permanent home. In the case of a business, domicile is
that place considered as the center of business affairs and the place where
its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — The compensation as required to be reported to or as
determined by the Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the Act of
§ 24-35 RESERVED § 24-35
23:827
March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971," and
rules and regulations promulgated under that section. Employee business
expenses as reported to or determined by the Department of Revenue
under Article III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 shall constitute allowable
deductions in determining earned income. The term does not include offsets
for business losses. The amount of any housing allowance provided to a
member of the clergy shall not be taxable as earned income.
EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS TAX — The tax levied by the
Township on earned income and net profits.
EMPLOYER — A person, business entity or other entity, employing one
or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
The term includes the commonwealth, a political subdivision and an
instrumentality or public authority of either. For purposes of penalties under
this article, the term includes a corporate officer.
INCOME TAX — Except as set forth in Section 511(b) of the Local Tax
Enabling Act, P.L. 1257, Act 511 of 1965, as amended (hereinafter the
"LTEA"), 53 P.S. § 6924.511(b), an earned income and net profits tax,
personal income tax or other tax that is assessed on the income of a
taxpayer levied by the Township under the authority of this act or any other
act.
JOINT TAX COLLECTION COMMITTEE — An entity formed by two or more
tax collection committees for the purpose of income tax collection in more
than one tax collection district.
LTEA — The Pennsylvania Local Tax Enabling Act, P.L. 1257, Act 511 of
1965, as amended.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business, other
than a corporation, as required to be reported to or as determined by the
Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L.
6, No. 2), 72 P.S. § 7303, known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971," and rules
and regulations promulgated under that section. The term does not include
income under any of the following paragraphs:
NONRESIDENT — A person or business domiciled outside the Township
levying the tax.
Income which:
(1) Is not paid for services provided; and
(2) Is in the nature of earnings from an investment.
A.
Income which represents:
(1) Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; or
(2)
(3) Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of a farm.
B.
§ 24-35 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-35
23:828
NONRESIDENT TAX — An income tax levied by the Township on
nonresidents.
OFFICIAL REGISTER — The part of the tax register that includes
withholding tax rates as provided in Section 511(a)(3) of the LTEA, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.511(a)(3).
PERSON — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
PRIVATE AGENCY — A business entity or person appointed as a tax officer
by a tax collection committee.
PUBLIC AGENCY — Any and all public bodies, authorities, agencies,
instrumentalities, political subdivisions, intermediate units, councils,
boards, commissions or similar governmental entities.
RESIDENT — A person or business domiciled in the Township levying the
tax.
RESIDENT TAX — An income tax levied by the Township.
RESIDENT TAX OFFICER — The tax officer administering and collecting
income taxes for the tax collection district in which a taxpayer is domiciled.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAX BUREAU — A public nonprofit entity established for the administration
and collection of taxes.
TAX COLLECTION COMMITTEE — The committee established to govern
the Lehigh Tax Collection District for the purpose of income tax collection.
The term shall include a joint tax collection committee.
TAX COLLECTION DISTRICT — The Lehigh Tax Collection District
established under Section 504 of the LTEA.
TAX OFFICER — A political subdivision, public employee, tax bureau,
county, except a county of the first class, or private agency which
administers and collects income taxes for one or more tax collection
districts. Unless otherwise specifically provided, for purposes of the
obligations of an employer, the term shall mean the tax officer for the tax
collection district within which the employer is located, or, if an employer
maintains workplaces in more than one district, the tax officer for each such
district with respect to employees principally employed therein.
TAX RECORDS — Tax returns, supporting schedules, correspondence with
auditors or taxpayers, account books and other documents, including
electronic records, obtained or created by the tax officer to administer or
collect a tax under this Article. The term includes documents required by
Section 509(e) of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.509(e). The term "electronic
records" includes data and information inscribed on a tangible medium
or stored in an electronic or other medium and which is retrievable in
perceivable form.
§ 24-35 RESERVED § 24-35
23:829
TAX REGISTER — A database of all county, municipal and school tax rates
available on the internet as provided in Section 511(a)(1) of the LTEA, 53
P.S. § 6924.511(a)(1).
TAXABLE INCOME — Includes:
TAXPAYER — A person or business required under this article to file a
return of an income tax or to pay an income tax.
WITHHOLDING TAX — An income tax levied by a political subdivision under
the authority of this article or any other ordinance, or any other tax levied
by a municipality or school district for which employer withholding may be
required under this article.
§ 24-36. Imposition of tax.
In the case of an earned income and net profits tax, earned income and
net profits.
A.
In the case of a personal income tax, income enumerated in Section
303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971," 72 P.S. § 7303, as reported to and determined by
the Department of Revenue, subject to correction for fraud, evasion or
error, as finally determined by the commonwealth.
B.
A. The tax levied under this article is a continuation of a tax previously
described in the above-referenced "Whereas" clauses.110 The tax
previously imposed and continued under this article is a tax for general
revenue purposes of (0.80 of 1%) and is hereby imposed on the
following:
(1) Earned income, as defined by this article, received by residents of
the Township, on or after January 1, 2012;
(2) Earned income, as defined by this article, received by nonresidents
of the Township for work done or services performed or rendered in
the Township on or after January 1, 2012;
(3) Net profits, as defined by this article, earned on or after January 1,
2012, of businesses, professions, and other activities conducted by
residents in the Township; and
(4) Net profits, as defined by this article, earned on or after January 1,
2012, of businesses, professions, and other activities conducted by
nonresidents in the Township.
B. The tax levied under Subsection A(1) and (2) herein shall relate to and
be imposed upon salaries, wages, commissions, and other
compensation paid by an employer or on its behalf to any person who is
employed by or renders services to him. The tax levied under
Subsection A(3) and (4) herein shall relate to and be imposed on the net
110. Editor's Note: The "Whereas" clauses of Ord. No. 2865 make specific reference to Ord. No.
2754. Said Ord. No. 2754, adopted 12-8-2008, imposed a tax at the rate of 0.8 of 1%.
§ 24-35 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-36
23:830
§ 24-37. Declaration and payment of tax.
profits of any business, profession, or enterprise carried on by any
person as owner or as proprietor, either individually or in association
with some other person or persons.
A. Application.
(1) Income taxes shall be applicable to taxable income earned or
received based on the method of accounting used by the taxpayer
in the period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year, and the tax shall continue in force
on a calendar year or taxpayer fiscal year basis, without annual
reenactment, unless the rate of the tax is subsequently changed.
(2) For a taxpayer whose fiscal year is not a calendar year, the tax
officer shall establish deadlines for filing, reporting and payment of
taxes which provide time periods equivalent to those provided for a
calendar year taxpayer.
B. Partial domicile. The taxable income subject to tax of a taxpayer who is
domiciled in the Township for only a portion of the tax year shall be an
amount equal to the taxpayer's taxable income multiplied by a fraction,
the numerator of which is the number of calendar months during the
tax year that the individual is domiciled in the Township and the
denominator of which is 12. A taxpayer shall include in the numerator
any calendar month during which the taxpayer is domiciled for more
than half the calendar month. A day that a taxpayer's domicile changes
shall be included as a day the individual is in the new domicile and not
the old domicile. If the number of days in the calendar month in which
the individual lived in the old and new domiciles are equal, the calendar
month shall be included in calculating the number of months in the new
domicile.
C. Declaration and payment. Except as provided in Subsection C(2),
taxpayers shall declare and pay income taxes as follows:
(1) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the resident tax officer, a final return showing
the amount of taxable income received during the period beginning
January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the
current year, the total amount of tax due on the taxable income, the
amount of tax paid, the amount of tax that has been withheld under
Section 512 of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.512, and the balance of tax
due. All amounts reported shall be rounded to the nearest whole
dollar. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay
the resident tax officer the balance of the tax due or shall make
demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment. Every
taxpayer is required to file a final return showing the amount of
earned income received even if no payment is due and owing.
§ 24-36 RESERVED § 24-37
23:831
(2) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, by April 15 of the current
year, make and file with the resident tax officer a declaration of the
taxpayer's estimated net profits during the period beginning
January 1 and ending December 31 of the current year, and shall
pay to the resident tax officer in four equal quarterly installments
the tax due on the estimated net profits. The first installment shall
be paid at the time of filing the declaration, and the other
installments shall be paid on or before June 15 of the current year,
September 15 of the current year and January 15 of the succeeding
year, respectively.
(3) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of
the current year shall make and file the declaration required on or
before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the current
year or December 31 of the current year, whichever date next
follows the date on which the taxpayer first anticipates such net
profit, and shall pay to the resident tax officer in equal installments
the tax due on or before the quarterly payment dates that remain
after the filing of the declaration.
(4) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the resident tax officer a final return showing
the amount of net profits earned or received based on the method
of accounting used by the taxpayer during the period beginning
January 1 of the current year, and ending December 31 of the
current year, the total amount of tax due on the net profits and the
total amount of tax paid. At the time of filing the final return, the
taxpayer shall pay to the resident tax officer the balance of tax due
or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of
overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth
quarterly installment of the estimated tax, elect to make and file
with the resident tax officer on or before January 31 of the
succeeding year, the final return. Every taxpayer is required to file
a return showing the amount of net profits earned or received even
if no payment is due and owing.
(5) The Department, in consultation with the Department of Revenue,
shall provide by regulation for the filing of adjusted declarations of
estimated net profits and for the payments of the estimated tax in
cases where a taxpayer who has filed the declaration required
under this subsection anticipates additional net profits not
previously declared or has overestimated anticipated net profits.
(6) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file a final return as required under this subsection and
pay the tax due.
(7) Every taxpayer who receives any other taxable income not subject
to withholding under Section 512 (3) of the LTEA, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.512(3), shall make and file with the resident tax officer a
§ 24-37 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-37
23:832
§ 24-38. Withholding and remittance.
For taxable years commencing on and after January 1, 2012, income taxes
shall be withheld, remitted and reported as follows:
quarterly return on or before April 15 of the current year, June 15
of the current year, September 15 of the current year, and January
15 of the succeeding year, setting forth the aggregate amount of
taxable income not subject to withholding by the taxpayer during
the three-month periods ending March 31 of the current year,
June 30 of the current year, September 30 of the current year,
and December 31 of the current year, respectively, and subject
to income tax, together with such other information as the
Department may require. Every taxpayer filing a return shall, at
the time of filing the return, pay to the resident tax officer the
amount of income tax due. In accordance with criteria established
by the Department, the tax officer may waive the quarterly return
and payment of the income tax and permit a taxpayer to file the
receipt of taxable income on the taxpayer's annual return and pay
the income tax due on or before April 15 of the succeeding year.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse,
or other place of business within the tax collection district which
employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation, who has not
previously registered, shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer,
register with the tax officer the name and address of the employer and
such other information as the tax officer may require.
B. An employer shall require each new employee to complete a certificate
of residency form, which shall be an addendum to the Federal
Employee's Withholding Allowance Certificate (Form W-4). An employer
shall also require any employee who changes his or her address or
domicile to complete a certificate of residency form. The certificate of
residency form shall provide information to help identify the political
subdivision where an employee lives and works. Forms of certificate of
residency may be obtained by an employer from the Department upon
request by an employer.
C. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within a tax collection district that employs
one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation, shall, at the time of payment,
deduct from the compensation due each employee employed at such
place of business the greater of the employee's resident tax or the
employee's nonresident tax as released in the official register under
Section 511 of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.511.
D. Except as set forth in Subsection E, within 30 days following the end of
each calendar quarter, every employer shall file a quarterly return and
pay the amount of income taxes deducted during the preceding
§ 24-37 RESERVED § 24-38
23:833
calendar quarter to the tax officer for the place of employment of each
employee. The form shall show the name, address and Social Security
number of each employee, the compensation of the employee during
the preceding three-month period, the income tax deducted from the
employee, the political subdivision imposing the income tax upon the
employee, the total compensation of all employees during the preceding
calendar quarter, the total income tax deducted from the employees
and paid with the return and any other information prescribed by the
Department.
E. Notwithstanding Subsection D, the provisions of this subsection shall
apply if an employer has more than one place of employment in more
than one tax collection district. Within 30 days following the last day of
each month, the employer may file the return required by Subsection D
and pay the total amount of income taxes deducted from employees in
all work locations during the preceding month to the tax officer for
either the tax collection district in which the employer's payroll
operations are located or as determined by the Department. The return
and income taxes deducted shall be filed and paid electronically. The
employer must file a notice of intention to file combined returns and
make combined payments with the tax officer for each place of
employment at least one month before filing its first combined return or
making its first combined payment. This subsection shall not be
construed to change the location of an employee's place of employment
for purposes of nonresident tax liability.
F. Any employer who, for two of the preceding four quarterly periods, has
failed to deduct the proper income tax, or any part of the income tax, or
has failed to pay over the proper amount of income tax as required by
Subsection C to the tax collection district, may be required by the tax
officer to file returns and pay the income tax monthly. In such cases,
payments of income tax shall be made to the tax officer on or before the
last day of the month succeeding the month for which the income tax
was withheld.
G. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the tax officer where income taxes have been deducted and
remitted pursuant to Subsection C:
(1) An annual return showing, for the period beginning January 1 of
the current year and ending December 31 of the current year, the
total amount of compensation paid, the total amount of income tax
deducted, the total amount of income tax paid to the tax officer and
any other information prescribed by the Department.
(2) An individual withholding statement, which may be integrated with
the Federal Wage and Tax Statement (Form W-2), for each
employee employed during all or any part of the period beginning
January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the
current year, setting forth the address and Social Security number,
the amount of compensation paid to the employee during the
§ 24-38 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-38
23:834
§ 24-39. Powers and duties of tax officer.
period, the amount of income tax deducted, the amount of income
tax paid to the tax officer, the numerical code prescribed by the
Department representing the tax collection district where the
payments required by Subsections D and E were remitted and
any other information required by the Department. Every employer
shall furnish one copy of the individual withholding statement to
the employee for whom it is filed.
H. Any employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file returns and withholding statements required under this section and
pay the income tax due.
I. Except as otherwise provided in Section 511 of the LTEA, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.511, an employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to
make the deductions required by this section shall be liable for payment
of income taxes which the employer was required to withhold to the
extent that the income taxes have not been recovered from the
employee. The failure or omission of any employer to make the
deductions required by this section shall not relieve any employee from
the payment of the income tax or from complying with the requirements
for filing of declaration and returns.
A. Tax collection. In addition to any other power and duty conferred upon
a tax officer in this article or by law, it shall be the duty of the tax
officer:
(1) To collect, reconcile, administer and enforce income taxes imposed
on residents and nonresidents in the Township included in the tax
collection district.
(2) To receive and distribute income taxes and to enforce withholding
by employers located in the tax collection district.
(3) To receive income taxes distributed by tax officers for other tax
collection districts.
(4) To distribute income taxes to the Township as required by Section
513 of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.513.
(5) To comply with all regulations adopted by the Township under this
article and all resolutions, policies and procedures adopted by the
Tax Collection Committee.
(6) To invest all income taxes in the custody of the tax officer in
authorized investments, subject to the approval of the Tax
Collection Committee. The tax officer shall observe the standard of
care that would be observed by a prudent person dealing with
property of another. For the purposes of this subsection, the term
"authorized investment" shall include all of the following:
§ 24-38 RESERVED § 24-39
23:835
(a) Short-term obligations of the United States government or its
agencies or instrumentalities which are backed by the full faith
and credit of the United States or are rated in the highest
category by a nationally recognized statistical rating
organization.
(b) Deposits in savings accounts, time deposits, share accounts or
certificates of deposit of institutions insured by the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union
Share Insurance Fund, or their successor agencies, to the
extent that the accounts are insured and, for the amount above
the insured maximum, that collateral, free from other liens, for
the amount is pledged by the depository institution.
(c) Deposits in investment pools established by the State
Treasurer or established by local governments pursuant to 53
Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 23 Subch. A (relating to intergovernmental
cooperation) and related statutes, provided that the
investment pools are rated in the highest category by a
nationally recognized statistical rating organization.
(d) Repurchase agreements which are fully collateralized by
obligations of the United States government or its agencies or
instrumentalities, which are free from other liens and backed
by the full faith and credit of the United States or are rated in
the highest category by a nationally recognized statistical
rating organization.
(7) To distribute income generated from investments authorized under
Subsection A(6) as determined by the Tax Collection Committee.
B. Monthly reports. The tax officer shall, within 20 days after the end of
each month, provide a written report, on forms prescribed by the
Department, to the Secretary of the Tax Collection Committee and to
the Secretary of the Township for which taxes were collected during the
previous month. The report shall include a breakdown of all income
taxes, income generated from investments under Subsection A(6),
penalties, costs and other money received, collected, expended and
distributed for each political subdivision served by the tax officer and of
all money distributed to tax officers for other tax collection districts.
C. Overpayments. A tax officer shall refund, under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8425
(relating to refunds of overpayments) and § 8426 (relating to interest on
overpayment), on petition of and proof by the taxpayer, income taxes
paid in excess of income taxes rightfully due.
D. Bonds. Prior to initiating any official duties, each tax officer shall give
and acknowledge a bond to the appointing Tax Collection Committee as
follows:
(1) The Tax Collection Committee shall fix the amount of the bond in an
amount equal to the maximum amount of taxes that may be in the
§ 24-39 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-39
23:836
possession of the tax officer at any given time or an amount
sufficient, in combination with fiscal controls, insurance and other
risk management and loss prevention measures used by the tax
collection district, to secure the financial responsibility of the tax
officer in accordance with guidelines adopted by the Department.
The amount of the bond shall be revised annually by the Tax
Collection Committee based upon the annual examination required
under Section 505(h) of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.515(h).
(2) Each bond shall be joint and several, with one or more corporate
sureties, which shall be surety companies authorized to do business
in this commonwealth and licensed by the Insurance Department.
(3) Each bond shall be conditioned upon the completion of all of the
following by the tax officer's employees and appointees:
(a) The faithful execution of all duties required of the tax officer.
(b) The just and faithful accounting or payment over of all moneys
and balances paid to, received or held by the tax officer by
virtue of the office in accordance with law.
(c) The delivery of all tax records or other official items held in
right as the tax officer to the tax officer's successor in office.
(4) Each bond shall be taken in the name of the tax collection district
and shall be for the use of the tax collection district appointing the
tax officer, and for the use of any other political subdivision or tax
collection district for which income taxes shall be collected or
distributed in case of a breach of any conditions of the bond by the
acts or neglect of the principal on the bond.
(5) The Tax Collection Committee or any political subdivision may sue
upon the bond for the payment or distribution of income taxes.
(6) Each bond shall contain the name of the surety company bound on
the bond.
(7) The Tax Collection Committee may, upon cause shown and due
notice to the tax officer and the tax officer's sureties, require or
allow the substitution or the addition of a surety company
acceptable to the Tax Collection Committee for the purpose of
making the bond sufficient in amount, without releasing the
sureties first approved from any accrued liability or previous action
on the bond.
(8) The Tax Collection Committee shall designate the custodian of the
bond.
(9) The tax officer shall file copies of all bonds in effect with the
Township.
§ 24-39 RESERVED § 24-39
23:837
(10) A copy of all bonds in effect shall be made available upon request
and at no cost to the Department or to a tax collection district or
political subdivision seeking payment or distribution of income
taxes authorized by this article.
E. Records. It shall be the duty of the tax officer to keep a record showing
the amount of income taxes received from each taxpayer or other tax
officer, the date of receipt, the amount and date of all other moneys
received or distributed and any other information required by the
Department. All tax records shall be the property of the Township and
the tax collection district in which the taxes were collected. The tax
collection district and tax officer shall retain all tax records as directed
by the Tax Collection Committee and, when applicable, in accordance
with retention and disposition schedules established by the Local
Government Records Committee of the Pennsylvania Historical and
Museum Commission under 53 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 13, Subch. F (relating to
records). Tax records under this subsection may be retained
electronically as permitted by law.
F. Employer and taxpayer audits.
(1) In order to verify the accuracy of any income tax declaration or
return or, if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the
income tax due, the tax officer and the tax officer's designated
employees may examine or audit the records pertaining to income
taxes due of any of the following:
(a) An employer;
(b) A taxpayer; and/or
(c) A person whom the tax officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer.
(2) The examination or audit conducted by the tax officer and the tax
officer's designated employees shall conform to the requirements
set forth in the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421
et seq.
(3) Every employer and taxpayer or other person whom the tax officer
reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer shall provide to
the tax officer and the tax officer's designated employees the
means, facilities and opportunity for the examination and
investigation authorized under Subsection F(1).
(4) For purposes of this subsection, the term "records" shall include
any books, papers and relevant federal or state tax returns and
accompanying schedules, or supporting documentation for any
income taxable under this article.
G. Exchange of information.
§ 24-39 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-39
23:838
(1) The tax officer shall ensure that the tax collection district enters
into an agreement with the Department of Revenue for the
exchange of information as necessary for the collection of income
taxes.
(2) The Department of Revenue may enter into agreements with each
tax collection district and shall establish procedures under which
tax collection, filing and other taxpayer and locality information in
its custody will be made available to tax officers for purposes of
collection, reconciliation and enforcement no later than one year
after the deadline for filing returns for the tax year in question.
H. Actions for collection of income taxes. The tax officer may file an action
in the name of the Township for the recovery of income taxes due to the
Township and unpaid. Nothing in this subsection shall affect the
authority of the Township to file an action in its own name for collection
of income taxes under this article. This subsection shall not be
construed to limit a tax officer, a tax collection district or the Township
from recovering delinquent income taxes by any other means provided
by this article or by law. Actions for collection of income taxes shall be
subject to the following:
(1) Except as set forth in Subsection H(2) or (4), an action brought to
recover income taxes must be commenced within three years of the
later of the date:
(a) The income taxes are due;
(b) The declaration or return has been filed; or
(c) Of a redetermination of compensation or net profits by the
Department of Revenue.
(2) If there is substantial understatement of income tax liability of 25%
or more and there is no fraud, an action must be commenced within
six years.
(3) Except as set forth in Subsection H(4)(b), (c) or (d), an action by a
tax officer for recovery of an erroneous refund must be commenced
as follows:
(a) Except as set forth in Subsection H(3)(b), within two years
after making the refund.
(b) If it appears that any part of the refund was induced by fraud
or misrepresentation of material fact, within five years after
making the refund.
(4) There is no limitation of action if any of the following apply:
(a) A taxpayer fails to file a declaration or return required under
this article.
§ 24-39 RESERVED § 24-39
23:839
(b) An examination of a declaration or return or of other evidence
in the possession of the tax officer relating to the declaration or
return reveals a fraudulent evasion of income taxes.
(c) An employer has deducted income taxes under Section 512 of
the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.512, and has failed to pay the amount
deducted by the tax officer.
(d) An employer has intentionally failed to make deductions
required by this article.
I. Interest and penalties.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection I(2), if the income tax is not paid
when due, interest at the rate the taxpayer is required to pay to the
commonwealth under Section 806 of the act of April 9, 1929 (P.L.
343, No. 176), known as the "Fiscal Code," 72 P.S. § 806, on the
amount of the income tax, and an additional penalty of 1% of the
amount of the unpaid income tax for each month or fraction of a
month during which the income tax remains unpaid shall be added
and collected but the amount shall not exceed 15% in the
aggregate. Where an action is brought for the recovery of the
income tax, the taxpayer liable for the income tax shall, in addition,
be liable for the costs of collection, interest and penalties.
(2) The Department may establish conditions under which a tax officer,
with the concurrence of the Tax Collection Committee, may abate
interest or penalties that would otherwise be imposed for the
nonreporting or underreporting of income tax liabilities or for the
nonpayment of income taxes previously imposed and due if the
taxpayer voluntarily files delinquent returns and pays the income
taxes in full.
(3) The provisions of Subsection I(2) shall not affect or terminate any
petitions, investigations, prosecutions or other proceedings
pending under this article, or prevent the commencement or
further prosecution of any proceedings by the proper authorities
for violations of this article. No proceedings shall, however, be
commenced on the basis of delinquent returns filed pursuant to
Subsection H if the returns are determined to be substantially true
and correct and the income taxes are paid in full within the
prescribed time.
J. Fines and penalties for violations.
(1) Any taxpayer who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration
or return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects
or refuses to register, keep or supply records or returns required by
Section 512 of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.512, or to pay the income
tax deducted from employees, or fails, neglects or refuses to deduct
or withhold the income tax from employees, any taxpayer or
employer who refuses to permit the tax officer appointed by a Tax
§ 24-39 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-39
23:840
Collection Committee or an employee or agent of the tax officer to
examine books, records and papers, and any taxpayer or employer
who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return,
or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure
of the amount of income in order to avoid the payment of income
taxes shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $2,500 for each offense and reasonable costs, and in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to imprisonment for not
more than six months.
(2) Any employer required under this article to collect, account for and
distribute income taxes who willfully fails to collect or truthfully
account for and distribute income taxes, commits a misdemeanor
and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$25,000 or to imprisonment not exceeding two years, or both.
(3) The penalties imposed under this subsection shall be in addition to
any other costs and penalties imposed by this article.
(4) The failure of any person to obtain forms required for making the
declaration or returns required by this article shall not excuse the
person from making the declaration or return.
K. Costs. The tax officer shall be entitled to impose and collect the
reasonable costs incurred to provide notices of delinquency or to
implement similar procedures utilized to collect delinquent taxes from a
taxpayer as approved by the Tax Collection Committee. Reasonable
costs collected may be retained by the tax officer. An itemized
accounting of all costs collected shall be remitted to the Tax Collection
Committee on an annual basis.
L. Appeals and tax officer actions. A determination of the tax officer
relating to the assessment, collection, refund, withholding, remittance
or distribution of income taxes may be appealed to the appeals board
established by the Tax Collection Committee by a taxpayer, employer,
political subdivision or another tax collection district pursuant to the
provisions of Section 505(j) of Act 32, 53 PS § 6924.505(j). Pursuant to
Section 505(k) of Act 32, 53 P.S. § 6924.515(k), any dispute among the
affected parties involving a ten-percent or greater deviation from taxes
received in the previous tax year shall be subject to mandatory
mediation in accordance with regulations and guidelines adopted by
the Department. A dispute involving less than a ten-percent threshold
may be the subject of voluntary mediation in accordance with
regulations and guidelines adopted by the Department.
M. Confidentiality.
(1) General rule. Any information gained by a tax officer or any
employee or agent of a tax officer or of the Tax Collection
Committee as a result of any declarations, returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications shall be confidential tax information.
§ 24-39 RESERVED § 24-39
23:841
§ 24-40. Compensation of income tax officer.
The tax officer shall receive such compensation for his services and
expenses as determined by the Tax Collection Committee. At the discretion
of the Tax Collection Committee, the tax officer may be permitted to
withhold the amount of the tax officer's compensation from income taxes
collected if the monthly reports required by section 509(b) of the LTEA,
submitted by the tax officer include an accounting for all compensation
withheld.
§ 24-41. Applicability.
(2) Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful, except for official purposes
or as provided by law, for the commonwealth, the Township, Tax
Collection Committee member, tax officer or employee or agent of a
tax officer or Tax Collection Committee to do any of the following:
(a) Divulge or make known confidential tax information.
(b) Permit confidential tax information or a book containing an
abstract or particulars of the abstract to be seen or examined
by any person.
(c) Print, publish or otherwise make known any confidential tax
information.
(3) Penalties. A person who violates Subsection M(2) commits a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $2,500 or to imprisonment
for not more than one year, or both. If the offender is a member of
the Tax Collection Committee, the member shall be removed from
the Tax Collection Committee. If the offender is an employee of a
Tax Collection Committee or the Township, the employee shall be
discharged from employment. The offender shall pay the costs of
prosecution.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall not apply:
(1) To any person as to whom it is beyond the legal power of the
Township to impose the tax herein provided under the Constitution
of the United States and the Constitution and laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) To institutions or organizations operated for public, religious,
educational, or charitable purposes, to institutions or organizations
not organized or operated for private profit, or to trusts and
foundations established for any of the said purposes.
B. This section shall not be construed to exempt any person who is an
employer from the duty of collecting the tax from his employees and
paying the amount collected to the tax officer under the provisions of
§ 24-38 of this article.
§ 24-39 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-42
23:842
§ 24-42. Effective date; repealer; statutory authority.
§ 24-43. through § 24-47. (Reserved)
A. The provisions of this article shall take effect on January 1, 2012, and
shall apply to earned income and net profits received or earned income
and net profits earned or made by a taxpayer during calendar year 2012
and each year thereafter without annual reenactment unless the rate of
tax is subsequently changed. Changes in the rate of tax shall become
effective on the date specified in the ordinance.
B. Nothing contained herein shall be considered to repeal by implication
or otherwise the provisions of any earned income and net profits tax
Ordinance(s) previously enacted as it may apply to earned income and
net profits of taxpayers prior to the effective date of this article, which
shall remain in full force and effect with respect to such earned income
and net profits.
C. Subject to valid enactment of this article without appeal, all provisions
of any prior ordinance or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby
modified, amended, and repealed by the provisions of this article, which
shall thereafter govern the taxation of such earned income and net
profits.
D. This article is enacted under authority of the LTEA, and all provisions
thereof that relate to a tax on earned income and net profits are
incorporated into this article. Any future amendments to the LTEA that
are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will
automatically become part of this article upon the effective date of such
amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this article, to
the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
§ 24-42 RESERVED § 24-43
23:843

ARTICLE IV
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-12-2007 by Ord. No. 2700]
§ 24-48. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Whitehall Township Local Services Tax
Ordinance."
§ 24-48.1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
COMPENSATION — Salaries, wages, commissions, tips, bonuses, fees,
gross receipts, or any other earned income.
EMPLOYEE — A person employed by an employer, a self-employed person
and a partner or member of any employer which is a partnership, limited
partnership, unincorporated association, institution, trust, corporation,
governmental agency or other unincorporated entity.
EMPLOYER — Any person, partnership, limited partnership,
unincorporated association, institution, trust, corporation, governmental
agency, and any other body engaged in business or situated in the Township
employing one or more employees engaged in an occupation other than
domestic service.
HE, HIS, or HIM — Shall include the singular and plural number and the
masculine, feminine and neuter gender.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation
within the Township.
MILITARY SERVICE - CONNECTED DISABILITY — A military service
connected disability declared by the United States Veterans' Administration
or its successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on
or performed within the Township for which compensation is charged or
received, whether by means of salary, wages, commission, fees for services
rendered or other means. An individual may have more than one
occupation.
RESERVE UNIT OF THE ARMED FORCES — The United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve,
United States Coast Guard Reserve, the United States Air Force Reserve,
the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National
Guard.
TAX — The Local Services Tax imposed hereunder.
TAXPAYER — Any natural person liable for the tax levied by this article.
§ 24-48 RESERVED § 24-48.1
23:845
TAX YEAR — Such period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive; a
calendar year.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Whitehall, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
Whenever the term is used in a geographical sense, it shall mean the area
within the limits of the Township of Whitehall, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
TREASURER — The Treasurer of the Township of Whitehall.
§ 24-48.2. Levy of tax.
A local services tax is levied pursuant to this article for the period January
1 through December 31 for the purposes of supplementing the funds for
police, fire and emergency services, road construction and/or maintenance;
or reduction of property taxes. This tax is levied for the privilege of
engaging in an occupation within the Township in the year after the
effective date of this article and each following calendar year. It shall
be paid over to the Treasurer as set forth herein. Each natural person
who exercises such privilege for any length of time in any calendar year
beginning with the year as of the effective date of this article shall pay a
tax in the amount not to exceed $52 in accordance with the provisions of
§ 24-48.2.
§ 24-48.3. Exemptions.
A. The following persons shall be exempt from the local services tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year.
(3) Any person whose total earned income and net profits from all
sources within the Township is less than $12,000 for the calendar
year in which the local services tax is levied.
B. A person seeking to claim an exemption from the tax levied herein may
annually file an exemption certificate with the Township and with the
person's employer affirming that the person is eligible for exemption
under this section. The exemption certificate will be provided to the
Treasurer through the person's employer for the fiscal year for which
the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax hereby levied.
For those persons who reasonably expect to receive earned income and
net profits from all sources within the Township of less than $12,000 in
the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is filed, the
exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of all the
employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment within the
§ 24-48.1 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-48.3
23:846
§ 24-48.4. Amount of tax.
Township for the year prior to the fiscal year for which the employee
is requesting to be exempted. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate
by the Treasurer, the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the year or the remainder of the calendar year for
which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall insure that the
exemption certificate forms are readily available to employees at all
times and shall furnish each new employee with the form at the time
of hiring. If the person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar
year from the local services tax becomes subject to the tax for the
calendar year, the employer shall withhold the tax for the remainder
of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from the person,
for the first payroll period after receipt of notification of ineligibility
for the exemption a lump sum equal to the amount of tax that was
not withheld from the person due to the exemption claimed by the
person plus the per payroll amount due for that first payroll period.
The amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll
periods in that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for
other employees. In any event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax is subsequently severed in that calendar year, the
person shall be liable for any outstanding balance of tax due and the
Township can pursue collection under this article. It is the intention of
this subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exempt eligibility or exempting
any employee from the local services tax.
A. The Local Services Tax will be collected as a payroll deduction from all
employees and will be reported and remitted as set forth herein. The
tax must be deducted on a per payroll basis and the employer shall be
required to withhold the tax based on the frequency of the employee's
payroll schedule. This shall be determined as the tax rate $52 divided
by the number of payroll periods in the year. In so far as the tax rate is
$52, the effective rate of withholding shall not exceed $1 per week. An
individual shall be subject and liable to the tax on a per payroll basis,
i.e., only for those periods actually employed. For purposes of this tax,
sole proprietors and partners shall be deemed to be employees.
B. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment determined as of
the day the person first becomes subject to the tax during the calendar
year. In the event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that
is concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order: first the political subdivision in which a person
maintains the person's principal office or is principally employed;
second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and works,
if the tax is levied by that political subdivision and third, the political
subdivision in which a person is employed and which imposes the tax
nearest in miles to the person's home. In the case of concurrent
§ 24-48.3 RESERVED § 24-48.4
23:847
§ 24-48.5. Duty of employers to collect tax.
Each employer within the Township and each employer situated outside
the Township but who engages in business within the Township is hereby
charged with the duty of collecting from each of his employees performing
an occupation for him within the Township, the local services tax required to
be paid by such employees for each tax year. Each such employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax from the compensation paid to each such
employee, whether said employee is paid by salary, wages, commissions, or
other means, and whether all or only a part of such services are performed
within the Township. An employer who deducts the tax from an employee's
compensation shall deliver evidence of the deduction to the employee on a
form furnished to the employer by the Treasurer. If an employer shall fail
to collect the tax from an employee, he/she shall nonetheless be responsible
for the payment of the tax in full, as though the tax had originally been
levied against him/her.
§ 24-48.6. Returns.
Each employer described in § 24-48.5 of this article shall prepare and file
periodic returns showing a computation of the local services tax required to
be collected by the employer on forms supplied to him by the Treasurer.
employment, an employer shall refrain from withholding the local
services tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement from a
principal employer and includes the name of the employer, the length
of the payroll period and the amount of the local services tax withheld
and a statement from the employee that the payment statement is from
the employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence.
C. No person shall pay more than $52 in any calendar year irrespective of
the number of municipalities within which each person may be
employed. A municipality shall provide a taxpayer a receipt of payment
upon request by the Taxpayer.
A. The returns shall be filed in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) A return shall be filed on or before April 15 of each tax year which
calculates the local services tax required to be collected by the
employer from employees who first became subject to the tax for
such tax year between January 1 and March 31 of such tax year,
inclusive.
(2) A return shall be filed on or before July 15 of each tax year which
calculates the local services tax required to be collected by the
employer from employees who first became subject to the tax for
such tax year between April 1 and June 30 of such tax year,
inclusive.
§ 24-48.4 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-48.6
23:848
§ 24-48.7. Payment.
Payment of the amount required to be shown on any return required to be
filed pursuant to § 24-48.6 of this article shall be due and payable on the
due date of such return.
§ 24-48.8. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation.
Each individual who shall have more than one occupation within the
Township during any given tax year shall be subject to the payment of
the local services tax for such tax year only with respect to his principal
occupation. Once an employer deducts the tax due for any tax year from
the compensation of an individual, any other employer is authorized to
not deduct the tax from such individual's compensation upon presentation
of the evidence of deduction form received by the individual from the
first employer. However, the other employer must include the following
information on his local services tax return for the period when the
(3) A return shall be filed on or before October 15 of each tax year
which calculates the local services tax required to be collected by
the employer from employees who first became subject to the tax
for such tax year between July 1 and September 31 of such tax year,
inclusive.
(4) A return shall be filed on or before January 15 of each tax year
which calculates the local services tax required to be collected by
the employer from employees who first became subject to the tax
for such tax year between October 1 and December 31 of such tax
year, inclusive.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no employer shall be required to file
any return specified in Subsection A(1) through (4) if none of his
employees first became subject to the tax for a given tax year during the
period of the report and none of his employees need be reported on
such return under the provisions of § 24-48.8 of this article.
C. Any employer who discontinues business or ceases operation before
December 31 of any year during which this tax is in effect, shall file the
return hereinabove required and pay the tax to the Treasurer within 15
days after discontinuing business or ceasing operations.
D. The failure of any employer to deduct the tax shall not relieve the
employee from the duty to file a return and pay the tax. Any employer
who fails to deduct the tax as required by this section, or who fails to
pay such tax to the Treasurer, shall be liable for such tax in full, as
though the tax had originally been levied against such employer.
E. As to employees who present official receipts evidencing prior payment
of the tax imposed hereby either directly or by collection through
employers, the employer shall not deduct the tax but shall maintain
adequate records concerning such employees.
§ 24-48.6 RESERVED § 24-48.8
23:849
individual first became his employee: the individual's name, address and
the name and account number of the employer who issued the evidence of
deduction forms.
§ 24-48.9. Self-employed individuals.
All self-employed individuals who engage in any occupation within the
Township during any given tax year shall be required to comply with the
provision of this article, and file returns and pay the local services tax
consistent with §§ 24-48.6 and 24-48.7.
§ 24-48.10. Employers and self-employed individuals residing
outside Township.
All employers or self-employed individuals residing or having their principal
place of business outside of the Township, but who perform services of any
type or kind, or engage in any business, occupation or profession within the
Township, do by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject themselves
to the provisions, penalties and regulation promulgated under this article
with the same force and effect as if they were residents of the Township. In
the event that such an employer fails to collect and pay the local services
tax for any given tax year with respect to any of his employees who are
engaged in an occupation within the Township, the Township shall have the
option of collecting the tax from the employer or treating the employees as
self-employed persons and collecting the tax directly from the employees.
§ 24-48.11. Duties and powers of Treasurer.
A. The Treasurer is charged with the duties of collecting and receiving the
taxes, additions and penalties imposed under this article. It shall be his
duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him from each
employer or self-employed person remitting the tax and the date of such
receipt. The Treasurer shall prescribe and issue all forms necessary for
the administration of the tax.
B. The Treasurer is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby authorized, with the approval
of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Whitehall, to
prescribe, adopt and promulgate additional rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement
of this article, including provisions for the examination of the payroll
records of any employer subject to this article, the examination and
correction of any return hereunder and any payments alleged or found
to be incorrect or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to
have occurred.
C. The Treasurer is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and
records of any employer he believes may be subject to collect or pay the
tax imposed by this article in order to verify the accuracy of any returns
made, or to ascertain the tax due for any period in which no return was
§ 24-48.8 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-48.11
23:850
§ 24-48.12. Penalties for late payment.
If for any reason, the local services tax imposed under this article is not paid
on or before the date it is due, the amount of tax due shall be increased by
10% plus an additional 1% per month or fractional part of a month from the
date due until the tax is paid in full.
§ 24-48.13. Suits for enforcement of tax.
§ 24-48.14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall make a false or untrue statement on any return
required under this article, or who shall refuse inspection of books, records
or accounts in his custody or control setting forth the number of employees
subject to the local services tax, or who shall fail or refuse to file any
return required under this article, or who shall be the person in charge of
the business of any employer who has failed or refused to file any return
required under this article shall, upon conviction therefor, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 24-48.15. Limitations on powers of Township.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Township to levy and collect the local services tax on any occupation to
the extent that such action is not within the taxing power of the Township
under the Constitution and laws of the United States and Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. If the local services tax, or any portion thereof, imposed upon
any person under the provisions of this article shall be held by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution or laws of the
made. Each employer is hereby obligated to give the Treasurer the
means, facilities and opportunity for such an examination.
D. The Treasurer is required to adopt regulations for the processing of
refund applications in the event a person qualified for exemption from
the tax, or has had in excess of the amount of tax authorized withheld.
E. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Treasurer shall have the
right to appeal to the Tax Appeals Board, as described in this chapter.
A. The Treasurer shall have the power in the name of the Township to
institute proceedings against any and all persons who violate the
provisions of this article. An action for the collection of any local
services tax shall not be instituted prior to 30 days after the due date of
said tax.
B. If for any reason the local services tax is not paid when due and suit is
brought for the recovery of any such tax, and any additions and
penalties, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the
costs of collection, and attorney fees.
§ 24-48.11 RESERVED § 24-48.15
23:851
United States or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as to such individual,
the decisions of the court shall not affect or impair the Township's right to
impose taxes, or the validity of the taxes so imposed, upon other persons as
herein provided.
§ 24-48.16. Repealer.
Except as set forth hereafter, all ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. Nothing herein shall be
construed to repeal the imposition and collection of an occupational
privilege tax, plus applicable penalties and interest, for calendar year 2006
and all prior calendar years, or of an emergency and municipal services tax
for calendar year 2007, as the same existed prior to this amendment.
§ 24-48.17. Effective date.
The tax imposed by this article shall be effective on January 1, 2008, and all
calendar years thereafter unless repealed or modified by ordinance of the
Township Commissioners.
§ 24-48.18. Saving clause.
In all other respects, Chapter 24, Part 4, Taxation, of the Code of Ordinances
of the Township of Whitehall remain as heretofore enacted, ordained and
amended, which said chapter, as amended, is hereby reenacted in its
entirety herein.
§ 24-48.15 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-48.18
23:852
ARTICLE V
Per Capita
[Adopted 1-11-1982 by Ord. No. 1393]
§ 24-49. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Per Capita Tax" of the
Township of Whitehall.
§ 24-50. Authority.
This article is hereby enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling
Act, Act of 1965, December 31, P.L. 1257, as amended.
§ 24-51. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
INHABITANT — Any person domiciled in the Township of Whitehall.
PERSON — Any natural person.
RESIDENCE — The act or fact of living within the boundaries of the
Township of Whitehall.
TAXPAYER — Any person required hereunder to pay a per capita tax.
§ 24-52. Tax rate imposed.
In addition to other taxes provided for by ordinances of the Township, there
is hereby imposed for general revenue purposes, an annual per capita tax of
$5 upon every inhabitant of the Township who is 18 years of age and over.
§ 24-53. Exonerations. [Added 6-13-1988 by Ord. No. 1615;
amended 11-28-1988 by Ord. No. 1634]
The following persons shall be deemed exonerated from the obligation to
pay per capita taxes to Whitehall Township:
A. Adult individuals aged 72 and older, as of December 31 of the prior
calendar year.
B. Individuals whose income from all sources is less than $5,000 per year
and are:
(1) Adult individuals between the ages of 62 and 71 years, as of
December 31 of the prior calendar year, inclusive.
(2) Widows and widowers age 50 and older, as of December 31 of the
prior calendar year.
§ 24-49 RESERVED § 24-53
23:853
§ 24-54. Notice of tax due.
The per capita tax shall be collected by the Township Treasurer. The
Township shall annually send every inhabitant of the Township who is 18
years of age and over a notice of the per capita tax due by such inhabitant
for the current year, however, the failure or omission of the Township to
send, or of any taxpayer to receive, such notice shall not relieve such person
from the payment of the per capita tax.
§ 24-55. Discount and penalty. [Adopted 5-22-1988 by Ord. No.
1529]
(3) Persons permanently and totally disabled, as determined utilizing
criteria developed or hereinafter to be developed by the Social
Security Administration.
(4) Persons deemed legally blind, in accordance with appropriate
social security criteria.
A. All taxpayers subject to the payment of the tax under this article shall
be entitled to a discount of 2% on the amount of such tax upon making
payment of the whole amount thereof within two months after the date
of the tax notice. All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of any
such taxes imposed against them by this article for four months after
the date of the notice shall be charged a penalty of 10%, which shall be
added to the taxes by the Township Treasurer and collected by same.
The Township Treasurer shall furnish a receipt to every person paying
such tax.
B. Every owner of mobile home facilities and multifamily dwelling units
shall file a list of all taxpayers residing therein with the Township
Treasurer on or before April 15 of each year. The list shall include the
name, post office address (including apartment number), and Social
Security number of each taxpayer, and shall be accurate as of April 1 of
such year. In addition to the annual list, every owner of mobile home
facilities and multifamily dwelling units shall file a supplemental list
with the Township Treasurer on or before the 15th day of each month
(except April) indicating all tenancy changes which have occurred
through the first day of the month. All lists required under this
subsection shall be filed on forms provided by the Township Treasurer.
C. Every owner of mobile home facilities and multifamily dwelling units
who fails to file timely and accurate tenant lists under Subsection B
above shall be liable for all amounts that were not billed to tenants by
the Township Treasurer but which would have been so billed if timely
and accurate tenant lists had been filed. The penalties provided by this
subsection shall be in addition to any other penalties authorized by this
article.
§ 24-53 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-56
23:854
§ 24-56. Collection.
All taxes levied under this article, together with all penalties, shall be
recoverable by the Township Treasurer in the manner authorized by law in
the case of a per capita tax within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 24-57. Penalties. [Amended 10-17-1995 by Ord. No. 1944;
8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 24-58. Refunds. [Added 12-27-1990 by Ord. No. 1717]
The Township Treasurer is hereby instructed to promulgate appropriate
forms and adopt reasonable regulations to effectuate the provisions of
this enactment, including requiring proof of age and income. Refunds for
per capita taxes shall be restricted solely to the current year tax or fee
and shall not be applied to payment of prior year assessments under any
circumstances.
§ 24-56 RESERVED § 24-58
23:855

ARTICLE VI
Real Estate Tax; Penalties and Exemptions
[Adopted 10-30-1978 by Ord. No. 1279]
§ 24-59. Penalty for nonpayment.
The Tax Collector of real estate taxes for the Township of Whitehall, County
of Lehigh, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, shall, commencing with the
taxable year beginning January 1, 1979, and each year thereafter, impose a
penalty of 10% on all taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of any real
estate taxes which remain due and unpaid for four months after the date
of the tax notice, said penalty shall be added to the taxes due and shall be
collected by the Tax Collector.
§ 24-59 RESERVED § 24-59
23:857

ARTICLE VII
Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted 3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 2144]
§ 24-60. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this section shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
ASSESSMENT — The determination of the Township of the amount of
underpayment by a taxpayer.
BOARD — A Board of Local Tax Appeals established under § 24-68 (relating
to administrative appeals).
ELIGIBLE TAX — Any of the following, including interest and penalty
provided by law, when levied by a political subdivision:
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of
Whitehall.
LOCAL TAXING AUTHORITY — The Township of Whitehall, including any
officer, agent, agency, clerk, income tax officer, collector, employee or other
person to whom the governing body has assigned responsibility of the audit,
assessment, determination or administration of an eligible tax.
OVERPAYMENT — Any payment of tax which is determined in the manner
provided by law not to be legally due.
TAXPAYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, estate, trust, trustee, fiduciary or any other entity subject
to or claiming exemption from any eligible tax or under a duty to perform
an act for itself or for another under or pursuant to the authority of an act
provided for an eligible tax.
Any tax authorized or permitted under the act of December 31, 1965
(P.L. 1257, No. 511, known as the "Local Enabling Act").
A.
B. Any per capita tax levied under any act.
Any occupation, occupation assessment or occupation privilege tax
levied under any act.
C.
D. Any tax on income levied under any act.
E. Any tax measured by gross receipts levied under any act.
F. Any tax on a privilege levied under any act.
G. Any tax on amusements or admissions levied under any act.
H. Any tax on earned income and net profits.
§ 24-60 RESERVED § 24-60
23:859
UNDERPAYMENT — The amount or portion of any tax determined to be
legally due in the manner provided by law for which payment or remittance
has not been made.
VOLUNTARY PAYMENT — A payment of an eligible tax made pursuant to
the free will of the taxpayer. The term does not include a payment made
as a result of distraint or levy or pursuant to a legal proceeding in which
the Township of Whitehall is seeking to collect its delinquent taxes or file a
claim therefor.
§ 24-61. Disclosure statement.
§ 24-62. Requirements for requests.
A. Statement. The Township of Whitehall shall prepare a statement which
sets forth in simple and nontechnical terms:
(1) The rights of a taxpayer and the obligation of the Township of
Whitehall during an audit or an administrative review of the
taxpayer's books or records.
(2) The administrative and judicial procedures by which a taxpayer
may appeal or seek review of any adverse decision of the Township
of Whitehall.
(3) The procedure for filing and processing refund claims and
taxpayers complaints.
(4) The enforcement of procedures.
B. Distribution. The Township of Whitehall shall notify any taxpayer
connected regarding the assessment, audit, determination, review or
collection of an eligible tax of the availability of the statement under
Subsection A. The Township of Whitehall shall make copies of the
statement available to taxpayers upon request at no charge to the
taxpayer, including mailing costs. The notification shall be stated as
follows:
"You are entitled to receive a written explanation of your rights with
regard to the audit, appeal, enforcement, refund and collection of local
taxes by calling the Township of Whitehall at (610) 437-5524 during
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m."
A. Minimum time periods for taxpayer response.
(1) The taxpayer shall have 30 calendar days from the mailing date to
respond to requests for information by the Township of Whitehall.
The Township shall grant additional reasonable extensions upon
application for good cause.
(2) The Township of Whitehall shall notify the taxpayer of the
procedure to obtain an extension in its initial request.
§ 24-60 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-62
23:860
§ 24-63. Refunds of overpayments.
(3) The Township of Whitehall shall take no lawful action against a
taxpayer for the tax year in question until the expiration of the
applicable response period, including extensions.
B. Requests for prior year returns.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), an initial inquiry by the
Township of Whitehall regarding a taxpayers compliance with any
eligible tax may include taxes required to be paid or tax returns
required to be filed no more than three years prior to the mailing
date of the notice.
(2) The Township of Whitehall may make a subsequent request for a
tax return or supporting information if, after the initial request, the
local taxing authority determines that the taxpayer filed to file a tax
return, under reported income or failed to pay a tax for one or more
of the tax periods covered by the initial request. This subsection
shall not apply if the Township or Whitehall has sufficient
information to indicate that the taxpayer failed to file a required
return or pay an eligible tax which was due more three years prior
to the date of the notice.
C. Use of federal tax information. The Township of Whitehall may require a
taxpayer to provide copies of the taxpayer's Federal individual income
tax return in the Township can demonstrate that the Federal tax
information is reasonably necessary for the enforcement or collection of
an eligible tax and the information is not available from other available
sources or the Department of Revenue.
A. General rule. A taxpayer who has paid an eligible tax to the Township of
Whitehall may file a written request with the Township for refund or
credit of the eligible tax. A request for a refund shall be made within
three years of the due date for filing the report as extended or one year
after the actual payment of the eligible tax, whichever is later. If no
report is required, the request shall be made within three years after
the due date for payment of the eligible tax, or within one year after the
actual payment of the eligible tax, whichever is later.
(1) For purposes of this section, a tax return filed by the taxpayer with
the Township of Whitehall showing an overpayment of tax shall be
deemed to be a written request for a cash refund unless otherwise
indicated on the tax return.
(2) A request for refund under this section shall not be considered a
petition under § 24-68 (relating to administrative appeals) and shall
not preclude a taxpayer from submitting a petition under § 24-69
(relating to petitions).
B. Notice of underpayment. For amounts paid as a result of a notice
asserting or informing a taxpayer of an underpayment, a written
§ 24-62 RESERVED § 24-63
23:861
§ 24-64. Interest on overpayment.
request for refund shall be filed with the Township of Whitehall within
one year of the date of the payment.
A. General rule. All overpayments of tax due the Township of Whitehall,
including taxes on real property, shall bear simple interest from the
date of overpayment until the date of resolution.
B. Interest rate. Interest on overpayments shall be allowed and paid at the
same rate as the Commonwealth is required to pay pursuant to § 806.1
of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176), known as the "Fiscal
Code."
C. Exceptions.
(1) No interest shall be allowed if an overpayment is refunded or
applied against any other tax, interest or penalty due to the
Township of Whitehall within 75 days after the last date prescribed
for filing the report of tax liability or within 75 days after the date
the return or report of the liability due is filed, whichever is later.
(2) Overpayments of interest or penalty shall not bear any interest.
D. Acceptance of refund check. The taxpayer's acceptance of the Township
of Whitehall's check shall not prejudice any right of the taxpayer to
claim any additional overpayment and interest thereon. Tender of a
refund check by the Township of Whitehall shall be deemed to be
acceptance of the check by the taxpayer for purposes of this section.
E. Definitions.
DATE OF OVERPAYMENT — The later of the date paid or the date tax
is deemed to have been overpaid as follows:
Any tax actually deducted and withheld at the source shall be
deemed to have been overpaid on the last day for filing the report
for the tax period, determined without regard to any extension of
time for filing.
(1)
Any amount overpaid as estimated tax for the tax period shall
be deemed to have been overpaid on the last day for filing the
final report for the tax period, determined without regard to any
extension of time for filing.
(2)
An overpayment made before the last day prescribed for payment
shall be deemed to have been paid on the last day.
(3)
Any amount claimed to be overpaid with respect to which a lawful
administrative review or appellate procedure is initiated, shall be
deemed to have been overpaid 60 days following the date of filing
of the amended income tax return.
(4)
§ 24-63 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-64
23:862
§ 24-65. Notice of basis of underpayment.
The Township of Whitehall shall notify the taxpayer in writing of the basis of
any underpayment that the Township of Whitehall has determined to exist.
The notification shall include:
§ 24-66. Abatement of certain interest and penalty.
DATE OF RESOLUTION — The date the overpayment is refunded or
credited as follows:
Any amount shown not to be due on an amended income or earned
income and net profits tax return shall be deemed to have been
overpaid with respect to which a lawful administrative review or
appellate procedure is initiated, shall be deemed to have been
overpaid 60 days following the date of filing of the amended income
tax return.
(5)
For a cash refund, a date preceding the date of the Township of
Whitehall's refund by check by not more than 30 days.
(1)
For credit of an overpayment:
The date of the Township of Whitehall's notice to the taxpayer
of the determination of the credit.
(a)
The due date for payment of the tax against which the credit
is applied, whichever first occurs. For a cash refund of a
previously determined credit, interest shall be paid on the
amount of the credit from a date 90 days after the filing of
a request to convert the credit to a cash refund to a date
preceding the date of the refund check by not more than
30 days whether or not the refund check is accepted by the
taxpayer after tender.
(b)
(2)
A. The tax period or periods for which the underpayment is asserted.
B. The amount of the underpayment detailed by the tax period.
C. The legal basis upon which the Township of Whitehall has relied to
determine that an underpayment exists.
D. An itemization of the revisions made by the Township of Whitehall to a
return or report filed by the taxpayer that results in the determination
that an underpayment exists.
A. Errors and delay. In the case of any underpayment, the Township of
Whitehall may abate all or any part of interest for any period for the
following:
(1) Any underpayment or tax finally determined to be due attributable
in whole or in part to any error or delay by the Township of
Whitehall in performance of a ministerial act. For purposes of this
§ 24-64 RESERVED § 24-66
23:863
§ 24-67. Application of payments.
Unless otherwise specified by the taxpayer, all voluntary payments of an
eligible tax shall be prioritized by the Township of Whitehall as follows:
§ 24-68. Administrative appeals. [Adopted 4-14-2003 by Ord. No.
2405]
paragraph, an error or delay shall be taken into account only if
no significant aspect or the error or delay can be attributed to
the taxpayer and after the Township has contacted the taxpayer in
writing with respect to the underpayment of tax finally determined
to be due or payable.
(2) Any payment of a tax to the extent that any error or delay in the
payment is attributable to an officer, employee or agent of the
Township of Whitehall being erroneous or dilatory in performance
of a ministerial act. The Township shall determine what constitutes
timely performance of ministerial acts performed under this article.
B. Abatement due to erroneous written advice by Township of Whitehall.
(1) The Township of Whitehall shall abate any portion of any penalty or
excess interest attributable to erroneous advice furnished to the
taxpayer in writing by any officer, employee or agent of the
Township acting in the officers, employee's or agent's official
capacity if:
(a) The written advice was reasonably relied upon by the taxpayer
and was in response to specific written request of the taxpayer.
(b) The portion of the penalty or addition to tax or excess interest
did not result from a failure by the taxpayer to provide
adequate or accurate information.
(2) This subsection shall not be construed to require the Township of
Whitehall to provide written advice to taxpayers.
A. Tax.
B. Interest.
C. Penalty.
D. Any other fees or charges.
A. The Township of Whitehall, as the political subdivision levying an
eligible tax hereby establishes a Local Tax Appeals Board appointed by
the Board of Commissioners. The Board shall consist of three members.
Qualifications for service on the Board of the members shall be
determined by the Board of Commissioners. Members of the Board
shall not be compensated for serving on the board. The Board of
§ 24-66 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-68
23:864
§ 24-69. Petitions.
§ 24-70. Practice and procedure.
Practice and procedure under this article shall not be governed by 2 Pa.C.S.,
Chapter 5, Subchapter B (relating to judicial review of local agency action).
The Board of Commissioners shall adopt regulations governing practice and
procedure under this article.
§ 24-71. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision under this article who has a direct
interest in the decision shall have the right to appeal to the court vested
with the jurisdiction of local tax appeals by or pursuant to Title 42, Pa.C.S.
(relating to judiciary and judicial procedure).
§ 24-72. Equitable and legal principles to apply.
Decisions under this article may be made according to principles of law or
equity.
§ 24-73. Installment agreements.
Commissioners may enter into agreements with other political
subdivisions to establish a joint local tax appeals board.
B. The Board of Commissioners may appoint members to the Board by
resolution. Further, at least one but no more than three residents of the
Township may be appointed to serve as alternate members of the
Board.
A. Filing. A petition is timely filed if the letter transmitting the petition is
postmarked by the United States on or before the final day on which the
petition is required to be filed. Deadlines for filing petitions are as
follows:
(1) Refund petitions shall be filed within three years after the due date
for filing the report as extended or one year after actual payment of
an eligible tax, whichever is later. If no report is required, the
petition shall be filed within three years after the due date for
payment of an eligible tax or within one year after actual payment,
whichever is later.
(2) Petitions for reassessment of an eligible tax shall be filed within 90
days of the date of the assessment notice.
B. Contents. The Board of Commissioners shall adopt regulations
specifying the form and content of petitions, including the process and
deadlines.
A. Authorization. The Township of Whitehall may enter into written
agreements with any taxpayer under which the taxpayer is allowed to
§ 24-68 RESERVED § 24-73
23:865
satisfy liability for any eligible tax in installment payments if the
Township determines that the agreement will facilitate collection.
B. Extent to which agreements remain in effect.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, any agreement
entered into by the Township of Whitehall under Subsection A shall
remain in effect for the term of agreement.
(2) The Township of Whitehall may terminate any prior agreement
entered into under Subsection A if:
(a) Information which the taxpayer provided to the Township prior
to the date of the agreement was inaccurate or incomplete.
(b) The Township of Whitehall believes that collection of any
eligible tax under this agreement if in jeopardy.
(3) If the Township of Whitehall finds that the financial condition of the
taxpayer has significantly changed, the Township may alter, modify
or terminate the agreement, but only if:
(a) Notice of the Township of Whitehall's finding is provided to the
taxpayer no later than 30 days prior to the date of such action.
(b) The notice contains the reasons by the Township of Whitehall
believes a significant change has occurred.
(4) The Township of Whitehall may alter, modify or terminate an
agreement entered into by the Township under Subsection A if the
taxpayer fails to do any of the following:
(a) Pay any installment at the time the installment is due under
such agreement.
(b) Pay any other tax liability at the time the liability is due.
(c) Provide a financial condition update as requested by the
Township of Whitehall.
C. Prepayment permitted. Nothing in this section shall prevent a taxpayer
from prepaying in whole or in part any eligible tax under an agreement
with the Township of Whitehall.
D. Real estate tax installment payments. [Added 7-10-2006 by Ord. No.
2645; amended 11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 2655]
(1) The following dates are the installment due dates within the year at
which time 1/4 of the total gross real estate tax shall be due and
owing: April 30, May 31, June 30 and July 31.
(2) A property owner electing to use the installment option shall make
payments consistent with the above due dates. Installment
§ 24-73 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-73
23:866
§ 24-74. Confidentiality of tax information. [Adopted 8-8-2005 by
Ord. No. 2578]
§ 24-75. Taxes on real property.
Except as provided in § 24-64 (relating to interest on overpayment), this
article shall not apply to any tax on real estate.
payments paid after the respective due date will be subject to a
penalty of 10%.
(3) The property owner shall receive one initial tax bill, and it shall be
the responsibility of the property owner to make such timely
payments as permitted in Subsection D(1).
A. Any information gained by the Township of Whitehall as a result of any
audit, return, report, investigation, hearing or verification shall be
confidential tax information. It shall be unlawful, except in official
purposes or as provided by law, for the Township of Whitehall to:
(1) Divulge or make known in any manner any confidential information
gained in any return, investigation, hearing or verification to any
person.
(2) Permit confidential tax information or any book containing any
abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any
person.
(3) Print, publish or make known in any manner any confidential tax
information.
§ 24-73 RESERVED § 24-75
23:867

ARTICLE VIII
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance
[Adopted 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 3009]
§ 24-76. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms and phrases used in this article shall be as follows:
ACT or LERTA — Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Act No. 1977-76, as amended and
supplemented.
APPLICATION — The completion of the appropriate application form at the
time of submission of a complete application for building permit(s) to the
appropriate office of the municipality.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COUNTY — Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, acting by and through its Board
of County Commissioners or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its
authorized representatives.
DESIGNATED AREA(S) — The area within the Township identified in
§ 24-77 of this article and listed in Schedule A attached.111
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY — Any industrial, commercial or other business
property located in the designated areas.
IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction or reconstruction, including
alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating an industrial,
commercial or other business property owned by an individual, association,
corporation or other legal entity and located in the designated area(s).
"Improvement" does not include any ordinary upkeep or maintenance.
LOCAL TAXING AUTHORITY — Means and includes the Township, the
County of Lehigh and the Whitehall Coplay School District.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Whitehall.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation, limited liability company, municipality, municipal authority or
other group or entity.
SCHOOL DISTRICT — The Whitehall Coplay School District, acting by and
through its Board of School Directors or, in appropriate cases, acting by and
through its authorized representatives.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Whitehall in Lehigh County, Pennsylvania,
acting by and through its Board of Commissioners or, in appropriate cases,
acting by and through its authorized representatives.
§ 24-77. Designated areas.
111. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 24-76 RESERVED § 24-77
23:869
§ 24-78. Exemptions.
A. The Township does hereby designate the areas listed in the attached
Schedule A as "deteriorated area(s)" within the meaning of the Act, and
in which the local taxing authorities may grant a tax exemption
pursuant to the provisions of the Act.
B. The criteria for establishing the designated area(s) under the Act will
take into account the following criteria when determining the
boundaries of the deteriorated area(s):
(1) Unsafe, unsanitary and overcrowded buildings.
(2) Vacant, overgrown and unsightly lots of ground.
(3) A disproportionate number of tax delinquent properties.
(4) Defective design or arrangement of building, street or lot layouts.
(5) Economically and socially undesirable land uses.
(6) High incidence of persistent unemployment or underemployment.
(7) High incidence of dependence upon public assistance.
(8) High incidence of overcrowded, unsanitary or inadequate housing.
(9) High incidence of crime and delinquency.
C. Any discrepancy between the description of the designated area in this
§ 24-77 and the area designated for the purpose of LERTA in the LERTA
District Ordinance shall be resolved in favor of the LERTA District
Ordinance, it being the intent of the local taxing authority to grant
exemption to all new construction and improvements to the eligible
property within the area designated by the municipality.
A. There is hereby exempted from all real estate taxation of this local
taxing authority that portion of the additional assessment attributable
to the actual cost of new construction, or improvements to eligible
property for which proper application has been made in accordance
with this article, subject to the limitations hereinafter set forth.
B. The exemption authorized by this article shall be in accordance with the
provisions and limitations hereinafter set forth.
C. The schedule of real property taxes to be exempted shall be in
accordance with the following percentage of the assessed valuation of
new construction or improvements to eligible property:
Tax Year(s) Following
Completion of Construction
Exemption Portion of Assessed
Valuation
First year 100%
Second year 90%
§ 24-77 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-78
23:870
Tax Year(s) Following
Completion of Construction
Exemption Portion of Assessed
Valuation
Third year 80%
Fourth year 70%
Fifth year 60%
Sixth year 50%
Seventh year 40%
Eighth year 30%
Ninth year 20%
Tenth year 10%
Eleventh year 0%
D. A tax exemption granted under this article shall first apply in the tax
year of this local taxing authority immediately following the tax year in
which the eligible new construction or improvements is or are
completed. Nothing in this article is intended to limit or prohibit, nor
shall it be construed as limiting or prohibiting, the levy of interim real
property taxes under new construction improvements prior to the
completion thereof.
E. A tax exemption granted under this article shall be upon the property
exempted and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of the
property.
F. Any person who is an owner of eligible property and who desires tax
exemption pursuant to this article with respect to new construction or
improvements on an eligible property shall apply in writing for such
exemption on a form to be provided by this local taxing authority at the
address set forth on such form, or if no address is set forth thereon, at
the principal office of this local taxing authority, and must be received
by this local taxing authority within 30 days following the date of
issuance of a building permit for the new construction or improvements
with respect to which exemption is desired.
G. This local taxing authority shall make available to any person desiring
to apply for a tax exemption in accordance with this article the
application which shall require such person to supply the following
information:
(1) The name of the owner or owner of the eligible property.
(2) The location of the eligible property, including the tax parcel
identification number or numbers assigned to such property for
real property tax purposes.
(3) The type of new construction or improvements to be made on the
eligible property.
§ 24-78 RESERVED § 24-78
23:871
§ 24-79. When effective.
§ 24-80. Termination of benefits; appeal.
(4) The nature of the improvements to be made to the eligible property.
(5) The date on which the relevant building permit was issued and the
date on which construction commenced or the estimated date on
which it shall commence, as appropriate.
(6) The cost or estimate of the new construction or improvements.
(7) Such additional information as this local taxing authority may
reasonably require.
H. The Mayor or another appropriate official of the local taxing authority
shall forward a copy of such completed application to the county and
school district within 60 days following the date on which such
application is filed with this local taxing authority, together with a
request or authorization to such board or other appropriate assessment
agency that, following completion of the new construction or
improvement in accordance with LERTA and give appropriate notice to
this local taxing authority and the taxpayer.
I. The cost of new construction or improvements to be exempted and the
schedule of taxes exempted at the time of an initial request for tax
exemption made in accordance with the further provisions of this
article shall be applicable to that exemption request, and any
subsequent amendment to this article, if any, shall not apply to
applications filed with this local taxing authority prior to its adoption.
J. There shall be placed on, or attached to, the application for building
permits the following notice:
Under the provisions of Whitehall Township Ordinance No. 3009 you
may be entitled to a property tax exemption on your contemplated new
construction or improvements. An application for exemption MUST be
secured from the Township of Whitehall and MUST be filed within 30
days of the date that a building permit is issued.
A. This article is subject to the approval of a like ordinance or resolution
by the school district and the county. In the event that either the school
district and/or the county does not approve a like ordinance or
resolution, the municipality may choose, by a vote of the Commissioners
to immediately terminate this article.
B. This article shall become effective immediately upon approval of a like
ordinance or resolution from the school district and county.
C. This article shall remain in effect through December 31, 2017, and may
be extended by a new ordinance adopted by the municipality.
§ 24-78 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-80
23:872
§ 24-81. Purpose.
It is declared that enactment of this article and the provisions hereof are
necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety
and welfare of inhabitants of this municipality.
A. Tax abatement under this article shall be available only for those
properties for which real property taxes are promptly paid and
discharged when due. Any property that is declared delinquent as
established by the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall
lose the LERTA tax abatement and any and all currently due and future
taxes shall be due and payable at the full unabated assessment and tax
rate.
B. Properties that have been declared delinquent may appeal the
recession of the LERTA benefits by providing a written statement to the
Whitehall Township Board of Commissioners providing a basis for the
appeal and the justification for the waiver of the requirements of
Subsection A. The Whitehall Township Board of Commissioners shall
have the responsibility to review the appeal request and determine the
validity of the appeal and to determine whether the termination of
LERTA benefits may be reinstated.
§ 24-80 RESERVED § 24-81
23:873

ARTICLE IX
Volunteer Tax Incentive Program
[Adopted 8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 3168]
§ 24-82. Title.
This article may be cited, and shall be known, as the "Township of Whitehall
Volunteer Tax Incentive Program," hereinafter referred to as the "VIT
Program."
§ 24-83. Purpose; applicability.
The VIT Program is designed to encourage volunteering associated with the
Whitehall Township Fire Department which increases the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the Township of Whitehall.
§ 24-84. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
ACTIVE VOLUNTEER — A volunteer for the Whitehall Township Fire
Department who has complied with, and is certified under, the volunteer
Service Credit Program as defined by 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 79A21 et seq.
EARNED INCOME TAX — A tax on earned income and net profits levied
under Chapter 3 of the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511),
known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act" ("the "Act").112
ELIGIBILITY PERIOD — The timeframe when active volunteers may earn
credit under the volunteer Service Credit Program.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE CALL — Any emergency call to which a volunteer
responds, including travel directly from and to a volunteer's home, place
of business or other place where he/she shall have been when the call was
received.
QUALIFIED REAL PROPERTY — A residential real property owned and
occupied as the domicile of an active volunteer within Whitehall Township.
STATE — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP — Whitehall Township, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
VOLUNTEER — A member of Whitehall Township Fire Department.
§ 24-85. Establishment.
A. Establishment. The Township hereby establishes a volunteer Tax
Incentive Program (the "Program"). The goal of the Program is to
encourage membership and service in the Whitehall Fire Department.
112. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 24-82 RESERVED § 24-85
23:875
B. Program criteria. The Board of Commissioners of the Township shall
establish, by resolution, the annual criteria that must be met to qualify
for credits under the Program based on the following:
(1) The number of emergency response calls to which a volunteer
responds;
(2) The level of training and participation in formal training and drills
for a volunteer;
(3) The total amount of time expended by a volunteer on administrative
and other support services, including but not limited to:
(a) Fundraising;
(b) Providing facility or equipment maintenance; and
(c) Financial bookkeeping.
(4) The involvement in other events or projects that aid the financial
viability, emergency response or operational readiness of a
volunteer fire company; and
(5) The total number of years volunteer has served.
C. Eligible entities. The Program is available to residents of the Township
who are volunteers of the Whitehall Township Fire Department and that
provide volunteer services to the Whitehall Township Fire Department.
D. Eligibility period.
(1) A volunteer must meet the minimum criteria, set by resolution
under this section, during the eligibility period to qualify for the tax
credits established under this article.
(2) The eligibility period for each year shall run from October 1 until
September 30.
E. Recordkeeping.
(1) The Whitehall Township Fire Chief shall keep specific records of
each volunteer's activities in a service log to establish credits under
the Program. Service logs shall be subject to review by the Board of
Commissioners, the State Fire Commissioner, the State Auditor
General and any other official as required by 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 79A21
et seq.
(2) The Whitehall Township Fire Chief, or any supervisory official
delegated to do so by the Whitehall Township Fire Chief, shall
annually transmit to the Township a notarized eligibility list of all
volunteers that have met the minimum criteria for the Program.
The notarized eligibility list shall be transmitted to the Township no
later than 45 days prior to the date the tax notices are sent each
§ 24-85 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-85
23:876
§ 24-86. Earned income tax credit.
year. The Chief or supervisor shall post the notarized eligibility list
in an accessible area of the volunteer agency's facilities.
F. Application. Volunteers that have met the minimum criteria of the
Program shall sign and submit an application for certification to the
Fire Chief. The Chief shall sign the application if the volunteer has met
the minimum criteria of the Program and forward it to the Mayor or his/
her designate.
G. Municipal review. The Mayor, or his/her designate, shall review the
applications for credit under the Program and shall cross reference
them with the notarized eligibility list. The Board of Commissioners of
the Township shall approve all applicants that are on the notarized
eligibility list. All applicants approved by the Board of Commissioners of
the Township shall be issued a tax credit certificate by the Township.
H. Official tax credit register. The Township shall keep an official tax credit
register of all active volunteers that were issued tax credit certificates.
The Mayor, or his/her designate, shall issue updates, as needed, of the
official tax credit register to the following:
(1) Whitehall Township Finance Officer; and
(2) Whitehall Township Treasurer.
I. Injured volunteers.
(1) An emergency responder that is injured during an emergency
response call may be eligible for future tax credits in subsequent
years. For such injury to be qualifying for future consideration, the
injury must have occurred while responding to, participating in, or
returning from an emergency response call with the Whitehall
Township Fire Department, or at the direction of the Whitehall
Township Fire Department.
(2) To qualify for subsequent tax credits, an injured emergency
responder shall provide documentation from a licensed physician
with the application for the Program, required under this article,
stating that their injury prevents them from performing duties to
qualify as an active volunteer. In such case, the injured emergency
responder shall be deemed an active volunteer for that tax year.
(3) An injured emergency responder shall annually submit the
application required under this article, along with updated
documentation from a licensed physician stating that the injury still
exists and prevents them from qualifying as an active volunteer.
The injured emergency responder shall again be deemed an active
volunteer for that tax year. An injured emergency responder shall
only be deemed an active volunteer for a maximum of five
consecutive tax years.
§ 24-85 RESERVED § 24-86
23:877
§ 24-87. Real property tax credit.
A. Tax credit. Each active volunteer, who has been certified under the
Program, shall be eligible to receive a tax credit of up to $250 of the
earned income tax levied by the Township. When an active volunteer's
earned income tax liability is less than the amount of the tax credit, the
tax credit shall equal the individual's tax liability.
B. Claim. An active volunteer with a tax credit certificate may file a claim
for the tax credit on their Township's earned income tax liability when
filing a final return for the preceding calendar year with the Tax
Collector for the Township.
C. Rejection of the tax credit claim.
(1) The Township shall reject the claim for a Township earned income
tax credit if the taxpayer fails to provide the documents required
under § 24-85 of this article.
(2) If the Township rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be notified in
writing of the decision. The notice shall include the reasons for the
rejection and provide the method of appealing the decision
pursuant to § 24-88.
(3) An aggrieved taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of
the Township in accordance with § 24-68 et seq, by providing
written notice to the Township alleging:
(a) The basis for the appeal of the decision;
(b) The aggrieved taxpayer's evidentiary basis for the appeal;
(c) Copies of any exhibits the taxpayer wishes to present to the
reviewing body; and
(d) A list of dates and times within the next 60 days when the
taxpayer will not be available.
A. Tax credit. Each active volunteer who has been certified under the
Program shall be eligible to receive a real property tax credit of 20% of
the Township property tax liability on qualified real property. If the tax
is paid in the penalty period, the tax credit shall only apply to the base
tax year liability. If the tax is paid in the discount period, the 20% real
property tax credit shall apply to the discount tax rate. Notwithstanding
the above, this tax credit may only be claimed by one active volunteer
per qualified real property per year.
B. Claim.
(1) An active volunteer with a tax credit certificate may file a claim for
the tax credit on their qualified real property tax liability for the
Township's real estate tax levy. The tax credit shall be administered
§ 24-86 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-87
23:878
§ 24-88. Appeals.
as a refund by the Township. An active volunteer shall file the
following:
(a) A true and correct receipt from the Township Real Estate Tax
Collector of the paid Township real property taxes for the tax
year which the claim is being filed;
(b) The tax credit certificate;
(c) Photo identification; and
(d) Documentation that the tax paid was for qualified real property
as defined in this article.
(2) If the active volunteer provides all documents required under this
subsection, the Township shall issue the tax refund to the active
volunteer.
C. Rejection of the tax credit claim.
(1) The Township shall reject the claim for a Township real property
tax credit if the taxpayer fails to provide the documents required
under § 24-87 of this article.
(2) If the Township rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be notified in
writing of the decision. The notice shall include the reasons for the
rejection and provide the method of appealing the decision
pursuant to § 24-88.
(3) An aggrieved taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of
the Township in accordance with § 24-68 et seq. by providing
written notice to the Township alleging:
(a) The basis for the appeal of the decision;
(b) The aggrieved taxpayer's evidentiary basis for the appeal;
(c) Copies of any exhibits the taxpayer wishes to present to the
reviewing body; and
(d) A list of dates and times within the next 60 days when the
taxpayer will not be available.
A. Earned income tax credit appeals.
(1) Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under § 24-86 shall have a
right to appeal said decision;
(2) A taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal a decision or rejection of
claim; and
(3) All appeals of decisions under § 24-86 shall follow the provisions of
the Act of May 5, 1998, P.L. 301, No. 50, known as the "Local
§ 24-87 RESERVED § 24-88
23:879
Taxpayers Bill of Rights," and codified in § 24-60 in the Code of the
Township of Whitehall.
B. Real property tax credit appeals.
(1) Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under § 24-87 shall have a
right to appeal said decision;
(2) A taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal a decision or rejection of
claim; and
(3) All appeals under § 24-87 shall follow the provisions of Act of May
5, 1998, P.L. 301, No. 50, known as the "Local Taxpayers Bill of
Rights," and codified in § 24-60 in the Code of the Township of
Whitehall.
§ 24-88 WHITEHALL CODE § 24-88
23:880
Chapter 25
RESERVED
Chapter 26
WATER; STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 24-88 RESERVED § 24-88
25:881

ARTICLE I
Catasauqua Creek Watershed and Lehigh River Subbasin 4
[Adopted 2-9-1998 by Ord. No. 2076]
§ 26-1. Purpose of part; miscellaneous enactment provision.
A. Statement of findings. The Board of Commissioners finds that:
(1) Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater
resulting from development throughout a watershed increase flood
flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation,
overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers,
greatly increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control
stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood control
efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge and threatens public health and safety.
(2) A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety and
welfare and the protection of the people of the municipality and all
the people of the Commonwealth, their resources and environment.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to promote the public health,
safety and welfare within the Catasauqua Creek Study Area by
minimizing the damages in § 26-1A(1) of this article by provisions
designed to:
(1) Control accelerated runoff end erosion and sedimentation
problems at their source by regulating activities which cause such
problems.
(2) Utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage
systems.
(3) Encourage recharge of groundwaters where appropriate.
(4) Maintain the existing flows and quality of streams and
watercourses in the Township and the Commonwealth.
(5) Preserve and restore the flood carrying capacity of streams.
(6) Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management structures which are constructed in the municipality.
C. Statutory authority. The Township is empowered to regulate the
activities referenced in the Part by the authority of the Act of October 4,
1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), as amended, the "Stormwater Management
Act."
D. Applicability.
§ 26-1 RESERVED § 26-1
25:883
(1) This article shall only apply to those areas of the Township which
are located within the Catasauqua Creek Study Area as delineated
on an official map available for inspection at the Township office. A
map of the Catasauqua Creek Study Area at a reduced scale is
included in Appendix 1A-A of this article and is incorporated herein
by this reference.113
(2) This article shall only apply to permanent stormwater management
facilities constructed as part of any of the activities listed in this
section. Stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation
control during construction involved with any of these activities are
specifically not required by this article, but shall continue to be
regulated under existing laws and ordinances.
(3) This article contains only those stormwater runoff control criteria
and standards which are necessary or desirable from a total
watershed perspective. Additional stormwater management design
criteria (i.e., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system details,
etc.) which represent sound engineering practices may be
regulated either by separate stormwater ordinance provisions or as
part of the general responsibilities of the Township Engineer.
(4) The following activities are defined as regulated activities and shall
be regulated by this article, except those which meet the waiver
specifications presented thereafter:
(a) Land development.
(b) Subdivision.
(c) Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces
(driveways, parking lots, etc.).
(d) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing
buildings.
(e) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream
channel.
(f) Installation of stormwater systems or appurtenances thereto.
(5) Any proposed regulated activity, except those defined in Subsection
D(4)(e) and (f), which would create 10,000 square feet or less of
additional impervious cover would be exempt from meeting the
provisions of this article. Development plans qualify for this waiver
would still be regulated by § 13 of the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Management Act and other municipal ordinance provisions, as
applicable. For development taking place in stages, the entire
development plan must be used in determining conformance with
this criteria. Additional impervious cover shall include, but not be
113. Editor's Note: Appendix 1A-A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 26-1 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-1
25:884
§ 26-2. Definitions.
The words and phrases used in the Part shall have the meanings given
below unless a contrary meaning is expressly set forth:
CATASAUQUA CREEK STUDY AREA — The area comprised of the
Catasauqua Creek Watershed and Lehigh Subbasin 4 (6 unnamed creeks
and 27 direct drainage subareas). See map in Appendix 1A-A.114
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank or storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Lehigh County Conservation District.
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit or similar structure including appurtenant
works which carries surface water.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid
or semifluid or a refuse bank fill or structure for highway, railroad or other
purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event
measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., fifty-year storm) and duration
(e.g., twenty-four-hour) and used in computing stormwater management
control systems.
DETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes
any regulated activity of this article.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land for which a regulated
activity is proposed.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a land owner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the proposed stormwater
management controls, if any, to be used for a given development site, the
contents of which are established in § 26-4 hereof.
EROSION — The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice
or other geological agents.
limited to, any roof, parking or driveway areas and any new streets
and sidewalks constructed as part of or for the proposed regulated
activity. Any areas which may be designed to initially be
semipervious (e.g., gravel, crushed stone, porous pavement, etc.)
shall be considered impervious areas for the purpose of waiver
evaluation. No waiver shall be provided for regulated activities as
defined in § 26-1D(4)(e) and (f).
114. Editor's Note: Appendix 1A-A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 26-1 RESERVED § 26-2
25:885
FREEBOARD — The incremental depth in a stormwater management
structure, provided as a safety factor of design, above that required to
convey the design runoff events.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which prevents the percolation of
water into the ground.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the ground, e.g., drench, seepage pit or seepage trench.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LOCAL RUNOFF CONVEYANCE FACILITIES — Any natural channel or
man-made conveyance system which has the purpose of transporting runoff
from the site to the mainstem.
MAINSTEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other conveyance
in a dual release rate or Conditional No Detention I subarea used as a reach
in the Catasauqua Creek study area hydrologic model. In Conditional No
Detention II subareas the main channel is the Lehigh River.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation
of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of
flow and slope. The phrase "open channels" may include closed conduits so
long as the flow is not under pressure.
NPDES REGULATIONS — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Regulations.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service — U.S. Department of
Agriculture.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of stream runoff at a given
location and time resulting from a specified storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (CALIBRATED) — The computer-based
hydrologic modeling technique adapted to the Catasauqua Creek Study
Area for the Act 167 plan has been calibrated to reflect actual flow values
by adjusting key model input parameters.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings.
The division or allocation of land or space between or among two
or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for
the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
§ 26-2 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-2
25:886
RATIONAL METHOD — A method of peak runoff calculation using a
standardized runoff coefficient (rational 'c'), acreage of tract and rainfall
intensity determined by return period and by the time necessary for the
entire tract to contribute runoff. The rational formula is stated as follows:
Q=ciA, where "Q" is the calculated peak flow rate in cubic feet per second,
"c" is the dimensionless runoff coefficient (see Appendix 1A-C)115, "i" is the
rainfall intensity in inches per hour and "A" is the area of the tract in acres.
REACH — Any of the natural or man-made runoff conveyance channels
used for modeling purposes to connect the subareas and transport flows
downstream.
REGULATED ACTIVITY(IES) — Actions or proposed actions which impact
upon proper management of stormwater runoff end which are governed by
this article as specified in § 26-1D hereof.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of the predevelopment peak rate of
runoff for a development site to which the postdevelopment peak rate of
runoff must be controlled to protect downstream areas.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval in years over which an event of
a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the twenty-fiveyear
return period rainfall or runoff evens would be expected to recur on
the average once every 25 years.
RUNOFF — The part of precipitation which flows over the land.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar material and into which surface water is directed for
infiltration into the ground.
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by NRCS which is based upon relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called a curve number.
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure based
on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the
change in storage for a given time interval) and based on outflow being a
unique function of storage volume.
STORM DRAINAGE PROBLEM AREA(S) — Areas which lack adequate
stormwater collection and/or conveyance facilities and which present a
hazard to persons or property. These areas are either documented in
Appendix 1A-B116 of this article or identified by the Township or Township
Engineer.
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes or other conduits which carries
intercepted surface runoff, street water and other wash waters or drainage,
but secludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing stormwater
runoff adopted by Lehigh and Northampton Counties for the Catasauqua
115. Editor's Note: Appendix 1A-C is included at the end of this chapter.
116. Editor's Note: Appendix 1A-B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 26-2 RESERVED § 26-2
25:887
Creek Study Area as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act
167), as amended, and known as the "Stormwater Management Act."
STREAM — A watercourse.
SUBAREA — The smallest unit of watershed breakdown for hydrologic
modeling purposes for which the runoff control criteria have been
established in the Stormwater Management Plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, transfer or ownership or building or lot ownership.
SWALE — A low lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Whitehall, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
WATERCOURSE(S) — Any channel or conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
§ 26-3. Stormwater management requirements.
A. General requirements.
(1) Storm drainage systems shall be provided to permit unimpeded
flow in natural watercourses except as modified by stormwater
detention facilities or open channels consistent with this article.
(2) The existing point of concentrated drainage discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be altered without written approval of
the affected property owner(s).
(3) Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge onto adjacent
property shall be managed such that, at minimum, the peak
diffused flow does not increase in the general direction of
discharge, except as otherwise provided in this article. If diffused
flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto adjacent
property, the developer must document that there are adequate
downstream conveyance facilities to safely transport the
concentrated discharge or otherwise prove that no harm will result
from the concentrated discharge. Areas of existing diffused
drainage discharge shall be subject to any applicable release rate
criteria in the general direction of existing discharge whether they
are proposed to be concentrated or maintained as diffused
drainage areas.
(4) Where a site is traversed by watercourses other than those for
which a one-hundred-year floodplain is defined by the Township,
there shall be provided drainage easements conforming
substantially with the line of such watercourses. The width of any
easement shall be adequate to provide for unimpeded flow of storm
§ 26-2 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-3
25:888
runoff based on calculations made in conformance with § 26-3D
hereof for the one-hundred-year return period runoff and to provide
a freeboard allowance of 0.5 foot above the design water surface
level. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the
placing of fill or structures and any alterations which may
adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the
easement. Also, periodic maintenance of the easement to ensure
proper runoff conveyance shall be required. Watercourses for
which the one-hundred-year flood plain is formally defined are
subject to the applicable Township floodplain regulations.
(5) Any drainage facilities or structures required by this article that
are located on state highways rights-of-way shall be subject to
approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
(6) When it can be shown than, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainage swales on the site cannot adequately provide for
drainage, open channels may be constructed conforming
substantially to the line and grade of such natural drainage swales.
Capacities of open channels shall be calculated using the Manning
equation.
(7) Storm drainage facilities and appurtenances shall be so designed
and provided as to minimize erosion in watercourse channels and
at all points of discharge.
(8) Consideration should be given to the design and use of volume
controls for stormwater management, where geology and soils
permit. Areas of suitable geology for volume controls shall be
determined by the Township. Documentation of the suitability of
the soil for volume controls shall be provided by the applicant.
Volume controls shall be acceptable in areas of suitable geology
where the soils are designated as well drained in the County Soil
Survey. Other soils may be acceptable for use of volume controls
based on site-specific soils evaluations provided by the applicant.
B. Stormwater Management Districts.
(1) Mapping of Stormwater Management Districts. To implement the
provisions of the Catasauqua Creek Watershed and Lehigh River
Subbasin 4 Stormwater Management Plan, the Township is hereby
divided into stormwater management districts consistent with the
Catasauqua Creek Release Rate Map presented in the plan. The
boundaries of the stormwater management districts are shown on
an official map which is available for inspection at the Township
office. A copy of the official map at a reduced scale is incorporated
herein by this reference as Appendix 1A-A.117
(2) Description of Stormwater Management Districts. Three types of
stormwater managements districts maybe applicable to the
117. Editor's Note: Appendix 1A-A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 26-3 RESERVED § 26-3
25:889
Township, namely Conditional No Detention I Districts, Conditional
No Detention II Districts and duel release rate districts as
described below.
(a) Conditional No Detention I Districts. Within these districts the
capacity of the local runoff conveyance facilities must be
calculated to determine if adequate capacity exists. For this
determination the developer must calculate peak flows
assuming that the site is developed as proposed and that the
remainder of the local watershed is in the existing condition.
The developer must also calculate peak flows assuming that
the entire local watershed is developed per current zoning and
that all new development would use the runoff controls
specified by this article. The larger of the two peak flows
calculated will be used in determining if adequate capacity
exists. If adequate capacity exists to safely transport runoff
from the site to the main channel these watershed areas may
discharge postdevelopment peak runoff without detention
facilities. If the capacity calculations show that the local runoff
conveyance facilities lack adequate capacity, the developer
shall either use a 100% release rate control or provide
increased capacity of downstream elements to convey
increased peak flows consistent with Subsection C(13) hereof.
Any capacity improvements must be designed to convey runoff
from development of all areas tributary to the improvement
consistent with the capacity criteria specified in Subsection
C(3) hereof. By definition, a storm drainage problem area
associated with the local runoff conveyance facilities indicates
that adequate capacity does not exist.
(b) Conditional No Detention II Districts. Within these districts,
the capacity of the local runoff conveyance facilities must be
calculated in the same manner as the Conditional No Detention
I Districts. In such cases, however, adequate capacity must be
demonstrated from the site to the Lehigh River. After
determining if adequate capacity exists, the developer shall
use either no detention, a 100% release rate or provide
capacity improvements as detailed in Subsection B(2)(a)
hereof.
(c) Dual Release Rate Districts. Within these districts, the twoyear
postdevelopment runoff must be controlled to 100% of the
predevelopment peak.
C. Stormwater Management District implementation provisions.
(1) Any stormwater management controls required by this article and
subject to a dual release rate criteria shall meet the applicable
release rate criteria for each of the two- , ten- , twenty-five- and
one-hundred-year return period runoff events consistent with the
calculation methodology specified in Subsection D hereof.
§ 26-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-3
25:890
(2) The exact location of the stormwater management district
boundaries as they apply to a given development site shall be
determined by mapping the boundaries using the two foot
topographic contours provided as part of the drainage plan. The
district boundaries as originally drawn coincide with topographic
divides or, in certain instances, are drawn from the intersection of
the watercourse and a physical feature such as the confluence with
another watercourse or a potential flow obstruction (e.g., road,
culvert, bridge, etc.). The physical feature is the downstream limit
of the subarea and the subarea boundary is drawn from that point
up slop to each topographic divide along the path perpendicular to
the contour lines.
(3) Any downstream capacity analysis conducted in accordance with
this article shall use the following criteria for determining
adequacy for accepting increased peak flow rates:
(a) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to
convey the increased runoff associated with a two-year return
period event within their banks at velocities consistent with
protection of the channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities
shall be based upon criteria included in the DEP Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (April 1990).
Permissible velocities from the DEP manual for selected
channels are presented in Appendix 1A-C of this article.118
(b) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to
convey the increased twenty-five-year return period runoff
without creating any hazard to persons or property.
(c) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which
must pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be
designed in accordance with DEP Chapter 105 regulations (if
applicable) and, at minimum, pass the increased twenty-fiveyear
return period runoff.
(4) For a proposed development site located within one release rate
category subarea, the total runoff from the site shall meet the
applicable release rate criteria. For development sites with
multiple directions of runoff discharge, individual drainage
directions may be designed for up to a 100% release rate so long as
the total runoff from the site is controlled to the applicable release
rate.
(5) For a proposed development site located within two or more
release category subareas, the peak discharge rate from any
subarea shall be the predevelopment peak discharge for that
subarea multiplied by the applicable release rate. The calculated
peak discharges shall apply regardless of whether the grading plan
118. Editor's Note: Appendix 1A-C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 26-3 RESERVED § 26-3
25:891
changes the drainage area by subarea. An exception to the above
may be granted if discharges from multiple subareas recombine in
proximity to the site. In this case, peak discharge in any direction
may be a 100% release rate provided that the overall site discharge
meets the weighted average release rate.
(6) For a proposed development site located partially within a release
rate category subarea and partially within a conditional no
detention subarea, in no event shall a significant portion of the site
area subject to the release rate control be drained to the discharge
point(s) located in the no detention subarea.
(7) Within a release rate category area, for a proposed development
site which has significant areas which drain to a closed
depression(s), the design release from the site will be lessor of:
(a) The total development site runoff times the applicable release
rate.
(b) The existing peak flow actually leaving the site.
(8) Offsite areas which drain through a proposed development site are
not subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable
peak runoff rates. However, onsite drainage facilities shall be
designed to safely convey offsite flows through the development
site.
(9) Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed development
activity differs significantly from the total site area, only the
proposed impact area shall be subject to the release rate criteria.
(10) Development proposals which, through groundwater recharge or
other means, do not increase the rate or volume of runoff
discharged from the site are not subject to the release rate
provisions of the Part.
(11) No-harm option.
(a) No-harm option. For any proposed development site not
located in a conditional no detention district, the developer has
the option of using a less restrictive runoff control including no
detention if the developer can prove that "no harm" would be
caused by discharging at a higher runoff rate than that
specified by the plan. Proof of "no harm" would have to be
shown from the development site through the remainder of the
downstream drainage network to the confluence of the creek
with the Lehigh River. Proof of "no harm" must be shown using
the capacity criteria specification in Subsection C(3) hereof, if
downstream capacity analysis is a part of the "no harm"
justification.
§ 26-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-3
25:892
(b) Attempts to prove "no harm" based upon downstream peak
flow versus capacity analysis shall be governed by the
following provisions:
[1] The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for
the design return period storms (two- , ten- , twenty-fiveand
one-hundred-year) shall be the values from the
calibrated Penn State Runoff Models for the Catasauqua
Creek Watershed and the watersheds associated with
several unnamed creeks. For the Conditional No Detention
II areas, the PSU-IV peak flow values will be sued. These
flow values would be supplied to the developer by the
municipal engineer upon request.
[2] Any available capacity in the downstream conveyance
system as documented by a developer may be used by the
developer only in proportion to his development site
acreage relative to the total upstream undeveloped
acreage from the identified capacity (i.e., if the developer's
site is 10% of the upstream undeveloped acreages the
developer may use up to 10% of the documented
downstream available capacity).
[3] Developer-proposed runoff controls which would generate
increased peak flow rates at storm drainage problem areas
would, be definition, be precluded from successful
attempts to prove "no harm," except in conjunction with
proposed capacity improvements for the problem areas
consistent with Subsection C(13) hereof.
(c) Any "no harm" justifications shall be submitted by the
developer as part of the drainage plan submission per § 26-4
hereof.
(12) Regional detention alternatives. For certain areas within the study
area, it may be more cost-effective to provide one control facility
for more than one development site than to provide an individual
control facility for each development site. The initiative and
funding for any regional runoff control alternatives are the
responsibility of prospective developers. The design of any regional
control basis must incorporate reasonable development of the
entire upstream watershed. The peak outflow of a regional basin
would be determined on a case-by-case basis using the hydrologic
model of the watershed consistent with protection of the
downstream watershed areas as used herein, the phrase
"hydrologic model" refers to the calibrated version of the Penn
State Runoff Model as developed for the stormwater management
plan.
(13) Capacity improvements.
§ 26-3 RESERVED § 26-3
25:893
(a) In certain instances, primarily within the conditional no
detention areas, local drainage conditions may dictate more
stringent levels of runoff control than those based upon
protection of the entire watershed. In such instances, if the
developer can prove that it would be feasible to provide
capacity improvements to relieve the capacity deficiency in the
local drainage network, then the capacity improvements could
be provided by the developer in lieu of runoff controls on the
development site. Peak flow calculations are to be done
assuming that the local watershed is in the existing condition
and then assuming that the local watershed is developed per
current zoning and using the specified runoff controls. Any
capacity improvements would be designed using the larger of
the above peak flows and the capacity criteria specified in
Subsection C(3) hereof. All new development in the entire
subarea(s) within which the proposed development site is
located shall be assumed to implement the developer's
proposed discharge control, if any.
(b) Capacity improvements may also be provided as necessary to
implement any regional detention alternatives or to implement
a modified "no harm" option which proposes specific capacity
improvements to provide that a less stringent discharge
control would not create any harm downstream.
(14)Waiver of runoff control based on minimum additional impervious
cover. Any proposed regulated activity, except those defined in
§ 26-1D(4)(e) and (f), which would create 10,000 square feet or less
of additional impervious cover would be exempt from meeting the
runoff control provisions of this article. For developments which
are to take place in stages, the entire development plan must be
used in determining conformance with this criteria.
Predevelopment impervious cover is that which is in place as of the
effective date of this article. Additional impervious cover is that
which is in place as of the effective date of this article. Additional
impervious cover shall include, but not be limited to, any roof,
parking or driveway areas and any new streets and sidewalks
constructed as part of or for the proposed development. Any
postdevelopment areas which may be designed to initially be
semipervious (e.g., gravel, crushed stone, porous pavement, etc.)
shall be considered impervious areas for the purposes of waiver
evaluation. Any semipervious redevelopment areas shall be
considered pervious areas for purposes of waiver evaluation unless
demonstrated otherwise by the applicant.
(15) Compatibility with NPDES requirements. Any proposed regulated
activity for which a permanent stormwater quality control
detention basin is required under the NPDES regulations shall use
the more stringent runoff control criteria between this article and
the NPDES requirements.
§ 26-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-3
25:894
D. Calculation methodology.
(1) Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated
using either the rational method or the soil-cover-complex
methodology.
(2) The design of any detention basin intended to meet the
requirements of this article shall be verified by routing the design
storm hydrograph through the proposed basin. For basins designed
using the rational method technique, the design hydrograph for
routing shall be either the universal rational hydrograph or the
modified rational method trapezoidal hydrograph which maximizes
detention volume.
(3) All stormwater detention facilities shall provide a minimum one
foot freeboard, measured to the invert of the emergency spillway,
above the maximum pool elevation associated with the twothrough
twenty-five-year runoff events. A 0.5 foot freeboard shall
be provided above the maximum pool elevation of the one-hundredyear
runoff event. The two- through one-hundred-year storm events
shall be controlled by the primary outlet structure. An emergency
spillway for each basin shall be designed to pass the entire onehundred-
year return frequency storm peak flow rate with a
minimum 0.5 foot freeboard measured to the top of basin. The
spillway should function to control overflows in the event of a
complete blockage of the basin outlet system. If this detention
facility is considered to be a dam as per DEP Chapter 105, the
design of the facility must be consistent with the Chapter 105
regulations, and may be required to pass a storm greater than the
one-hundred-year event.
(4) The minimum circular orifice diameter for controlling discharge
rates from detention facilities shall be three inches provided that as
much of the site runoff as practical is directed to the detention
facilities.
(5) All calculations using the soil-cover-complex method shall use the
Natural Resources Conservation Service Type II 24 hour rainfall
distribution. The twenty-four-hour rainfall depths for the various
return periods to be used consistent with this article are taken from
the PennDOT Intensity-Duration-Frequency Field Manual (May
1986) for Region 4:
Return Period
24-Hour Rainfall Depth
(inches)
1-year 2.40
2-year 3.00
5-year 3.60
10-year 4.56
§ 26-3 RESERVED § 26-3
25:895
Return Period
24-Hour Rainfall Depth
(inches)
25-year 5.52
50-year 6.48
100-year 7.44
A graphical and tabular presentation of the Type II-two-hour
distribution is included in Appendix 1A-C hereto.119
(6) All calculations using the rational method shall use rainfall
intensities consistent with appropriate times of concentration and
return periods and the Intensity-duration-frequency curves as
presented in Appendix 1A-C.
(7) Runoff curve numbers (CNs) to be used in the soil-cover-complex
method shall be based upon the matrix presented in Appendix 1AC.
(8) Runoff coefficients for use in the rational method shall be based
upon the table presented in Appendix 1A-C.
(9) Proposed volume controls shall be designed with sufficient storage
volume for a one-hundred-year return period event. The storage
volume shall equal or exceed the volume of the universal rational
hydrograph for the drainage area to the volume control.
(10) All predevelopment calculations for a given discharge direction
shall be based on a common time of concentration considering both
onsite and any offsite drainage areas. All postdevelopment
calculations for a given discharge direction shall be based on a
common time of concentration considering both onsite and offsite
drainage areas.
(11) The Manning equation shall be used to calculate the capacity of
watercourses. Manning "n" values used in the calculations shall be
consistent with the table presented in Appendix 1A-C.120 Pipe
capacities shall be determined by methods acceptable to the
Township Engineer.
(12) The Pennsylvania DEP, Chapter 105, Rules and Regulations, apply
to the construction modification, operation or maintenance of both
existing and proposed dams, water obstructions and
encroachments throughout the watershed. Criteria for design and
construction of stormwater management facilities according to this
article may not be the same criteria that are used in the permitting
of dams under the Dam Safety Program.
119. Editor's Note: Appendix 1A-C is included at the end of this chapter.
120. Editor's Note: Appendix 1A-C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 26-3 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-4
25:896
§ 26-4. Drainage plan requirements.
A. General requirements. For any of the regulated activities of this article,
prior to the final approval of subdivision and/or land development plans,
or the issuance of any permit or the commencement of any land
distribution activity, the owner, subdivider, developer or their agent
shall submit a drainage plan for approval.
B. Exemptions.
(1) Impervious cover. Any regulated activity which would create
10,000 square feet or less of additional impervious cover is exempt
from the drainage plan preparation provisions of this article. This
criteria shall apply to the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages (i.e., the impervious cover
associated with the total development shall be used to compare to
the waiver minimum, not merely the individual stage impervious
cover). Predevelopment impervious cover is that which is in place
as of the effective date of this article. Additional impervious cover
shall include, but not be limited to, any roof, parking or driveway
areas and any new streets and sidewalks constructed as part of or
for the proposed regulated activity. Any areas designed to initially
be gravel, crushed stone, porous pavement, etc. shall be assumed
to be impervious for the purposes of comparison to the waiver
criteria.
(2) Prior drainage plan approval. Any regulated activity for which a
drainage plan was previously prepared as part of a subdivision or
land development proposal that received preliminary plan approval
from the Township prior to the effective date of this article is
exempt from the drainage plan preparation provisions of this
article provided that the approved drainage plan included design of
stormwater facilities consistent with ordinance provisions in effect
at the time of approval. If significant revisions are made to the
drainage plan after both the preliminary plan approval and the
effective date of the Part, preparation of a new drainage plan,
subject to the provisions of this article, shall be required.
C. Drainage plan contents. The following items shall be included in the
drainage plan:
(1) General.
(a) General description of project.
(b) General description of proposed permanent stormwater water
controls.
(2) Map(s) of the project area showing:
(a) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities
or other identifiable landmarks.
§ 26-4 RESERVED § 26-4
25:897
(b) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep
slopes (greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be
used. Offsite drainage areas impacting the project including
topographic detail. All contours shall be based upon a field
survey and shall not be interpolated from USGS map contours.
(c) Streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the
project area.
(d) Other physical features including existing drainage swales,
wetlands, dosed depressions, sinkholes and areas of natural
vegetation to be preserved.
(e) Locations of proposed underground utilities, sewers and water
lines.
(f) An overlay showing soil types and boundaries based on the
Lehigh or Northampton County Soil Survey latest edition, as
applicable.
(g) Proposed changes to land surface and vegetative cover.
(h) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
(i) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(j) Stormwater management district boundaries applicable to the
site.
(3) Stormwater management controls.
(a) All stormwater management controls must be shown on a map
and described, including:
[1] Groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds
or trenches. When these structures are used, the locations
of septic tank infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
[2] Other control devices or methods such as roof top storage,
semipervious paving materials, grass swales, parking lot
pending, vegetated strips, detention or retention ponds,
storm sewers, etc.
(b) All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of
the control device or method must be shown.
(4) Maintenance program. A maintenance program for all Stormwater
management control facilities must be included. This program
must include the proposed ownership of the control facilities, the
maintenance requirements for the facilities and the financial
responsibilities for the required maintenance.
D. Plan submission.
§ 26-4 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-4
25:898
(1) For regulated activities specified in § 26-1D(4)(a) and (b) hereof:
(a) The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer as part
of the preliminary plan submission for the subdivision or land
development.
(b) Number of plans submitted shall be:
[1] When not part of a land development or subdivision plans
submission, four copies of the drainage plan shall be
submitted to the Township.
[2] When part of a land development or subdivision plan
submission, 11 copies of the drainage plan shall be
submitted to the Township.
(c) Distribution of the drainage plan will be as follows:
[1] When not part of a land development or subdivision plan
submission:
[a] One copy to the Board of Commissioners.
[b] One copy to the Township Engineer.
[c] One copy to the Mayor. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
[d] One copy to the Whitehall Township Bureau of
Planning, Zoning and Development.
[2] When part of a land development or subdivision plan
submission:
[a] Seven copies to the Whitehall Township Planning
Commission.
[b] One copy to the Board of Commissioners.
[c] One copy to the Township Engineer.
[d] One copy to the Mayor. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
[e] One copy to the Whitehall Township Bureau of
Planning, Zoning and Development.
(d) The drainage plan shall also be submitted to the Lehigh Valley
Planning Commission by the developer.
(2) For regulated activities specified in § 26-1D(4)(c) and (d), the
drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the as part of
the building permit application.
(3) For regulated activities specified in § 26-1D(4)(e) and (f):
§ 26-4 RESERVED § 26-4
25:899
(a) The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the
Lehigh Valley Planning Commission for coordination with the
DEP permit application process under Chapter 105 (Dam
Safety and Waterway Management) or Chapter 106
(Floodplain Management) of DEP's rules and regulations.
(b) One copy of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
(4) For all regulated activities under § 26-1D hereof that propose to
disturb more than five acres of land, an NPDES permit application
for discharge of stormwater associated with construction activity
shall be submitted to the Lehigh County Conservation District.
E. Drainage plan review.
(1) The Township Engineer shall review the drainage plan for
consistency with the adopted Catasauqua Creek Watershed and
Lehigh River Subbasin four Stormwater Management Plan as
embodied by this article and against any additional storm drainage
provisions contained in Chapter 22, Subdivision and Land
Development, or Chapter 27, Zoning, as applicable.
(2) The Lehigh Valley Planning Commission shall provide an advisory
review of the drainage plan for consistency with the Catasauqua
Creek Watershed and Lehigh River Subbasin four Stormwater
Management Plan.
(3) For regulated activities specified in § 26-1D(4)(a) and (b), the
Lehigh Valley Planning Commission shall provide written
comments to the Township, within a time frame consistent with
established procedures under the Municipalities Planning Code, as
to whether the drainage plan has been found to be consistent with
the stormwater management plan.
(4) For regulated activities specified in § 26-1D(4)(e) and (f), the
Lehigh Valley Planning Commission shall notify DEP whether the
drainage plan is consistent with the stormwater management plan
and forward a copy of the review letter to the municipality and
developer.
(5) The Township shall not approve any subdivision or land
development [regulated activities § 26-1D(4)(a) and (b)] or building
permit application [regulated activities § 26-1D(4)(c) and (d)] if the
drainage plan has been found to be inconsistent with the
stormwater management plan as determined by the Township
Engineer.
F. Modification of plans. A modification to a submitted drainage plan for a
proposed development site which involves a change in control methods
or techniques, or which involves the relocation or redesign of control
measures or which is necessary because of soil or other conditions are
not as stated in the drainage plan (as determined by the Township
§ 26-4 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-4
25:900
§ 26-5. Inspections.
Engineer) shall require a resubmission of the modified drainage plan
consistent with Subsection D hereof subject to review per Subsection E
hereof of this article.
G. Hardship waiver procedure.
(1) The Board of Commissioners may hear requests for waivers where
it is alleged that the provisions of this article inflict unnecessary
hardship upon the applicant. The waiver request shall be in writing
and accompanied by the requisite fee based upon a fee schedule
adopted by the Township. A copy of the waiver request shall be
provided by the developer to each of the following: Township,
Township Engineer, Township Solicitor and Lehigh Valley Planning
Commission. The request shall fully document the nature of the
alleged hardship.
(2) The Board of Commissioners may grant a waiver provided that all
of the following findings are made in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity of lot size or shape or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular properly, and that the unnecessary hardship is due
to such conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions
generally created by the provisions of this article in the
stormwater management district in which the property is
located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this article, including
the "no harm" provision and that the authorization of a waiver
is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
(d) That the waiver, if authorized, will represent the minimum
waiver that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(e) That financial hardship is not the criteria for granting of a
hardship waiver.
(3) In granting any waiver, the Board of Commissioners may attach
such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of Act 167 and this article. If
a hardship waiver is granted, the applicant must still comply with
the requirements of § 13 of the Stormwater Management Act.
§ 26-4 RESERVED § 26-5
25:901
§ 26-6. Fees and expenses.
§ 26-7. Maintenance responsibilities.
A. Schedule of inspections.
(1) The Township Engineer or the Township Engineer's designee shall
inspect all phases of the installation of the permanent stormwater
control facilities and the completed installation.
(2) If at any stage of the work the Township Engineer determines that
the permanent stormwater control facilities are not being installed
in accordance with the approved development plan, the Township
shall revoke any existing permits until a revised development plan
is submitted and approved as required by § 26-4F hereof.
A. General. A fee shall be established by the Township to defer municipal
costs for drainage plan review and processing.
B. Expenses covered by fees. The fees required by this article shall, at a
minimum cover:
(1) The review of the drainage plan by the Township Engineer.
(2) The site inspection.
(3) The inspection of required controls and improvements during
construction.
(4) The final inspection upon completion of the controls and
improvements required in the plan.
(5) Any additional work required to enforce any permit violations,
regulated by this article, correct violations and assure the
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
(6) Administrative and clerical costs.
A. Maintenance responsibilities. The maintenance responsibilities for
permanent stormwater runoff control facilities shall be determined
based upon the type of ownership of the property which is controlled by
the facilities.
(1) Single entity ownership. In all cases where the permanent storm
runoff control facilities are designed to manage runoff from
property in a single entity ownership as defined below, the
maintenance responsibility for the stormwater control facilities
shall be with the single entity owner. The single entity owner shall
enter into an agreement with the Township which specified that the
owner will properly maintain the facilities that the owner will
properly maintain the facilities consistent with accepted practice
as determined by the Township Engineer. The agreement shall
provide for regular inspections by the Township and contain such
§ 26-5 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-7
25:902
§ 26-8. Enforcement.
provisions as necessary to ensure timely correction of any
maintenance deficiencies by the single entity owner. A single entity
shall be defined as an individual, association, public or private
corporation, partnership firm, trust, estate or any other legal entity
powered to own real estate.
(2) Multiple ownership. In cases where the property controlled by the
permanent stormwater control facilities shall be in a multiple
ownership (i.e., many individual owners of various portions of the
property), the developer may, in the Township's sole and absolute
discretion, be required to dedicate the permanent stormwater
control facilities to the Township for maintenance. The developer
shall pay a fee to the Township corresponding to the present worth
of maintenance of the facilities in perpetuity. The estimated annual
maintenance cost for the facilities shall be based on a fee schedule
provided by the Township Engineer and adopted by the Township.
The fee schedule must be reasonable. In certain multiple ownership
situations, the municipality may benefit by requiring and assigning
the maintenance responsibility to an individual or group of
individuals residing within the controlled area. These individuals
may have the permanent stormwater control facilities adjacent to
their lots or otherwise have an interest in the proper maintenance
of the facilities. In these instances, the Township and the
individual(s) may enter into a formal agreement for the
maintenance of the facilities. The Township may elect to maintain
ownership of the facilities and be responsible for periodic
inspections.
A. Right-of-way. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duty authorized
representatives of the Township may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the Township to investigate or ascertain the
condition of the subject property in regard to any aspect regulated by
this article.
B. Notification. In the event that a person fails to comply with the
requirements of this article, or fails to conform to the requirements of
any permit issued hereunder, the Township shall provide written
notification of the violation. Such notification shall set forth the nature
of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for correction of these
violation(s). Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject
such person to the penalty provisions of this article. All such penalties
shall be deemed cumulative and resort by the Township from pursuing
any and all other remedies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of
the real property on which any regulated activity is proposed to occur,
is occurring or has occurred to comply with the terms and conditions of
this article.
C. Enforcement. Any person found by the Township to have violated any
provision of this article shall be subject to the enforcement provisions in
§ 26-7 RESERVED § 26-8
25:903
Article V of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and/or § 15
of the Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Act (Act 167).
§ 26-8 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-8
25:904
ARTICLE II
Coplay Creek Watershed and Lehigh River Subbasin 2
[Adopted 8-21-1995 by Ord. No. 1942]
§ 26-9. General provisions.
A. Statement of findings. The governing body of the Township finds that:
(1) Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater
resulting from development throughout a watershed increase flood
flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation,
overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers,
greatly increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control
stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood control
efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge and threatens public health and safety.
(2) A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety and
welfare and the protection of the people of the Township and all the
people of the Commonwealth, their resources and environment.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to promote the public health,
safety and welfare within the Coplay Creek Study Area by minimizing
the damages described in § 26-9A(1) of this article by provisions
designed to:
(1) Control accelerated runoff end erosion and sedimentation
problems at their source by regulating activities which cause such
problems.
(2) Utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage
systems.
(3) Encourage recharge of groundwaters where appropriate.
(4) Maintain the existing flows and quality of streams and
watercourses in the Township and the Commonwealth.
(5) Preserve and restore the flood carrying capacity of streams.
(6) Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management structures which are constructed in the Township.
C. Statutory authority. The Township is empowered to regulate these
activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), the "Stormwater Management Act" and the appropriate municipal
code.
D. Applicability.
§ 26-9 RESERVED § 26-9
25:905
(1) This article shall only apply to those areas of the Township which
are located within the Coplay Creek Study Area as delineated on an
official map available for inspection at the municipal office. A map
of the Coplay Creek Study Area at a reduced scale is included in
Appendix 1B-A for general reference.121
(2) This article shall only apply to permanent stormwater management
facilities constructed as part of any of the activities listed in this
section. Stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation
control during construction involved with any of these activities are
specifically not regulated by this article, but shall continue to be
regulated under existing laws and ordinances.
(3) This article contains only those stormwater runoff control criteria
and standards which are necessary or desirable from a total
watershed perspective. Additional stormwater management design
criteria (i.e., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system details,
etc.) which represent sound engineering practice may be regulated
either by separate stormwater ordinance provisions or as part of
the general responsibilities of the Township Engineer.
(4) The following activities are defined as regulated activities and shall
be regulated by this article, except those which meet the waiver
specifications presented thereafter:
(a) Land development.
(b) Subdivision.
(c) Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces
(driveways, parking lots, etc.).
(d) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing
buildings.
(e) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream
channel.
(f) Installation of stormwater systems or appurtenances thereto.
(5) Any proposed regulated activity, except those defined in
§ 26-9D(4)(e) and (f), which would create 10,000 square feet or less
of additional impervious cover would be exempt from meeting the
provisions of this article. For development taking place in stages,
the entire development plan must be used in determining
conformance with this criteria. Additional impervious cover shall
include, but not be limited to, any roof, parking or driveway areas
and any new streets and sidewalks constructed as part of or for the
proposed regulated activity. Any areas which may be designed to
initially be semipervious (e.g., gravel, crushed stone, porous
121. Editor's Note: Appendix 1B-A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 26-9 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-9
25:906
§ 26-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank or storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Lehigh County Conservation District.
COPLAY CREEK STUDY AREA — The area comprised of the Coplay Creek
Watershed and Lehigh River Subbasin 2 (Rockdale Creek, Fells Creek and
Spring Creek Watersheds plus direct drainage areas). See map in Appendix
1B-A.122
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit or similar structure including appurtenant
works which carries surface water.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid
or semifluid or a refuse bank fill or structure for highway, railroad or other
purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.[Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event
measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., fifty-year storm) and duration
(e.g., twenty-four-hour) and used in computing stormwater management
control systems.
DETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes
any regulated activity of this article.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land for which a regulated
activity is proposed.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a land owner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the proposed stormwater
management controls, if any, to be used for a given development site, the
contents of which are established in § 26-12.
EROSION — The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice
or other geological agents.
pavement, etc.) shall be considered impervious areas for the
purpose of waiver evaluation. No waiver shall be provided for
regulated activities as defined in § 26-9D(4)(e) and (f).
122. Editor's Note: Appendix 1B-A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 26-9 RESERVED § 26-10
25:907
FREEBOARD — The incremental depth in a stormwater management
structure, provided as a safety factor of design, above that required to
convey the design runoff events.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which prevents the percolation of
water into the ground.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the ground, e.g., french drain, seepage pit or seepage trench.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LOCAL RUNOFF CONVEYANCE FACILITIES — Any natural channel or
man-made conveyance system which has the sole purpose of transporting
runoff from the site to the main channel.
MAINSTEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other conveyance
in a dual release rate or Conditional No Detention I subarea used as a reach
in a Coplay Creek study area hydrologic model. In Conditional No Detention
II subareas the main channel is the Lehigh River.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation
of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of
flow and slope. "Open channels" may include closed conduits so long as the
flow is not under pressure.
NPDES REGULATIONS — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Regulations.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of storm runoff at a given
point and time resulting from a specified storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (CALIBRATED) — The computer-based
hydrologic modeling technique adapted to the Coplay Creek Study Area for
the Act 167 plan. The model has been "calibrated" to reflect actual flow
values by adjusting key model input parameters.
RATIONAL METHOD — A method of peak runoff calculation using a
standardized runoff coefficient (rational 'c'), acreage of tract and rainfall
intensity determined by return period and by the time necessary for the
entire tract to contribute runoff. The rational formula is stated as follows: Q
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings.
The division or allocation of land or space between or among two
or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for
the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
§ 26-10 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-10
25:908
= ciA, where "Q" is the calculated peak flow rate in cubic feet per second,
"c" is the dimensionless runoff coefficient (see Appendix 1B-C)123, "i" is the
rainfall intensity in inches per hour and "A" is the area of the tract in acres.
REACH — Any of the 47 natural or man-made runoff conveyance channels
used for modeling purposes to connect the subareas and transport flows
downstream.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions which impact upon
proper management of stormwater runoff end which are governed by this
article as specified in § 26-9D.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of the predevelopment peak rate of
runoff for a development site to which the postdevelopment peak rate of
runoff must be controlled to protect downstream areas.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval in years over which an event of
a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the twenty-fiveyear
return period rainfall or runoff events would be expected to recur on
the average once every 25 years.
RUNOFF — The part of precipitation which flows over the land.
SCS — Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar material and into which surface water is directed for
infiltration into the ground.
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by SCS which is based upon relating soil type and land use/cover
to a runoff parameter called a curve number.
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure based
on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the
change in storage for a given time interval) and based on outflow being a
unique function of storage volume.
STORM DRAINAGE PROBLEM AREAS — Areas which lack adequate
stormwater collection and/or conveyance facilities and which present a
hazard to persons or property. These areas are either documented in
Appendix 1B-B124 of this article or identified by the Township or Township
Engineer.
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes or other conduits which carries
intercepted surface runoff, street water and other wash waters or drainage,
but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing stormwater
runoff adopted by Lehigh County for the Coplay Creek Study Area as
required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167) and known as the
"Stormwater Management Act."
123. Editor's Note: Appendix 1B-C is included at the end of this chapter.
124. Editor's Note: Appendix 1B-B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 26-10 RESERVED § 26-10
25:909
STREAM — A watercourse.
SUBAREA — The smallest unit of watershed breakdown for hydrologic
modeling purposes for which the runoff control criteria have been
established in the Stormwater Management Plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, transfer or ownership or building or lot ownership.
SWALE — A low lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
WATERCOURSE — Any channel or conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
§ 26-11. Stormwater management requirements.
A. General requirements.
(1) Storm drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow in natural watercourses except as modified by
stormwater detention facilities or open channels consistent with
this article.
(2) The existing point of concentrated drainage discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be altered without written approval of
the affected property owner(s).
(3) Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge onto adjacent
property shall be managed such that, at minimum, the peak
diffused flow does not increase in the general direction of
discharge, except as otherwise provided in this article. If diffused
flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto adjacent
property, the developer must document that there are adequate
downstream conveyance facilities to safely transport the
concentrated discharge or otherwise prove that no harm will result
from the concentrated discharge. Areas of existing diffused
drainage discharge shall be subject to any applicable release rate
criteria in the general direction of existing discharge whether they
are proposed to be concentrated or maintained as diffused
drainage areas.
(4) Where a subdivision is traversed by watercourses other than those
for which a one-hundred-year floodplain is defined by the Township,
there shall be provided drainage easements conforming
substantially with the line of such watercourses. The width of any
easement shall be adequate to provide for unimpeded flow of storm
runoff based on calculations made in conformance with § 26-11
hereof for the one-hundred-year return period runoff and to provide
a freeboard allowance of 0.5 foot above the design water surface
§ 26-10 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-11
25:910
level. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the
placing of fill or structures and any alterations which may
adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the
easement. Also, periodic maintenance of the easement to ensure
proper runoff conveyance shall be required. Watercourses for
which the one-hundred-year flood plain is formally defined are
subject to the applicable Township floodplain regulations.
(5) Any drainage facilities or structures required by this article that
are located on state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to
approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
(6) When it can be shown than, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainage swales on the site cannot adequately provide for
drainage, open channels may be constructed conforming
substantially to the line and grade of such natural drainage swales.
Capacities of open channels shall be calculated using the Manning
equation.
(7) Storm drainage facilities and appurtenances shall be so designed
and provided as to minimize erosion in watercourse channels and
at all points of discharge.
(8) Consideration should be given to the design and use of volume
controls for stormwater management, where geology permits.
B. Stormwater Management Districts.
(1) Mapping of Stormwater Management Districts. In order to
implement the provisions of the Coplay Creek Watershed and
Lehigh River Subbasin 2 Stormwater Management Plan, the
Township is hereby divided into stormwater management districts
consistent with the Coplay Creek Release Rate Map presented in
the plan. The boundaries of the stormwater management districts
are shown on an official map which is available for inspection at the
Township office. A copy of the official map at a reduced scale is
incorporated herein by this reference as Appendix 1B-A.125
(2) Description of Stormwater Management Districts. Three types of
stormwater managements districts maybe applicable to the
Township, namely Conditional No Detention I Districts, Conditional
No Detention II Districts and dual release rate districts as
described below.
(a) Conditional No Detention I Districts. Within these districts the
capacity of the local runoff conveyance facilities (as defined in
§ 26-10) must be calculated to determine if adequate capacity
exists. For this determination the developer must calculate
peak flows assuming that the site is developed as proposed and
that the remainder of the local watershed is in the existing
125. Editor's Note: Appendix 1B-A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 26-11 RESERVED § 26-11
25:911
condition. The developer must also calculate peak flows
assuming that the entire local watershed is developed per
current zoning and that all new development would use the
runoff controls specified by this article. The larger of the two
peak flows calculated will be used in determining if adequate
capacity exists. If adequate capacity exists to safely transport
runoff from the site to the main channel (as defined in § 26-10),
these watershed areas may discharge postdevelopment peak
runoff without detention facilities. If the capacity calculations
show that the local runoff conveyance facilities lack adequate
capacity, the developer shall either use a 100% release rate
control or provide increased capacity of downstream elements
to convey increased peak flows consistent with Subsection
C(9). Any capacity improvements must be designed to convey
runoff from development of all areas tributary to the
improvement consistent with the capacity criteria specified in
Subsection C(3). By definition, a storm drainage problem area
associated with the local runoff conveyance facilities indicates
that adequate capacity does not exist.
(b) Conditional No Detention II Districts. Within these districts,
the capacity of the local runoff conveyance facilities must be
calculated in the same manner as the Conditional No Detention
I Districts. In such cases, however, adequate capacity must be
demonstrated from the site to the Lehigh River. After
determining if adequate capacity exists, the developer shall
use either no detention, a 100% release rate or provide
capacity improvements as detailed in Subsection B(2)(a) —
Conditional No Detention I Districts.
(c) Dual Release Rate Districts. Within this district, the two-year
postdevelopment runoff must be controlled to 30% of the
predevelopment two-year runoff peak. Further, the ten-year,
twenty-five-year and one-hundred-year postdevelopment
runoff must be controlled to the stated percentage of the
predevelopment peak. Release rates associated with the tenthrough
one-hundred-year events are either 90% or 100%
depending upon location in the watershed.
C. Stormwater Management District implementation provisions.
(1) Any stormwater management controls required by this article and
subject to a dual release rate criteria shall meet the applicable
release rate criteria for each of the two- , ten- , twenty-five- and
one-hundred-year return period runoff events consistent with the
calculation methodology specified in Subsection D.
(2) The exact location of the stormwater management district
boundaries as they apply to a given development site shall be
determined by mapping the boundaries using the two-foot
topographic contours provided as part of the drainage plan. The
§ 26-11 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-11
25:912
district boundaries as originally drawn coincide with topographic
divides or, in certain instances, are drawn from the intersection of
the watercourse and a physical feature such as the confluence with
another watercourse or a potential flow obstruction (e.g., road,
culvert, bridge, etc.). The physical feature is the downstream limit
of the watercourse and the downstream subarea boundary is drawn
from that point upslope to each topographic divide along the path
perpendicular to the contour lines.
(3) Any downstream capacity analysis conducted in accordance with
this article shall use the following criteria for determining
adequacy for accepting increased peak flow rates:
(a) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to
convey the increased runoff associated with a two-year return
period event within their banks at velocities consistent with
protection of the channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities
shall be based upon criteria included in the DEP Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (April 1990).
Permissible velocities for selected channels are presented in
Appendix 1B-C of this article.126 [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord.
No. 2578]
(b) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to
convey the increased twenty-five-year return period runoff
peak within their banks or otherwise not create any hazard to
persons or property.
(c) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which
must pass or convey flows from the tributary area must have
sufficient capacity to pass or convey the increased flows
associated with the twenty-five-year return period runoff
event, except for facilities located within a designated
floodplain area which must be capable of passing or conveying
the one-hundred-year return period runoff. Any facilities which
constitute stream enclosures per DEP's Chapter 105
regulations shall be designed to convey the one-hundred-year
return period runoff. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
(4) For a proposed development site located within only one release
rate category area, the total runoff from the site shall meet the
applicable release rate criteria. For development sites with
multiple points of concentrated runoff discharge, individual
drainage points may be designed for up to a 100% release rate so
long as the total runoff from the site is controlled to the applicable
release rate.
(5) For a proposed development site located within two or more
release category areas, the maximum peak rate of runoff that may
126. Editor's Note: Appendix 1B-C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 26-11 RESERVED § 26-11
25:913
be discharged at any point is limited to the predevelopment peak
rate of runoff at that point multiplied by the applicable release
rate. The control rates shall apply regardless of any grading
modifications which may change the drainage area which
discharges at a given point.
(6) For a proposed development sites located partially within a release
rate category area and partially within a provisional no detention
area, in no event shall a significant portion of the site area subject
to the release rate control be drained to the discharge point(s)
located in the no detention area.
(7) No-harm option.
(a) For any proposed development site not located in a provisional
no detention district, the developer has the option of using a
less restrictive runoff control (including no detention) if the
developer can prove that "no harm" would be caused by
discharging at a higher runoff rate than that specified by the
plan. Proof of "no harm" would have to be shown from the
development site through the remainder of the downstream
drainage network to the confluence of the creek with the
Lehigh River. Proof of "no harm" must be shown using the
capacity criteria specification in Subsection C(3) if
downstream capacity analysis is a part of the "no harm"
justification. Attempts to prove "no harm" based upon
downstream peak flow versus capacity analysis shall be
governed by the following provisions:
[1] The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for
the design return period storms (two- , ten- twenty-fiveand
one-hundred-year) shall be the values from the
calibrated Penn State Runoff Models for the Coplay Creek,
Rockdale Creek, Fells Creek and Spring Creek Watersheds
and the watersheds associated with the unnamed creek
north of the Rockdale Creek. For the Conditional No
Detention II areas, the PSU-IV peak flow values will be
discussed. These flow values would be supplied to the
developer by the Township Engineer upon request.
[2] Any available capacity in the downstream conveyance
system as documented by a developer may be used by the
developer only in proportion to his development site
acreage relative to the total upstream undeveloped
acreage from the identified capacity (i.e., if his site is 10%
of the upstream undeveloped acreage, he may use up to
10% of the documented downstream available capacity).
[3] Developer-proposed runoff controls which would generate
increased peak flow rates at storm drainage problem areas
would, by definition, be precluded from successful
§ 26-11 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-11
25:914
attempts to prove "no harm," except in conjunction with
proposed capacity improvements for the problem areas
consistent with Subsection C(9) hereof.
(b) Any "no harm" justifications shall be submitted by the
developer as part of the drainage plan submission per § 26-12
hereof.
(8) Regional or subregional detention alternatives. For certain areas
within the study area, it may be more cost-effective to provide one
control facility an entire subarea, group of subareas or portion of a
subarea incorporating more than one development site than to
provide an individual control facility for each development site. The
initiative and funding for any regional or subregional runoff control
alternatives are the responsibility of prospective developers. The
design of any regional control basins must incorporate reasonable
development of the entire upstream watershed. The peak outflow of
a regional basin would be determined on a case-by-case basis using
the hydrologic model of the watershed consistent with protection of
the downstream watershed areas. "Hydrologic model" refers to the
calibrated versions of the Penn State Runoff Model as developed for
the stormwater management plan.
(9) Capacity improvements. In certain instances, primarily within the
provisional no detention areas, local drainage conditions may
dictate more stringent levels of runoff control than those based
upon protection of the entire watershed. In such instances, if the
developer could prove that it would be feasible to provide capacity
improvements to relieve the capacity deficiency in the local
drainage network, then the capacity improvements could be
provided by the developer in lieu of runoff controls on the
development site. Any capacity improvements would be designed
based upon development of all areas tributary to the proposed
improvement and the capacity criteria specified in Subsection C(3).
In addition, all new development upstream of a proposed capacity
improvement shall be assumed to implement the applicable runoff
controls consistent with this article except that all new
development within the entire subarea(s) within which the
proposed development site is located shall be assumed to
implement the developer's proposed discharge control, if any.
Capacity improvements may also be provided as necessary to
implement any regional or subregional detention alternatives or to
implement a modified "no harm" option which proposes specific
capacity improvements to document the validity of a less stringent
discharge control which would not create any harm downstream.
(10)Waiver of runoff control based on minimum additional impervious
cover. Any proposed regulated activity, except those defined in
Subsection D(5) and (6), which would create 10,000 square feet or
less of additional impervious cover would be exempt from meeting
the runoff control provisions of this article. For developments
§ 26-11 RESERVED § 26-11
25:915
which are to take place in stages, the entire development plan
must be used in determining conformance to this criteria.
Predevelopment impervious cover is that in place as of the effective
date of this article. Additional impervious cover shall include, but
not be limited to, any roof, parking or driveway areas and any new
streets and sidewalks constructed as part of or for the proposed
development. Any postdevelopment areas which may be designed
to initially be semipervious (e.g., gravel, crushed stone, porous
pavement, etc.) shall be considered impervious areas for the
purposes of waiver evaluation. Any semipervious redevelopment
areas shall be considered pervious areas for purposes of waiver
evaluation unless demonstrated otherwise by the applicant.
(11) Compatibility with NPDES requirements. Any proposed regulated
activity for which a permanent stormwater quality control
detention basin is required under the NPDES regulations shall use
the more stringent runoff control criteria between this article and
the NPDES requirements.
D. Calculation methodology.
(1) Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated
using either the rational method or the soil-cover-complex
methodology.
(2) The design of any detention basin intended to meet the
requirements of this article shall be verified by routing the design
storm hydrograph through the proposed basin. For basins designed
using the rational method technique, the detention volume shall, at
minimum, equal the volume derived from the approximate routing
process as contained in SCS Technical Release Number 55 (TR55,
1986), Chapter 6 (Figure 6-1).127
(3) All stormwater detention facilities shall provide a minimum one
foot freeboard above the maximum, pool elevation associated with
the two- through twenty-five-year runoff events. The two- through
one-hundred-year storm events shall be controlled by the primary
outlet structure. An emergency spillway for each basin shall be
designed to pass the entire one-hundred-year return frequency
storm peak flow rate with a minimum 0.5 foot freeboard. The
spillway should function to control overflows in the event of a
complete blockage of the basin outlet system. If this detention
facility is considered to be a dam as per DEP Chapter 105, the
design of the facility must be consistent with the Chapter 105
regulations, and may be required to pass a storm greater than the
one-hundred-year event. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
(4) All calculations using the soil-cover-complex method shall use the
Soil Conservation Service Type II twenty-four-hour rainfall
127. Editor's Note: Figure 6-1 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 26-11 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-11
25:916
§ 26-12. Drainage plan requirements.
distribution. The twenty-four-hour rainfall depths for the various
return periods to be used consistent with this article are taken from
the PennDOT Intensity-Duration-Frequency Field Manual (May
1986) for Region 4:
Return Period
24-Hour Rainfall Depth
(inches)
2-year 2.88
10-year 4.56
25-year 5.52
100-year 7.68
A graphical and tabular presentation of the Type II-twenty-fourhour
distribution is included in Appendix 1B-C hereto.128
(5) All calculations using the rational method shall use rainfall
intensities consistent with appropriate times of concentration and
return periods and the Intensity-duration-frequency curves as
presented in Appendix 1B-C.
(6) Runoff Curve Numbers (CNs) to be used in the soil-cover-complex
method shall be based upon the matrix presented in Appendix 1BC.
(7) Runoff coefficients for use in the rational method shall be based
upon the table presented in Appendix 1B-C.
(8) The Manning equation shall be used to calculate the capacity of
watercourses. Manning "n" values used in the calculations shall be
consistent with the table presented in Appendix 1B-C.129 Pipe
capacities shall be determined by methods acceptable to the
Township Engineer.
(9) The Pennsylvania DEP, Chapter 105, Rules and Regulations, apply
to the construction modification, operation or maintenance of both
existing and proposed dams, water obstructions and
encroachments throughout the watershed. Criteria for design and
construction of stormwater management facilities according to this
article may not be the same criteria that are used in the permitting
of dams under the Dam Safety Program. [Amended 8-8-2005 by
Ord. No. 2578]
A. General requirements. For any of the regulated activities of this article,
prior to the final approval of subdivision and/or land development plans,
128. Editor's Note: Appendix 1B-C is included at the end of this chapter.
129. Editor's Note: Appendix 1B-C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 26-11 RESERVED § 26-12
25:917
or the issuance of any permit or the commencement of any land
disturbance activity, the owner, subdivider, developer or his agent shall
submit a drainage plan for approval.
B. Exemptions.
(1) Impervious cover. Any regulated activity which would create
10,000 square feet or less of additional impervious cover is exempt
from the drainage plan preparation provisions of this article. This
criteria shall apply to the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages (i.e., the impervious cover
associated with the total development shall be used to compare to
the waiver minimum, not merely the individual stage impervious
cover). Predevelopment impervious cover is that in place as of the
effective date of this article. Additional impervious cover shall
include, but not be limited to, any roof, parking or driveway areas
and any new streets and sidewalks constructed as part of or for the
proposed regulated activity. Any areas designed to initially be
gravel, crushed stone, porous pavement, etc. shall be assumed to
be impervious for the purposes of comparison to the waiver
criteria.
(2) Prior drainage plan approval. Any regulated activity for which a
drainage plan was previously prepared as part of a subdivision or
land development proposal that received preliminary plan approval
from the Township prior to the effective date of this article is
exempt from the drainage plan preparation provisions of this
article provided that the approved drainage plan included design of
stormwater facilities consistent with ordinance provisions in effect
at the time of approval. If significant revisions are made to the
drainage plan after both the preliminary plan approval and the
effective date of the Part, preparation of a new drainage plan,
subject to the provisions of this article, shall be required.
C. Drainage plan contents. The following items shall be included in the
drainage plan:
(1) General.
(a) General description of project.
(b) General description of proposed permanent stormwater water
controls.
(2) Map(s) of the project area showing:
(a) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities
or other identifiable landmarks.
(b) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep
slopes (greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be
used.
§ 26-12 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-12
25:918
(c) Streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the
project area.
(d) Other physical features including existing drainage swales and
areas of natural vegetation to be preserved.
(e) Locations of proposed underground utilities, sewers and water
lines.
(f) An overlay showing soil types and boundaries based on the
Lehigh County Soil Survey latest edition.
(g) Proposed changes to land surface and vegetative cover.
(h) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
(i) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(j) Stormwater management district boundaries applicable to the
site.
(3) Stormwater management controls.
(a) All stormwater management controls must be shown on a map
and described, including:
[1] Groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds
or trenches. When these structures are used, the locations
of septic tank infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
[2] Other control devices or methods such as rooftop storage,
semipervious paving materials, grass swales, parking lot
ponding, vegetated strips, detention or retention ponds,
storm sewers, etc.
(b) All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of
the control device or method must be shown.
(4) Maintenance program. A maintenance program for all stormwater
management control facilities must be included. This program
must include the proposed ownership of the control facilities, the
maintenance requirements for the facilities and the financial
responsibilities for the required maintenance.
D. Plan submission.
(1) For regulated activities specified in § 26-9D(1) and (2) hereof:
(a) The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the
Township Secretary (or other appropriate person) as part of
the preliminary plan submission for the subdivision or land
development.
(b) Three copies of the drainage plan will be as submitted.
§ 26-12 RESERVED § 26-12
25:919
(c) Distribution of the drainage plan will be as follows:
[1] When not part of a land development or subdivision plan
submission:
[a] One copy to the Board of Commissioners.
[b] One copy to the Township Engineer.
[c] One copy to the Joint Planning Commission.
(2) For regulated activities specified in § 26-9D(3) and (4), the
drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the Township
Building Permit Officer as part of the building permit application.
(3) For regulated activities specified in § 26-9D(4) and (5):
(a) The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the
Joint Planning Commission for coordination with the DEP
permit application process under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and
Waterway Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain
Management) of DEP's rules and regulations. [Amended
8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
(b) One copy of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
(4) For all regulated activities under § 26-9D hereof that propose to
disturb more than five acres of land, an NPDES permit application
for discharge of stormwater associated with construction activity
shall be submitted to the Lehigh County Conservation District.
E. Drainage plan review.
(1) The Township Engineer shall review the drainage plan for
consistency with the adopted Coplay Creek Watershed and Lehigh
River Subbasin 2 Stormwater Management Plan as embodied by
this article and against any additional storm drainage provisions
contained in Chapter 22, Subdivision and Land Development, or
Chapter 27, Zoning, as applicable.
(2) The Joint Planning Commission shall provide an advisory review of
the drainage plan for consistency with the Coplay Creek Watershed
and Lehigh River Subbasin 2 Stormwater Management Plan.
(3) For regulated activities specified in § 26-9D(1) and (2), the Joint
Planning Commission shall provide written comments to the
Township, within a time frame consistent with established
procedures under the Act 247, as to whether the drainage plan has
been found to be consistent with the stormwater management plan.
(4) For regulated activities specified in § 26-9D(4) and (5), the Joint
Planning Commission shall notify DEP whether the drainage plan is
consistent with the stormwater management plan and forward a
§ 26-12 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-12
25:920
copy of the review letter to the Township and developer.
[Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
(5) The Township shall not approve any subdivision or land
development [regulated activities § 26-9D(1) and (2)] or building
permit application [regulated activities § 26-9D(3) and (4)] if the
drainage plan has been found to be inconsistent with the
stormwater management plan as determined by the Township
Engineer.
F. Modification of plans. A modification to a submitted drainage plan for a
proposed development site which involves a change in control methods
or techniques, or which involves the relocation or redesign of control
measures or which is necessary because of soil or other conditions are
not as stated in the drainage plan (as determined by the Township
Engineer) shall require a resubmission of the modified drainage plan
consistent with Subsection D subject to review per Subsection E hereof
of this article.
G. Hardship waiver procedure.
(1) The Board of Commissioners may hear requests for waivers where
it is alleged that the provisions of this (Act 167) Part inflict
unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The waiver request shall
be in writing on an application form promulgated by the Township
and accompanied by the requisite fee based upon a fee schedule
adopted by the Township. A copy of the completed application form
shall be provided to each of the following: Township, Township
Engineer, Township Solicitor and Joint Planning Commission. The
application shall fully document the nature of the alleged hardship.
(2) The Township may grant a waiver provided that all of the following
findings are made in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity of lot size or shape or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular properly, and that the unnecessary hardship is due
to such conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions
generally created by the provisions of this article in the
stormwater management district in which the property is
located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this article, including
the "no harm" provision and that the authorization of a waiver
is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
§ 26-12 RESERVED § 26-12
25:921
§ 26-13. Inspections.
§ 26-14. Fees and expenses.
§ 26-15. Maintenance responsibilities.
(d) That the waiver, if authorized, will represent the minimum
waiver that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(3) In granting any waiver, the Board of Commissioners may attach
such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of Act 167 and this article.
A. Schedule of inspections.
(1) The Township Engineer or his designee shall inspect all phases of
the installation of the permanent stormwater control facilities and
the completed installation.
(2) If at any stage of the work the Township Engineer determines that
the permanent stormwater control facilities are not being installed
in accordance with the approved development plan, the Township
shall revoke any existing permits until a revised development plan
is submitted and approved as required by § 26-12F.
A. General. A fee shall be established by the Township to defer municipal
costs for drainage plan review and processing.
B. Expenses covered by fees. The fees required by this article shall, at a
minimum, cover:
(1) The review of the drainage plan by the Township Engineer.
(2) The site inspection.
(3) The inspection of required controls and improvements during
construction.
(4) The final inspection upon completion of the controls and
improvements required in the plan.
(5) Any additional work required to enforce any permit violations,
regulated by this article, correct violations and assure the
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
A. Maintenance responsibilities. The maintenance responsibilities for
permanent stormwater runoff control facilities shall be determined
based upon the type of ownership of the property which is controlled by
the facilities.
(1) Single entity ownership. In all cases where the permanent storm
runoff control facilities are designed to manage runoff from
§ 26-12 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-15
25:922
§ 26-16. Enforcement. [Added 2-9-1998 by Ord. No. 2076]
property in a single entity ownership as defined below, the
maintenance responsibility for the stormwater control facilities
shall be with the single entity owner. The single entity owner shall
enter into an agreement with the Township which specified that the
owner will properly maintain the facilities consistent with accepted
practice as determined by the Township Engineer. The agreement
shall provide for regular inspections by the Township and contain
such provisions as necessary to ensure timely correction of any
maintenance deficiencies by the single entity owner. A single entity
shall be defined as an individual, association, public or private
corporation, partnership firm, trust, estate or any other legal entity
empowered to own real estate.
(2) Multiple ownership. In cases where the property controlled by the
permanent stormwater control facilities shall be in a multiple
ownership (i.e., many individual owners of various portions of the
property), the developer shall dedicate the permanent stormwater
control facilities to the Township for maintenance. The developer
shall pay a fee to the Township corresponding to the present worth
of maintenance of the facilities for a ten-year period. The estimated
annual maintenance cost for the facilities shall be based on a fee
schedule provided by the Township Engineer and adopted by the
Township. The fee schedule must be reasonable. In certain multiple
ownership situations, the Township may benefit by transferring the
maintenance responsibility to an individual or group of individuals
residing within the controlled area. These individuals may have the
permanent stormwater control facilities adjacent to their lots or
otherwise have an interest in the proper maintenance of the
facilities. In these instances, the Township and the individual(s)
may enter into a formal agreement for the maintenance of the
facilities. The Township shall maintain ownership of the facilities
and be responsible for periodic inspections.
B. Right-of-entry. Upon presentation of the proper credentials, duly
authorized representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable
times upon any property within the municipality to investigate or
ascertain whether proper maintenance is being provided for any
stormwater management facilities for which the Township is not
directly responsible for maintenance as provided in Subsection A.
A. 1031. Right-of-way. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duty
authorized representatives of the Township may enter at reasonable
times upon any property within the Township to investigate or ascertain
the condition of the subject property in regard to any aspect regulated
by this article.
B. Notification. In the event that a person fails to comply with the
requirements of this article, or fails to conform to the requirements of
any permit issued hereunder, the Township shall provide written
§ 26-15 RESERVED § 26-16
25:923
notification of the violation. Such notification shall set forth the nature
of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for correction of these
violation(s). Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject
such person to the penalty provisions of this article. All such penalties
shall be deemed cumulative and resort by the Township from pursuing
any and all other remedies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of
the real property on which any regulated activity is proposed to occur,
is occurring or has occurred to comply with the terms and conditions of
this article.
C. Enforcement. Any person found by the Township to have violated any
provision of this article shall be subject to the enforcement provisions in
Article V of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and/or § 15
of the Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Act (Act 167).
§ 26-16 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-16
25:924
ARTICLE III
Jordan Creek Watershed
[Adopted 4-19-1993 by Ord. No. 1824]
§ 26-17. General provisions.
A. Title. This article shall be known as the "Stormwater Management
Ordinance of Whitehall Township."
B. Statement of findings. The Township Commissioners finds that:
(1) Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater
resulting from development throughout a watershed increase flood
flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation,
overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers,
greatly increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control
stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood control
efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge and threatens public health and safety.
(2) A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety and
welfare and the protection of the people of the Township and all the
people of the Commonwealth, their resources and environment.
C. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to promote the public health,
safety and welfare within the watersheds by minimizing the damages
described in § 26-17B(1) of this article by provisions designed to:
(1) Control accelerated runoff end erosion and sedimentation
problems at their source by regulating activities which cause such
problems.
(2) Utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage
systems.
(3) Encourage recharge of groundwaters where appropriate.
(4) Maintain the existing flows and quality of streams and
watercourses in the Township and the Commonwealth.
(5) Preserve and restore the flood carrying capacity of streams.
(6) Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management structures which are constructed in the Township.
D. Statutory authority. The Township of Whitehall is empowered to
regulate these activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978,
P.L. 864 (Act 167), the Stormwater Management Act and the First Class
Township Code, the Home Rule Charter of the Township of Whitehall
and Chapter 22, Subdivision and Land Development, and Chapter 27,
Zoning.
§ 26-17 RESERVED § 26-17
25:925
E. Applicability.
(1) This article shall only apply to those areas of the Township which
are located within the Jordan Creek drainage basin as delineated
on an official map available for inspection at the Whitehall
Township Municipal Building. A map of the Jordan Creek
Watershed at a reduced scale is included in Appendix 1C-A130 for
general reference.
(2) This article shall only apply to permanent stormwater management
facilities constructed as part of any of the activities listed in this
section. Stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation
control during construction involved with any of these activities are
specifically not regulated by this article, but shall continue to be
regulated under existing laws and ordinances.
(3) This article contains only those stormwater runoff control criteria
and standards which are necessary or desirable from a total
watershed perspective. Additional stormwater management design
criteria (i.e., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system details,
etc.) which represent sound engineering practice may be regulated
whether by separate stormwater ordinance provisions or as part of
the general responsibilities of the Township Engineer.
(4) The following activities are defined as regulated activities and shall
be regulated by this article, except those which meet the waiver
specifications presented thereafter:
(a) Land development.
(b) Subdivision.
(c) Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces
(driveways, parking lots, etc.).
(d) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing
buildings.
(e) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream
channel.
(f) Installation of stormwater systems or appurtenances thereto.
(5) Any proposed regulated activity, except those defined in
§ 26-17E(4)(e) and (f), which would create 10,000 square feet or
less of additional impervious cover would be exempt from meeting
the provisions of this article. For development taking place in
stages, the entire development plan must be used in determining
conformance with this criteria. Additional impervious cover shall
include, but not be limited to, any roof, parking or driveway areas
and any new streets and sidewalks constructed as part of or for the
130. Editor's Note: Appendix 1C-A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 26-17 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-17
25:926
§ 26-18. Definitions.
proposed regulated activity. Any areas which may be designed
to initially be semipervious (e.g., gravel, crushed stone, porous
pavement, etc.) shall be considered impervious areas for the
purpose of waiver evaluation. No waiver shall be provided for
regulated activities as defined in § 26-17E(4)(e) and (f).
A. The following words and phrases shall have the meanings hereinafter
indicated, unless the text clearly states an alternative or different
meaning.
APPLICANT — See "developer."
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank or storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Lehigh County Conservation
District.
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit or similar structure including appurtenant
works which carries surface water.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid or any refuse bank fill or structure for highway,
railroad or other purposes which does or may impound water or
another fluid or semifluid.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event
measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., fifty-year storm) and
duration (e.g., twenty-four-hour) and used in computing stormwater
management control systems.
DETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that
undertakes any regulated activity of this article.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land for which a regulated
activity is proposed.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a land owner to a
grantee, allowing the use of private land for stormwater management
purposes.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the proposed stormwater
management controls, if any, to be used for a given development site,
the contents of which are established in § 26-20C.
EROSION — The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind,
ice or other geological agents.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
§ 26-17 RESERVED § 26-18
25:927
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which prevents the percolation of
water into the ground.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE — A structure designed to direct runoff
into the ground, e.g., french drain, seepage pit or seepage trench.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of stormwater runoff
at a given point and time resulting from a specified storm event.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions which impact
upon proper management of stormwater runoff end which are governed
by this article as specified in § 26-17D.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of the predevelopment peak rate of
runoff for a development site to which the postdevelopment peak rate
of runoff must be controlled to protect downstream areas.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval in years over which an event
of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the twentyfive-
year return period rainfall or runoff event would be expected to
recur on the average once every 25 years.
RUNOFF — The part of precipitation which flows over the land.
SCS — Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture or its
successor.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled
with loose stone or similar material and into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the ground.
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by SCS which is based upon relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called a curve number.
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure
based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow
equals the change in storage for a given time interval) and based on
outflow being a unique function of storage volume.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure.
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
§ 26-18 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-18
25:928
§ 26-19. Stormwater management requirements.
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes or other conduits which carries
intercepted surface water runoff, street water and other wash waters
or drainage, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing
stormwater runoff adopted by Lehigh County for the Jordan Creek
Watershed as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167)
and known as the "Stormwater Management Act."
STREAM — A watercourse.
SUBAREA — The smallest unit of watershed breakdown for hydrologic
modeling purposes for which the runoff control criteria have been
established in the Stormwater Management Plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the Court for
distribution to heirs or devices, transfer of ownership or building or lot
ownership.
SWALE — A low lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
WATERCOURSE — Any channel or conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
B. Any word, term or phrase used in this article, but not specifically
defined herein, shall be given it normal and customary meaning.
A. General requirements.
(1) Storm drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow in natural watercourses except as modified by
stormwater detention facilities or open channels consistent with
this article.
(2) The existing point of concentrated drainage discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be altered without written approval of
the affected property owner(s).
(3) Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge onto adjacent
property shall be managed such that, at minimum, the peak
diffused flow does not increase in the general direction of
discharge, except as otherwise provided in this article. If diffused
flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto adjacent
property, the developer must document that there are adequate
downstream conveyance facilities to safely transport the
concentrated discharge or otherwise prove that no harm will result
from the concentrated discharge. Areas of existing diffused
§ 26-18 RESERVED § 26-19
25:929
drainage discharge shall be subject to any applicable release rate
criteria in the general direction of existing discharge whether they
are proposed to be concentrated or maintained as diffused
drainage areas.
(4) Where a subdivision is traversed by watercourses other than those
for which a one-hundred-year floodplain is defined by the Township
of Whitehall, there shall be provided drainage easements
conforming substantially with the line of such watercourses. The
width of any easement shall be adequate to provide for unimpeded
flow of storm runoff based on calculations made in conformance
with § 26-20D hereof for the one-hundred-year return period runoff
and to provide a freeboard allowance of 0.5 foot above the design
water surface level. The terms of the easement shall prohibit
excavation, the placing of fill or structures, any alterations which
may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of
the easement. Also, periodic maintenance of the easement to
ensure proper runoff conveyance shall be required. Watercourses
for which the one-hundred-year flood plain is formally defined are
subject to the applicable Township floodplain regulations.
(5) Any drainage facilities or structures required by this article that
are located on state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to
approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
(6) When it can be shown than, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainage swales on the site cannot adequately provide for
drainage, open channels may be constructed conforming
substantially to the line and grade of such natural drainage swales.
Capacities of open channels shall be calculated using the Manning
equation.
(7) Storm drainage facilities and appurtenances shall be so designed
and provided as to minimize erosion in watercourse channels and
at all points of discharge.
(8) Consideration should be given to the design and use of volume
controls for stormwater management, where geology permits.
(9) Storm drainage facilities and appurtenances shall be so designed
and provided as to minimize erosion in watercourse channels and
at all points of discharge.
(10) Consideration should be given to the design and use of volume
controls for stormwater management, where geology permits.
(11) All streets shall be designed to provide for the prompt runoff of
surface water from their cartways.
B. Stormwater Management Districts.
§ 26-19 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-19
25:930
(1) Mapping of Stormwater Management Districts. In order to
implement the provisions of the Jordan Creek Stormwater
Management Plan, the Township is hereby divided into stormwater
management districts consistent with the Jordan Creek Release
Rate Map presented in the plan. The boundaries of the stormwater
management districts are shown on an official map which is
available for inspection at the Township office. A copy of the official
map at a reduced scale is incorporated herein by this reference as
Appendix 1C-A131 for general reference.
(2) Description of Stormwater Management Districts. Three types of
stormwater managements districts maybe applicable to the
Township, namely provisional no detention districts, 100% release
rate districts and dual release rate districts as described below.
(a) Provisional No Detention Districts. These watershed areas may
discharge postdevelopment peak runoff without detention
facilities without adversely affecting the total watershed peak
flow. In certain instances, however, the "local" runoff
conveyance facilities, which transport runoff from the site to
the main channel, may not have adequate capacity to safely
transport increased peak flows associated with not providing
detention for a proposed development. In those instances, the
developer shall either use a 100% release rate control or
provide increased capacity of downstream drainage elements
to convey increased peak flows consistent with § 26-19C(9). In
determining if adequate capacity exists in the local watershed
drainage network, the developer must assume that the entire
local watershed is developed per current zoning and that all
new development would use the runoff controls specified by
this article. Similarly, any capacity improvements must be
designed to convey runoff from development of all areas
tributary to the improvement consistent with the capacity
criteria specified in § 26-19C(3).
(b) One-Hundred-Percent Release Rate Districts. These watershed
areas must implement a 100% release rate for each of the two-
, ten- , twenty-five and one-hundred-year return period storm
events. Areas with a 100% release rate strategy form a buffer
between provisional no detention areas and dual release rate
areas described below.
(c) Dual Release Rate Districts. The anticipated postdevelopment
runoff from these areas can only be controlled across the range
of return periods from two through 100 years by implementing
a dual system of release rates. Within this district, the two-year
postdevelopment runoff must be controlled to 30% of the
predevelopment two-year runoff peak. Further, the ten-year,
twenty-five-year and one-hundred-year postdevelopment
131. Editor's Note: Appendix 1C-A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 26-19 RESERVED § 26-19
25:931
runoff must be controlled to the stated percentage of the
predevelopment peak. Release rates associated with the tenthrough
one-hundred-year events vary from 50% to 100%
depending upon location in the watershed.
C. Stormwater Management District implementation provisions.
(1) Any stormwater management controls required by this article and
subject to a 100% release rate criteria shall meet the applicable
release rate criteria for each of the two- , ten- , twenty-five- and
one-hundred-year return period runoff events consistent with the
calculation methodology specified in § 26-19D. Stormwater
management controls intended to be designed consistent with
§ 26-19D.
(2) The exact location of the stormwater management district
boundaries as they apply to a given development site shall be
determined by mapping the boundaries using the two foot
topographic contours provided as part of the drainage plan. The
district boundaries as originally drawn coincide with topographic
divides or, in certain instances, are drawn from the intersection of
the watercourse and a physical feature such as the confluence with
another watercourse or a potential flow obstruction (e.g., road,
culvert, bridge, etc.). The physical feature acts as a downstream
limit of the watercourse and the downstream subarea boundary is
drawn from that point upslope to each topographic divide along the
path perpendicular to the contour lines.
(3) Any downstream capacity analysis conducted in accordance with
this article shall use the following criteria for determining
adequacy for accepting increased peak flow rates:
(a) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to
convey the increased runoff associated with a two-year return
period event within their banks at velocities consistent with
protection of the channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities
shall be based upon criteria included in the DEP Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (April 1990 or
subsequent amendments). Permissible velocities for selected
channels are presented in Appendix 3C-C of this article.132
[Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
(b) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to
convey the increased twenty-five-year return period runoff
peak within their banks or otherwise not create any hazard to
persons or property.
(c) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which
must pass or convey flows from the tributary area must have
sufficient capacity to pass or convey the increased flows
132. Editor's Note: Appendix 3C-C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 26-19 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-19
25:932
associated with the twenty-five-year return period runoff
event, except for facilities located within a designated
floodplain area which must be capable of passing or conveying
the one-hundred-year return period runoff. Any facilities which
constitute stream enclosures per DEP's Chapter 105
regulations shall be designed to convey the one-hundred-year
return period runoff. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
(4) For a proposed development site located within only one release
rate category area, the total runoff from the site shall meet the
applicable release rate criteria. For development sites with
multiple points of concentrated runoff discharge, individual
drainage points may be designed for up to a 100% release rate so
long as the total runoff from the site is controlled to the applicable
release rate.
(5) For a proposed development site located within two or more
release rate category areas, the maximum peak rate of runoff that
may be discharged at any point is limited to the predevelopment
peak rate of runoff at that point multiplied by the applicable release
rate. The control rates shall apply regardless of any grading
modifications which may change the drainage area which
discharges at a given point.
(6) For a proposed development sites located partially within a release
rate category area and partially within a provisional no detention
area, in no event shall a significant portion of the site area subject
to the release rate control be drained to the discharge point(s)
located in the no detention area.
(7) No-harm option.
(a) For any proposed development site not located in a provisional
no detention district, the developer has the option of using a
less restrictive runoff control (including no detention) if the
developer can prove that "no harm" would be caused by
discharging at a higher runoff rate than that specified by the
plan. Proof of "no harm" would have to be shown from the
development site through the remainder of the downstream
drainage network to the confluence of the Jordan Creek with
the Little Lehigh Creek. Proof of "no harm" must be shown
using the capacity criteria specified in § 26-19C(3) if
downstream capacity analysis is a part of the "no harm"
justification. Attempts to prove "no harm" based upon
downstream peak flow versus capacity analysis shall be
governed by the following provisions:
[1] The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for
the design return period storms (two- , ten- , twenty-fiveand
one-hundred-year) shall be the values from the
calibrated Penn State Runoff Model for the Jordan Creek
§ 26-19 RESERVED § 26-19
25:933
Watershed. These flow values would be supplied to the
developer by the Township Engineer upon request.
[2] Any available capacity in the downstream conveyance
system as documented by a developer may be used by the
developer only in proportion to his development site
acreage relative to the total upstream undeveloped
acreage from the identified capacity (i.e., if his site is 10%
of the upstream undeveloped acreage, he may use up to
10% of the documented downstream available capacity).
[3] Developer-proposed runoff controls which would generate
increased peak flow rates at undocumented storm
drainage problem areas would, by definition, be precluded
from successful attempts to prove "no harm," except in
conjunction with proposed capacity improvements for the
problem areas consistent with § 26-19C(9).
(b) Any "no harm" justifications shall be submitted by the
developer as part of the drainage plan submission per § 26-20
hereof.
(8) Regional or subregional detention alternatives. For certain areas
within the watershed, it may be more cost-effective to provide one
control facility for an entire subarea, group of subareas or portion
of a subarea incorporating more than one development site than to
provide an individual control facility for each development site. The
initiative and funding for any regional or subregional runoff control
alternatives are the responsibility of prospective developers. The
design of any regional control basins must incorporate reasonable
development of the entire upstream watershed. The peak outflow of
a regional basin would be determined on the case-by-case basis
using the hydrologic model of the watershed consistent with
protection of the downstream watershed areas. "Hydrologic model"
refers to the calibrated Jordan Creek version of the Penn State
Runoff Model as developed for the stormwater management plan.
(9) Capacity improvements. In certain instances, primarily within the
provisional no detention areas, local drainage conditions may
dictate more stringent levels of runoff control than those based
upon protection of the entire watershed. In such instances, if the
developer could prove that it would be feasible to provide capacity
improvements to relieve the capacity deficiency in the local
drainage network, when the capacity improvements could be
provided by the developer in lieu of runoff controls on the
development site. Any capacity improvements would be designed
based upon development of all areas tributary to the proposed
improvement and the capacity criteria specified in § 26-19C(3). In
addition, all new development upstream of a proposed capacity
improvement shall be assumed to implement the applicable runoff
controls consistent with this article except that all new
§ 26-19 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-19
25:934
development within the entire subarea(s) within which the
proposed development site is located shall be assumed to
implement the developer's proposed discharge control, if any.
Capacity improvements may also be provided as necessary to
implement any regional or subregional detention alternatives or to
implement a modified "no harm" option which proposes specific
capacity improvements to document the validity of a less stringent
discharge control which would not create any harm downstream.
(10)Waiver of runoff control based on minimum additional impervious
cover. Any proposed regulated activity, except those defined in
§ 26-17E(4)(e) and (f), which would create 10,000 square feet or
less of additional impervious cover would be exempt from meeting
the runoff control provisions of this article. For developments
which are to take place in stages, the entire development plan must
be used in determining conformance to this criteria.
Predevelopment impervious cover shall include, but not be limited
to, any roof, parking or driveway areas and any new streets and
sidewalks constructed as part of or for the proposed development.
Any postdevelopment areas which may be designed to initially be
semipervious (e.g., gravel, crushed stone, porous pavement, etc.)
shall be considered impervious areas for the purposes of waiver
evaluation. Any semipervious predevelopment areas shall be
considered pervious areas for purposes of waiver evaluation unless
demonstrated otherwise by the applicant.
D. Calculation methodology.
(1) Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated
using either the rational method or the soil-cover-complex
methodology.
(2) The design of any detention basin intended to meet the
requirements of this article shall be verified by routing the design
storm hydrograph through the proposed basin. For basins designed
using the modified rational method technique, the detention
volume shall, at minimum, equal the volume derived from the
approximate routing process as contained in SCS Technical
Release Number 55 (TR55, 1986), Chapter 6 (Figure 6-1).133
(3) All stormwater detention facilities shall provide a minimum one
foot freeboard above the maximum, pool elevation associated with
the two- through twenty-five-year runoff events. An emergency
spillway shall be designed to pass the one-hundred-year runoff
event with a minimum 0.5 foot freeboard.
(4) All calculations using the soil-cover-complex method shall use the
Soil Conservation Service Type II twenty-four-hour rainfall
distribution. The twenty-four-hour rainfall depths for the various
133. Editor's Note: Figure 6-1 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 26-19 RESERVED § 26-19
25:935
§ 26-20. Drainage plan requirements.
return periods to be used consistent with this article are taken from
the PennDOT Intensity-Duration-Frequency Field Manual (May
1986) for Region 4:
Return Period
24-Hour Rainfall Depth
(inches)
2-year 2.88
10-year 4.56
25-year 5.52
100-year 7.68
A graphical and tabular presentation of the Type II-twenty-fourhour
distribution is included in Appendix 3C-C hereto.134
(5) All calculations using the rational method shall use rainfall
intensities consistent with appropriate times of concentration and
return periods and the Intensity-duration-frequency curves as
presented in Appendix 3C-C.
(6) Runoff curve numbers (CN's) to be used in the soil-cover-complex
method shall be based upon the matrix presented in Appendix 3CC.
(7) Runoff coefficients for use in the rational method shall be based
upon the table presented in Appendix 3C-C.
(8) The Manning equation shall be used to calculate the capacity of
watercourses. Manning "n" values used in the calculations shall be
consistent with the table presented in Appendix 3C-C.135 Pipe
capacities shall be determined by methods acceptable to the
Township Engineer.
(9) Any detention basin intended to meet the requirements of this
article which requires a dam safety permit from DEP shall be
designed consistent with the provisions of the Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act and the DEP Chapter 105 Rules and
Regulations.
A. General requirements. For any of the regulated activities of this article,
prior to the final approval of subdivision and/or land development plans,
or the issuance of any permit or the commencement of any land
disturbance activity, the owner, subdivider, developer or his agent shall
submit a drainage plan for approval.
134. Editor's Note: Appendix 3C-C is included at the end of this chapter.
135. Editor's Note: Appendix 3C-C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 26-19 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-20
25:936
B. Exemptions. Any regulated activity which would create 10,000 square
feet or less of additional impervious cover is exempt from the drainage
plan preparation provisions of this article. This criteria shall apply to
the total proposed development even if development is to take place in
stages (i.e., the impervious cover associated with the total development
shall be used to compare to the waiver minimum, not merely the
individual stage impervious cover). Additional impervious cover is that
in place as of the effective date of this article. Additional impervious
cover shall include, but not be limited to, any roof, parking or driveway
areas and any new streets and sidewalks constructed as part of or for
the proposed regulated activity. Any areas designed to initially be
gravel, crushed stone, porous pavement, etc. shall be assumed to be
impervious for the purposes of comparison to the waiver criteria.
C. Drainage plan contents. The following items shall be included in the
drainage plan:
(1) General.
(a) General description of project.
(b) General description of proposed permanent stormwater water
controls.
(2) Map(s) of the project area showing:
(a) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities
or other identifiable landmarks.
(b) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep
slopes (greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be
used.
(c) Streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the
project area.
(d) Other physical features including existing drainage swales and
areas of natural vegetation to be preserved.
(e) Locations of proposed underground utilities, sewers and water
lines.
(f) An overlay showing soil types and boundaries.
(g) Proposed changes to land surface and vegetative cover.
(h) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
(i) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(j) Stormwater management district boundaries applicable to the
site.
§ 26-20 RESERVED § 26-20
25:937
(3) Stormwater management controls.
(a) All stormwater management controls must be shown on a map
and described, including:
[1] Groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds
or trenches. When these structures are used, the locations
of septic tank infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
[2] Other control devices or methods such as rooftop storage,
semipervious paving materials, grass swales, parking lot
ponding, vegetated strips, detention or retention ponds,
storm sewers, etc.
(b) All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of
the control device or method must be shown.
(4) Maintenance program. A maintenance program for all stormwater
management control facilities must be included. This program
must include the proposed ownership of the control facilities, the
maintenance requirements for the facilities and the financial
responsibilities for the required maintenance.
D. Plan submission.
(1) For regulated activities specified in § 26-121(4)(A) and (B):
(a) The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the
Township Secretary (or other appropriate person) as part of
the preliminary plan submission for the subdivision or land
development.
(b) Three copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
(c) Distribution of the drainage plan will be as follows:
[1] One copy to the Board of Commissioners.
[2] One copy to the Township Engineer.
[3] One copy to the Joint Planning Commission.
(2) For regulated activities specified in § 26-121(4)(C) and (D), the
drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the Township
Building Permit Officer as part of the building permit application.
(3) For regulated activities specified in § 26-121(4)(E) and (F):
(a) The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the
Joint Planning Commission for coordination with the DEP
permit application process under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and
Waterway Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain
Management) of DEP's rules and regulations. [Amended
8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
§ 26-20 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-20
25:938
(b) One copy of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
E. Drainage plan review.
(1) The Township Engineer shall review the drainage plan for
consistency with the adopted Jordan Creek Watershed Stormwater
Management Plan as embodied by this article and against any
additional storm drainage provisions contained in Chapter 22,
Subdivision and Land Development, or Chapter 27, Zoning, as
applicable.
(2) The Joint Planning Commission shall provide an advisory review of
the drainage plan for consistency with the Jordan Creek
Stormwater Management Plan.
(3) For regulated activities specified in § 26-121(4)(A) and (B), the Joint
Planning Commission shall provide written comments to the
Township, within a time frame consistent with established
procedures under the Act 247, as to whether the drainage plan has
been found to be consistent with the stormwater management plan.
(4) For regulated activities specified in § 26-121(4)(E) and (F), the Joint
Planning Commission shall notify DEP whether the drainage plan is
consistent with the stormwater management plan and forward a
copy of the review letter to the Township and developer.
[Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
(5) The Township shall not approve any subdivision or land
development (regulated activities § 26-121(4)(A) and (B)) or
building permit application (regulated activities § 26-121(4)(C) and
(D)) if the drainage plan has been found to be inconsistent with the
stormwater management plan as determined by the Township
Engineer.
F. Modification of plans. A modification to a submitted drainage plan for a
proposed development site which involves a change in control methods
or techniques, or which involves a change in control methods or
measures, or which is necessary because soil or other conditions are
not as stated on the drainage plan (as determined by Township
Engineer) shall require a resubmission of the modified drainage plan
consistent with § 26-20D subject to review per § 26-21 of this article.
G. Hardship waiver procedure.
(1) The Whitehall Township Board of Commissioners may hear
requests for waivers where it is alleged that the provisions of this
(Act 167) Part inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The
waiver request shall be in writing on an application form
promulgated by the Township and accompanied by the requisite fee
based upon a fee schedule adopted by Whitehall Township. A copy
of the completed application form shall be provided to each of the
following: Whitehall Township, the Township Engineer, the
§ 26-20 RESERVED § 26-20
25:939
§ 26-21. Inspections.
§ 26-22. Fees and expenses.
Township Solicitor and the Joint Planning Commission. The
application shall fully document the nature of the alleged hardship.
(2) The Township may grant a waiver provided that all of the following
findings are made in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity of lot size or shape or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular properly, and that the unnecessary hardship is due
to such conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions
generally created by the provisions of this article in the
stormwater management district in which the property is
located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this article, including
the "no harm" provision and that the authorization of a waiver
is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
(d) That the waiver, if authorized, will represent the minimum
waiver that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(3) In granting any waiver, the Township, the Board of Commissioners
of Whitehall Township may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of
Act 167 and this article.
A. Schedule of inspections.
(1) The Township Engineer or his designee shall inspect all phases of
the installation of the permanent stormwater control facilities and
the completed installation.
(2) If at any stage of the work the Township Engineer determines that
the permanent stormwater control facilities are not being installed
in accordance with the approved development plan, the Township
shall revoke any existing permits until a revised development plan
is submitted and approved as required by § 26-20F.
A. General. A fee shall be established by the Township to defer municipal
costs for drainage plan review and processing.
§ 26-20 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-22
25:940
§ 26-23. Maintenance responsibilities.
B. Expenses covered by fees. The fees required by this article shall, at a
minimum, cover:
(1) The review of the drainage plan by the Township Engineer.
(2) The site inspection.
(3) The inspection of required controls and improvements during
construction.
(4) The final inspection upon completion of the controls and
improvements during construction.
(5) Any additional work required to enforce any permit violations,
regulated by this article, correct violations and assure the
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
A. Maintenance responsibilities. The maintenance responsibilities for
permanent stormwater runoff control facilities shall be determined
based upon the type of ownership of the property which is controlled by
the facilities.
(1) Single entity ownership. In all cases where the permanent storm
runoff control facilities are designed to manage runoff from
property in a single entity ownership as defined below, the
maintenance responsibility for the stormwater control facilities
shall be with the single entity owner. The single entity owner shall
enter into an agreement with the Township which specifies that the
owner will properly maintain the facilities consistent with accepted
practice as determined by the Township Engineer. The agreement
shall provide for regular inspections by the Township and contain
such provisions as necessary to ensure timely correction of any
maintenance deficiencies by the single entity owner. A single entity
shall be defined as an individual, association, public or private
corporation, partnership firm, trust, estate or any other legal entity
empowered to own real estate under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The agreement memorializing
such maintenance responsibility shall be recorded in the Recorder
of Deeds office in and for Lehigh County and a notation referencing
such agreement shall be made on the recorded subdivision plan.
(2) Multiple ownership. In cases where the property controlled by the
permanent stormwater control facilities shall be in a multiple
ownership (i.e., many individual owners of various portions of the
property), the developer shall dedicate the permanent stormwater
control facilities to the Whitehall Township for maintenance. The
developer shall pay a fee to the Township corresponding to the
present worth of maintenance of the facilities for a ten-year period.
The estimated annual maintenance cost for the facilities shall be
based on a fee schedule provided by the Township Engineer and
§ 26-22 RESERVED § 26-23
25:941
§ 26-24. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
adopted by the Township. The fee schedule will be based upon the
anticipated cost of maintenance for a ten-year period.
(3) In certain multiple ownership situations, the Township may benefit
by transferring the maintenance responsibility to an individual or
group of individuals residing within the controlled area. These
individuals may have the permanent stormwater control facilities
adjacent to their lots or otherwise have an interest in the proper
maintenance of the facilities. In these instances, the Township and
the individual(s) may enter into a formal agreement for the
maintenance of the facilities and the posting of a sufficient escrow
to cover costs. The Township shall then maintain ownership of the
facilities and be responsible for periodic inspections.
A. Enforcement and penalties. Upon presentation of the proper
credentials, duly authorized representatives of Whitehall Township may
enter upon any property within the Township at reasonable times to
investigate or ascertain whether proper maintenance is being provided
for any stormwater management facilities for which the Township is not
directly responsible for maintenance as provided in § 26-23.
B. Violation and notification. In the event that an owner, subdivider,
developer or his agent fails to comply with the requirements of this
article, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, the Township shall provide written notification of the
violation(s) and establish a time limit for correction of these
violation(s). Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the owner,
subdivider, developer or his agent shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of this article (§ 26-24C) and any other penalty provisions
contained in Chapter 22, Subdivision and Land Development, or other
Township ordinances. Penalties shall be deemed cumulative.
C. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a
separate offense. In addition, the Township may institute injunctive,
mandamus or any other applicable action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this article. Any court or competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
§ 26-23 WHITEHALL CODE § 26-24
25:942
Chapter 27
ZONING
§ 26-24 RESERVED § 26-24
25:943

ARTICLE I
Short Title
§ 27-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Whitehall Township
Zoning Ordinance of 1989."
§ 27-1 RESERVED § 27-1
25:945

ARTICLE II
Purposes and Interpretation
§ 27-2. Intent.
This chapter is enacted to implement and further the land development
and use objectives, policies and recommendations stated in the Whitehall
Township Comprehensive Plan.
§ 27-3. Purposes.
The specific purposes of this chapter are:
§ 27-4. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to be the minimum
requirements necessary to serve the purposes and community development
objectives of the Township. Where the provisions of this chapter impose
A. To protect the established character and the social and economic wellbeing
of both private and public property.
B. To promote, in the public interest, the utilization of land for the
purposes for which it is most appropriate.
C. To prevent loss from fire, panic or other danger.
D. To provide adequate light and air.
E. To provide convenience of access.
F. To prevent overcrowding of land and buildings.
G. To avoid undue concentration of population.
H. To lessen and, where possible, prevent traffic congestion on public
streets and highways.
I. To preserve and enhance the value of buildings and land.
J. To preserve and enhance the visual character and natural beauty of the
Township.
K. To provide mediation.
L. To protect and preserve natural resources and agricultural land and
activities.
M. To protect and preserve natural scenic and historical values in the
environment and preservation of forests, wetlands, aquifers and
floodplains. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
N. To assure compliance with all applicable provisions of federal fair
housing laws. [Added 1-11-2016 by Ord. No. 3039]
§ 27-2 RESERVED § 27-4
25:947
greater restrictions or higher standards than those of any statute, other
ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Where
the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater
restrictions or higher standards than those enumerated in this chapter, the
provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation shall govern.
§ 27-5. Word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the words and phrases listed in the
definition section of this chapter shall be construed throughout this chapter
to have the meaning therein indicated. The singular shall include the plural
and the plural the singular. The present tense shall include the future tense.
The word "shall" is always mandatory. The phrase "this chapter" shall be
read as including any and all amendments to this chapter. The phrase
"Municipalities Planning Code" shall mean that statute found at 53 P.S.
§ 10101 et. seq.
§ 27-6. Validity.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional, unenforceable or invalid, such
decision shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter. The Board
of Commissioners (hereinafter referred to as "Commissioners") hereby
declares that it would have passed this chapter and each remaining section
and subsection and amendment thereof irrespective of the fact that any one
or more of its sections, subsections, clauses, phrases or amendments may
be found to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid.
§ 27-4 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-6
25:948
ARTICLE III
Enforcement and Administration
§ 27-7. Enforcement by Zoning Officer. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2776, approved 11-3-2009]
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by an agent to be
appointed by the Mayor who shall be known as the Zoning Officer. The
Zoning Officer shall be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Township a working knowledge of municipal zoning. The Zoning Officer
shall not hold any elective office in the Township. In addition to
administering and enforcing this chapter, the Zoning Officer shall receive
and maintain a record of all applications for permits and a record of all
permits issued, and shall note all special conditions involved. The Zoning
Officer shall further file copies of all plans submitted and the same shall
form a part of the records of the office and shall be available for the use
of the Zoning Hearing Board, the Commissioners, other Township officials
and staff, and Township residents. Such records shall be the property of the
Township.
§ 27-8. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer or his/her duly authorized assistant
or assistants to inspect or examine any land, building, structure, sign,
plan or premises and to order, in writing, the abatement of any conditions
found to exist in violation of the provisions of this chapter. At no time
shall the Zoning Officer or his/her duly authorized assistant or assistants
issue a permit for the construction or alteration of any building, structure
or sign where the proposed construction, alteration or use thereof would
be in violation of any provision of this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall
administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms, and shall not
have the power to permit any construction or any use or change of use
which does not conform to this chapter. The Zoning Officer is also
authorized to institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of
enforcement when acting within the scope of his/her employment.
§ 27-9. Relief from personal responsibility.
The Zoning Officer, or any employee charged with the enforcement of this
chapter, while acting in such capacity, shall not be personally liable for
any actions, effects, consequences or results undertaken in furtherance
of the provisions of this chapter. Any suit instituted against the Zoning
Officer or any employee because of an act performed by him/her in the
lawful discharge of his/her duties pursuant to this chapter in good faith
and without malice shall be defended by the legal representative of the
Township and all costs associated with such action or actions shall be borne
by the Township.
§ 27-7 RESERVED § 27-10
25:949
§ 27-10. Right of entry.
In the discharge of the duties prescribed herein, the Zoning Officer or his/
her authorized assistant or assistants shall have the authority to enter,
at any reasonable hour, any structure, building, premises or land in the
Township to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 27-11. Finances and fees.
The Commissioners shall appropriate from general funds monies to finance
the preparation, administration and enforcement of this chapter and to
finance the work of the Zoning Hearing Board, and may appropriate such
monies to support or oppose a position or party before the Zoning Hearing
Board and upon appeal to the courts. For the same purposes, the
Commissioners may accept grants of money and services from authorized
sources which include County, State and Federal governments. The
Commissioners may, by resolution, prescribe reasonable fees to be charged
with respect to the administration of this chapter.
§ 27-12. Enforcement notice.
A. If it appears to the Township that a violation of any provision of this
chapter has occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement
proceedings by sending an enforcement notice as provided in this
section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced shall be five days from receipt of such notice and the
date before which the steps must be completed to remedy the
violation shall be 30 days from the receipt of such notice.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right of appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board within five days of receipt of the notice pursuant to
standards as set forth in this chapter. [Amended 12-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 1657]
§ 27-10 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-12
25:950
§ 27-13. Causes of action. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
In the event any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed
to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained
or used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the Commissioners, the
Zoning Officer, or with the approval of the Commissioners, an officer of the
Township or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that
his property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged violation,
in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure,
landscaping or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act,
conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When any such action is
instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served
upon the Township at least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun by
serving a copy of the complaint on the Commissioners. No such action may
be maintained until such notice has been given.
§ 27-14. Enforcement remedies.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, pay a
judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment
shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until the date of
the determination of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce
the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless
the district justice, determining that there has been a violation, further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership
or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was no
(6) Any person who authorizes or continues any work, use or
occupancy in or about any structure, building, sign, land or
premises after having been served with an enforcement notice
(which may also be referred to as a "stop work order"), except such
work as is directed by the Township to be performed, shall be in
violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties as set forth in
§ 27-14.
(7) Any person who has been served with an enforcement notice or
discontinues or abandons work shall not leave any structure,
building, sign, land or premises in such condition as to be
hazardous to the public health, safety and welfare. In the event any
structure, building, sign, land or premises is abandoned or left in a
condition which, in the option of the Zoning Officer, constitutes a
hazard to the public health, safety and welfare, the Zoning Officer
may declare the same to be a nuisance. Such hazard shall,
thereafter, be abated as permitted by statute, ordinance or law.
§ 27-12 RESERVED § 27-14
25:951
such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one
such violation until the 5th day following the date of the determination of
a violation by the district justice and thereafter each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and
reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of this chapter shall be
paid over to the Township.
§ 27-15. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed building or
extension thereof used or to be used by a public utility if, upon petition of
the utility, the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission shall, after a public
hearing, decide that the present or proposed condition of the building in
question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the
general public. It shall be the responsibility of the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission to ensure that both the corporation and the Township
have notice of the hearing and are granted an opportunity to appear,
present witnesses, cross-examine witnesses presented by other parties and
otherwise exercise the rights of a party to the proceeding.
§ 27-14 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-15
25:952
ARTICLE IV
Permits
§ 27-16. Type.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following types of permits are
established:
§ 27-17. Airport zone permits.
See § 27-190, Airport zone permits.
§ 27-18. Building permits. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
Building permits shall be secured from the Zoning Officer prior to any
alteration, construction, conversion, erection, excavation, extension,
placement, reconstruction, repair, replacement or restoration of any
building or structure, whether or not conforming, and whether or not
affixed to the ground and specifically includes, but is not limited to,
buildings, fences, heliports, garages, satellite earth station dishes,
swimming pools, temporary utility trailers, sheds, signs and all other
structures.
§ 27-19. Construction in floodplain and floodprone area permits.
See § 27-175, Administration.
§ 27-20. Occupancy permits. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
A. Airport zone.
B. Building.
C. Construction in floodplain and floodprone areas.
D. Occupancy.
E. Temporary occupancy.
F. Temporary sign.
G. Use.
A. No building shall be occupied or used until such time as an occupancy
permit is secured from the Zoning Officer.
B. The Zoning Officer shall not approve any occupancy permit until the
Zoning Officer has determined that the building, structure or use
conforms with the provisions of this chapter and any and all other
applicable codes or regulations.
§ 27-16 RESERVED § 27-20
25:953
C. No building, structure or part thereof, the use of which has been
changed or which has been subject to any structural alteration, shall be
occupied until such time as an occupancy permit has been issued.
D. Changes in the use or tenants of commercial or industrial businesses
located in existing structures may be reviewed and approved by the
Zoning Officer without submitting a formal request to the Whitehall
Township Planning Commission, provided that: [Amended 5-10-2010
by Ord. No. 2825]
(1) The use is a permitted use as of right within the zoning district in
which the structure is situate.
(2) There are no proposed exterior structural additions or changes in
excess of 30% of the existing building area.
(3) The appropriate enforcement officers of the Township have
certified that there are no open or unfulfilled conditions imposed by
the Zoning Hearing Board, Board of Commissioners, or other
officers of the Township.
(4) All necessary and required permits are applied for and secured,
when necessary, prior to occupancy. This includes, but may not be
limited to, Township permits, and state and federal permits when
necessary (i.e., Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, NPDES, Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare,
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture, and PennDOT Highway
Occupancy Permit).
(5) When occupying up to 30% of an existing commercial or industrial
structure or property with a new tenant or use, the property owner
or tenant shall:
(a) Replace or repair at least 50% of any damaged sidewalks or
walks abutting the entrance to the particular area being
occupied. Accessible ramps shall be provided where necessary.
(b) At least 30% of the site landscaping and parking areas shall be
restored and refurbished, unless acceptable documentation
can be provided to the Zoning Officer indicating that
restoration and/or refurbishment has been done within the 12
months preceding the request for a new certificate of
occupancy for that particular area to be occupied.
(c) Where no curbing or guiderail is provided to enclose the
parking area servicing the use, curbing, guiderail, precast
curbing sections, bumper blocks or a similar device as
approved by the Township Engineer shall be installed.
(d) If already existing, bumper blocks shall be re-pinned, and
damaged blocks shall be replaced.
§ 27-20 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-20
25:954
(e) All traffic control in the parking area shall be inspected and
reconditioned, repainted or replaced.
(f) All site lighting shall be re-evaluated, repaired and, if
necessary, replaced.
(6) When occupying up to 69% of an existing commercial or industrial
structure or property with a new tenant or use, the property owner
or tenant shall:
(a) Replace or repair at least 50% of any damaged sidewalks or
walks abutting the entrance to the particular area being
occupied. Accessible ramps shall be provided where necessary.
(b) At least 50% of the site landscaping and parking areas shall be
restored and refurbished, as well as 50% of the exterior of the
structure, unless acceptable documentation can be provided to
the Zoning Officer indicating that such restoration and/or
refurbishment of said areas has been done within the 12
months preceding the request for a new certificate of
occupancy for the particular area to be occupied.
(c) Where no curbing or guiderail is provided to enclose the
parking area servicing the use, curbing, guiderail, precast
curbing sections, bumper blocks or a similar device as
approved by the Township Engineer shall be installed.
(d) If already existing, bumper blocks shall be re-pinned, and
damaged blocks shall be replaced.
(e) All traffic control in the parking area shall be inspected and
reconditioned, repainted or replaced.
(f) All site lighting shall be re-evaluated, repaired and if necessary
replaced.
(7) When occupying 70% to 100% of an existing commercial or
industrial structure with a new tenant or use, the property owner
or tenant shall:
(a) Replace and restore any damaged sidewalks and provide
accessible ramps where required for the entire site.
(b) One hundred percent of the site landscaping and parking areas
shall be restored and refurbished, as well as 100% of the
exterior of the structure, unless acceptable documentation can
be provided to the Zoning Officer indicating that restoration
and/or refurbishment of said areas to be occupied has been
done within the 12 months preceding the request for a new
certificate of occupancy.
(c) Where no curbing or guiderail is provided to enclose the
parking area servicing the use, curbing, guiderail, precast
§ 27-20 RESERVED § 27-20
25:955
§ 27-21. Temporary occupancy permits.
§ 27-22. Temporary sign permits.
See Article XIII, Signs.
§ 27-23. Use permits.
Use permits shall be secured from the Zoning Officer prior to the use of a
building, structure, land or sign, whether or not a permitted, accessory or
nonconforming use and prior to changing the use, area of use, percentage
or use or extending or displacing a use, in whole or in part, of any building,
structure, land or sign. In addition to the foregoing, use permits shall be
required prior to the creation or change of home occupations.
curbing sections, bumper blocks or a similar device as
approved by the Township Engineer shall be installed.
(d) If already existing, bumper blocks shall be re-pinned, and
damaged blocks replaced.
(e) All traffic control in the parking area shall be inspected and
reconditioned, repainted or replaced.
(f) All site lighting shall be re-evaluated, repaired and if necessary
replaced.
A. A temporary occupancy permit may be secured from the Zoning Officer
when it is necessary to continue a preexisting activity during
modification, alteration or expansion of a building. A temporary
occupancy permit may also be secured when it is necessary to occupy a
portion of a building or project before the entire building or project is
completed.
B. The permit shall indicate that the portion occupied substantially
complies with the terms and the intent of the building permit and with
the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable codes or
regulations.
C. The Zoning Officer may deny issuance of a temporary occupancy permit
if the Zoning Officer determines that the intended occupants will be
subject to hazards that may result from the continued construction
activity or any other cause. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
D. A temporary occupancy permit shall be reviewed whenever conditions
for which it was issued have changed. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord.
No. 1657]
E. Temporary occupancy permits shall automatically terminate when the
final occupancy permit is issued or the expiration of 90 days from the
date of issuance. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
§ 27-20 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-24
25:956
§ 27-24. Form of application. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
The application for a permit shall be submitted on the form provided by
the Zoning Officer and shall be accompanied by the required fee, plans
of proposed construction, erection, alteration and other information as
required by the Zoning Officer.
§ 27-25. By whom application is made.
All requests for permits shall be made in writing by the contractor employed
by the owner or lessee of the building or structure to perform the proposed
work or their authorized agents or if there is no contractor, then in that
event, the request for a permit shall be made as aforesaid by the legal or
equitable owner. Written proof of ownership or equitable interest shall be
provided to the Township upon request therefor. Failure to provide such
proof of ownership or equitable interest shall be, in and of itself, a sufficient
basis for refusal to accept and process an application.
§ 27-26. Conditions of permit.
The Zoning Officer shall not issue a permit unless the following conditions
have been met or are satisfied:
§ 27-27. Action on application.
A permit shall be issued or denied by the Zoning Hearing Officer within
30 days of application or as otherwise required by law. All permits are
issued subject to compliance with all other applicable ordinances, rules and
regulations of the Township.
A. Written approval, where required, is secured from the Zoning Hearing
Board or Commissioners with all conditions required attached thereto.
B. All applications and support documents have been provided or revised
in accordance with the conditions of any approval given by any
authorized Township review body or officer.
C. The proposed building, structure or use conforms to the provisions of
this chapter and all other ordinances in the Township except for:
(1) Variances granted from the provisions of this chapter, special
exceptions, or conditional uses allowed and approved by the Zoning
Hearing Board or Commissioners; [Amended 12-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 1657]
(2) Nonconforming buildings, structures or uses legally existing prior
to the enactment of this chapter.
§ 27-24 RESERVED § 27-28
25:957
§ 27-28. Denial and revocation of permits. [Amended 12-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 1657]
A request for a permit shall be denied if the information submitted
therewith is incomplete, erroneous or otherwise unsatisfactory, or if the
application fee is not remitted in full. The Zoning Officer may revoke a
permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter if the Zoning
Officer determines that any false statement or misrepresentation of fact
exists on the application or on the plans upon which the permit or approval
was based or if a change in use occurs which is inconsistent with the
requirements of the permit, this chapter or the representations of the
applicant.
§ 27-29. Compliance with permit.
All work to or any use of any building, structure, sign or land shall conform
to the approved application and plan for which the permit was issued and
any approved amendments thereto. The permit shall not be construed as
authority to violate, cancel or set aside the provisions of this or any other
ordinance unless otherwise permitted or stated upon the permit.
§ 27-30. Duration of permit.
A. Except where the duration of the use or building is limited by action of
the Zoning Hearing Board, Commissioners or provisions of this chapter,
a permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance
or until such time as there is a change in use, a change in ownership of
the subject premises or a change in a condition for which the permit
was originally issued, whichever shall first occur.
B. Where the duration of the use or building has been limited by action of
the Zoning Hearing Board, Commissioners or provisions of this chapter,
the life of the permit shall be equally limited. In the event that a
variance, special exception or conditional use has been granted or
approved or other action has been authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board or Commissioners, the applicant shall secure the necessary
permits and commence the authorized action, construction or alteration
within one year of the final action of the Zoning Hearing Board or
Commissioners. The applicant may request, in writing, extensions of
the one year period from the body granting the variance or approval
stating the reasons for delay. Unless the Zoning Hearing Board or
Commissioners find such reasons for delay justifiable, it may refuse to
extend the one year period and may, after expiration of said one year
period, rescind or revoke the granted variance, approval, authorization
and permit. When it is suspected that the authorized construction or
development will commence in phases over an extended period of time,
the Zoning Hearing Board or Commissioners may establish a schedule
for the procurement of permits in lieu of the one year period specified
hereinabove. If in the opinion of the Zoning Officer the authorized work
is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time of
§ 27-28 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-30
25:958
§ 27-31. Records.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to keep a record of all applications
for permits, a record of all permits issued, together with a notation of
all special conditions involved. Such records shall be the property of the
Township. The Zoning Officer shall file and safely keep copies of all plans
submitted which shall form a part of the records of his office. All records
and permits issued shall be open to public inspection at reasonable times.
§ 27-32. Report.
The Zoning Officer shall prepare a monthly report sheet for the
Commissioners summarizing for the period since the last report all permits
issued, all complaints of alleged violations and any and all action taken
regarding those permits and violations.
commencing work, such permit shall become invalid. Upon expiration
or invalidation of the permit, all other permits issued thereon shall
become invalid.
C. When a variance, special exception or conditional use has been granted
or approved, or other similar action has been authorized with respect to
a particular development plan, use or by the Zoning Hearing Board or
Board of Commissioners prior to the enactment of this chapter, then the
applicant, his heirs, successors or assigns shall be entitled to the
issuance of a building permit for said development or use provided that
a detailed development plan is submitted to the Zoning Officer and that
said plan conforms in every respect with the development plan
submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Commissioners
during the authorization process. In the event that the proposed
development plan is inconsistent with the original plan submitted to the
Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Commissioners, then the building
permit shall not be issued unless the inconsistencies as set forth in the
proposed development plan comply with the current zoning
requirements. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
§ 27-30 RESERVED § 27-32
25:959

ARTICLE V
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 27-33. Continuation.
The Zoning Hearing Board (hereinafter referred to as "Board") created and
existing under preexisting ordinances of the Township shall continue under
and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Matters pending
before the Board at the time this chapter becomes effective shall continue
and be completed under the zoning ordinance in effect at the time the Board
took jurisdiction of said matters.
§ 27-34. Membership.
A. The Board shall consist of five members who are residents of the
Township appointed by resolution by the Commissioners. The terms of
office shall be five years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of
one member of the five member Board shall expire each year. The Board
shall promptly notify the President of the Board of Commissioners of
any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only
for the unexpired portion of the term. Members of the Board shall hold
no other office in the Township. The Zoning Officer shall serve as
Secretary to the Board. Members of the Board appointed prior to the
adoption of this chapter shall, after enactment, complete the remainder
of the term for which they were appointed. After the enactment of this
amendment, the Board of Commissioners shall appoint, by resolution,
two additional members whose terms shall commence on the date of
appointment and shall terminate December 31, 2001 and December 31,
2002, respectively. [Amended 3-9-1998 by Ord. No. 2079]
B. The Board of Commissioners may appoint by resolution at least one, but
not more than three, residents of the Township to serve as alternate
members of the Board. The term of office of an alternate member shall
be three years. When seated pursuant to the provisions of § 27-36B, an
alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and
discussions of the Board to the same extent as provided by law for
Board members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a
voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers
and duties as set forth in this chapter and as otherwise provided by law.
Alternates shall hold no other office in the Township, including
membership on the Planning Commission and Zoning Officer. Any
alternate may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the Board
but shall not be entitled to vote as a member of the Board nor be
compensated pursuant to § 27-37 unless designated as a voting
alternate member pursuant to § 27-36B. [Amended 12-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 1657]
§ 27-33 RESERVED § 27-35
25:961
§ 27-35. Removal of members.
Any member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance
in office or for other just cause by majority vote of the Commissioners taken
after the member has received 15 days advanced written notice of the intent
to take such vote. A public hearing shall be held in connection with the
Commissioners' action if the member shall request the same in writing.
§ 27-36. Organization.
§ 27-37. Expenditures for service.
Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Commissioners, the Board
may utilize secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other
technical and clerical staff. Selection of all such counsel and consultants
shall be made by the Commissioners. Members of the Board may receive
compensation for the performance of their duties, as may be fixed by the
Commissioners, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation
authorized by the provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code. Alternate
members of the Board may receive compensation, as may be fixed by
the Commissioners, for the performance of their duties when designated
as alternate members pursuant to § 27-36B, but in no case shall such
compensation exceed the rate of compensation authorized by the provisions
of the Municipalities Planning Code.
A. The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers who shall
serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the
conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall not
be less than a majority of all of the members of the Board, but, where
any members are disqualified to act in a particular matter, the
remaining members may act for the Board. The Board may appoint a
hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its
own behalf, and the parties may waive further action by the Board as
provided in § 27-39D.
B. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not
reached the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate
members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed to provide a
quorum. Any alternate member of the Board shall continue to serve on
the Board in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the
alternate was initially appointed until the Board has made a final
determination of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate
pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case basis in
rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates.
C. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedures, consistent with the Township ordinances and laws of the
Commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business,
which records shall be the property of the Township and shall submit a
report of its activities to the Commissioners, as requested by the
Commissioners.
§ 27-35 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-38
25:962
§ 27-38. Applications.
Every application for a variance, special exception, mediation,
interpretation or appeal of a ruling of the Zoning Officer shall be made on a
form prepared by the Zoning Hearing Board. Such application shall be filed
with the Board and shall include a statement by the applicant regarding the
reasons for the application. Each application to the Board shall be subject
to a fee fixed by the Commissioners. An application is not complete until the
required fee is paid in full and the appropriate number and type of plans are
submitted therewith.
§ 27-39. Hearings and decisions.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
the following requirements:
A. The Board shall give public notice of all matters to be heard at any
given meeting and shall give written notice to the owner, appellant, the
Commissioners, Planning Commission, to the governing body of any
municipality located within 500 feet of the property at issue and to all
other interested parties who have registered their names and addresses
with the Board. The notices herein required shall state the location of
the building or lot, the general nature of the question involved and the
time and place of the hearing. In addition to the notices provided
herein, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on
the affected tract of land, building or sign at least one week prior to the
hearing.
B. The Commissioners may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings may
include compensation for the Secretary and members of the Board,
notice and advertising costs and necessary administrative overhead
connected with the hearings. The costs, however, shall not include legal
expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board, expenses for engineering,
architectural or other technical consultants or expert witness costs.
C. The hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the applicant's
request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of
time.
D. The hearing shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may appoint
any member as a hearing officer. The decision, or where no decision is
called for, the findings, shall be made by the Board; however, the
appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the
Township, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive the decision
or findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the
hearing officer as final.
E. The parties to the hearing shall be the applicant, the Township, any
person affected by the application who has made a timely appearance of
record before the Board, and any other person including duly
§ 27-38 RESERVED § 27-39
25:963
constituted civic or community organizations permitted to appear by
the Board. The Board shall have the power to require that all persons
who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in writing on
forms provided by the Board for that purpose.
F. The Chairman or acting Chairman of the Board or the Hearing Officer
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers including witnesses and documents requested
by the parties.
G. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to present evidence and argument and to
cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
H. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
I. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or Hearing Officer, or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is
made, and in either event, the cost of additional copies shall be paid by
the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
J. The Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall not
communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his
representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon
notice and opportunity for all parties to participate; shall not take
notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda or other
materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless all parties are
afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed; and shall not
inspect the site or its surroundings with any party or his representative
unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
K. The Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before
the Board or Hearing Officer. Where the application is contested or
denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon, together with the reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions of this act or of any ordinance, rule
or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the
reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of facts
found. If the hearing is conducted by a Hearing Officer and there has
been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Board
shall make his report and recommendations available to the parties
within 45 days and the parties shall be entitled to make written
§ 27-39 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-39
25:964
§ 27-40. Mediation option.
recommendations thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry
of findings. The Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30
days after the report of the Hearing Officer. Where the Board fails to
render the decision within the period required by this subsection, or
fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days from the date of the
applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have
been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed
in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision
has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of
the Board to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the
Board shall give public notice of said decision within 10 days from the
last day it could have met to rendered a decision in the same manner as
provided in Subsection A. If the Board shall fail to provide such notice,
the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the
right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a
court of competent jurisdiction.
L. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings, shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their names and addresses with the Board not later than the last
day of the hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, a brief
notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which
the full decision or findings may be examined.
A. Parties to proceedings authorized in this chapter may utilize mediation
as an aid in completing such proceedings. The Zoning Hearing Board
shall neither initiate mediation nor participate as a mediating party in
any proceeding pending before the Board. Mediation shall supplement,
not replace, those procedures in this chapter once said procedures have
been formally initiated. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as
expanding or limiting Township police powers or as modifying any
principles of substantive law.
B. Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The
appropriateness of mediation shall be determined by the particulars of
each case and the willingness of the parties to negotiate. The Township
shall assure that in each case the mediating parties, assisted by the
mediator as appropriate, develop terms and conditions for:
(1) Funding mediation. The costs of mediation shall be the sole and
separate responsibility of the parties thereto and of neither the
Township, the Planning Commission, Zoning Hearing Board or
Board of Commissioners. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
(2) Selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working
knowledge of municipal zoning and subdivision procedures and
demonstrated skills in mediation.
§ 27-39 RESERVED § 27-40
25:965
§ 27-41. Jurisdiction.
(3) Completing mediation, including time limits for such completion.
(4) Suspending time limits otherwise authorized in this chapter,
provided there is written consent by the mediating parties and by
an applicant or Township decision making body if either is not a
party to the mediation.
(5) Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to
participate.
(6) Subject to legal restraints, determining whether some or all of the
mediation sessions shall be open or closed to the public.
(7) Assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by the
parties and become subject to review and approval by the
appropriate decision making body pursuant to the authorized
procedures set forth in the other sections of this chapter.
C. No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the
final written mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in
any subsequent judicial or administrative proceedings.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before the Commissioners pursuant to
§ 609.1 of the Municipalities Planning Code and § 27-50A(2) hereof.
(2) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said
ordinance.
(3) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer including, but
not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, failure to act on
the application therefor or the issuance of any cease and desist
order or enforcement notice.
(4) Appeals from a determination by the Township Engineer with
reference to the administration of the Township Floodplain
Ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance.
(5) Applications for variances from the provisions of this chapter or
such provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to § 27-42.
(6) Applications for special exceptions or such provisions within a land
use ordinance, pursuant to § 27-43.
(7) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under § 27-51.
§ 27-40 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-41
25:966
(8) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Township
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or
provisions thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
development not involving the provisions of Chapter 22,
Subdivision and Land Development, or the planned residential
development sections of this chapter.
(9) Appeals from denials of special encroachment permits pursuant to
§ 405 of the Municipalities Planning Code.
(10) Appeals involving reasonable accommodations as provided in the
Federal Fair Housing Act or the Americans with Disabilities Act.
[Added 1-11-2016 by Ord. No. 3039]
(a) Such reasonable accommodation shall be requested in writing,
in accordance with the above noted laws, as well as applicable
Pennsylvania laws.
(b) If the applicant is requesting reasonable accommodation for
persons with disabilities as defined in the hereinabove noted
Acts, the applicant shall identify the following:
[1] The protected disability;
[2] The extent of the modification of the provisions of this
chapter for a reasonable accommodation;
[3] The manner by which the reasonable accommodation
requested may be removed when such person of protected
class will no longer be present on the property.
(c) Any modification approved under this section may be limited to
the time period for which the person with disabilities occupies
or utilizes the premises.
B. The Commissioners shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render
final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) All applications for approvals of planned residential developments
pursuant to the provisions of § 702 of the Municipalities Planning
Code.
(2) Applications for conditional uses under the express provisions of
§§ 27-44 and 27-45 hereof.
(3) Applications for curative amendment pursuant to § 609.1 of the
Municipalities Planning Code and § 27-50A(2) hereof.
(4) All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances, pursuant to
the procedures set forth in § 609 of the Municipalities Planning
Code. Any action on such petitions shall be deemed legislative acts,
§ 27-41 RESERVED § 27-41
25:967
§ 27-42. Variances.
provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to
enlarge or diminish existing law with reference to appeals to court.
(5) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the
Township Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance
or provisions thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
applications for land development under the provisions of Chapter
22, Subdivision and Land Development, or the planned residential
development sections of this chapter.
(6) Applications for a special encroachment permit pursuant to § 405
of the Municipalities Planning Code and applications for a permit
pursuant to § 406 of the Municipalities Planning Code.
A. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the
provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant.
B. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purpose of this chapter and the laws of the Commonwealth.
C. The Board may grant a variance provided the following findings are
made where relevant in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
§ 27-41 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-42
25:968
§ 27-43. Special exceptions.
Where this chapter permits, special exceptions may be granted or denied
by the Board pursuant to the provisions of § 27-45. In granting a special
exception, the Board shall consider the recommendations, if any, of the
Planning Commission and Zoning Officer and may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed by this chapter,
as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter and the
laws of the Commonwealth.
§ 27-44. Conditional uses.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(6) The variance shall not permit a use specifically prohibited by this
chapter.
A. The Commissioners shall process, hear and decide, by resolution, all
conditional use applications as hereinafter set forth. [Amended
4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
B. The Commissioners may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedures, consistent with the Township ordinances and laws of the
Commonwealth. The Commissioners shall keep full public records of its
business, which records shall be the property of the Township.
C. The Commissioners shall conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the following requirements:
(1) The Commissioners shall give public notice of all matters to be
heard at any given meeting and shall give written notice to the
owner, appellant, planning commission, to the governing body of
any municipality located within 500 feet of the property at issue
and to all other interested parties who have registered their names
and addresses with the Board. The notices herein required shall
state the location of the building or lot, the general nature of the
question involved and the time and place of the hearing. In addition
to the notices provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall
be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land, building or
sign at least one week prior to the hearing.
(2) The Commissioners may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings which shall include, but not be limited to, fees for notice
and advertising costs and necessary administrative overhead
connected with the hearings. The costs, however, shall not include
legal expenses of the Commissioners, expenses for engineering,
architectural or other technical consultants or expert witness costs.
(3) The hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date that the
applicant has submitted a complete application, necessary
§ 27-42 RESERVED § 27-44
25:969
documents and fully paid all required fees, unless the applicant has
agreed in writing to an extension of time.
(4) The hearing shall be conducted entirely by the Commissioners.
(5) The parties to the hearing shall be the applicant, the Township, any
person affected by the application who has made a timely
appearance of record before the Commissioners, and any other
person, including duly constituted civic or community
organizations to appear by the Commissioners. The Commissioners
shall have the power to require that all persons who wish to be
considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms provided
by the Commissioners for that purpose.
(6) The president or acting president of the Commissioners presiding
shall have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents
requested by the parties.
(7) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to present evidence and argument
and to cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
(8) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial
or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. [Amended
8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
(9) The Commissioners shall keep a stenographic record of all the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be
shared equally by the applicant and the Commissioners. The cost of
the original transcript shall be paid by the Commissioners if the
transcript is ordered by the Commissioners or shall be paid by the
person appealing from the decision of the Commissioners if such
appeal is made and, in either event, the cost of additional copies
shall be paid by the person requesting such copy of copies. In other
cases, the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the
cost thereof.
(10) The Commissioners shall not communicate, directly or indirectly,
with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue
involved, except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate; shall not take notice of any communications, reports,
staff memoranda or other materials, except advice from the
Solicitor, unless all parties are afforded an opportunity to contest
the material so noticed; and shall not inspect the site or its
surroundings with any party or his representative unless all parties
are given an opportunity to be present.
(11) The Commissioners shall render a written decision or, when no
decision is called for, make written findings on the application
within 45 days after the last hearing before the Commissioners.
§ 27-44 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-44
25:970
§ 27-45. Special exception and conditional use submission, review
and decision procedures and requirements.
Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall
be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon,
together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any
provisions of this act or of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall
contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why
the conclusion is deemed appropriate in light of the facts found.
(12) A copy of the final decision or where no decision is called for, of the
findings, shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to
him not later than the day following its date. To all other persons
who have filed their names and addresses with the Commissioners
not later than the last day of the hearing the Commissioners shall
provide, by mail or otherwise, a brief notice of the decision of
findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or
findings may be examined.
D. The parties may use mediation as an aid in completing the procedures
set forth herein. The Commissioners shall not initiate mediation or
participate as a mediating party in any pending proceeding. Mediation
shall supplement, not replace, those procedures in this chapter once
such procedures have been formally initiated. Nothing in this section
shall be interpreted as expanding or limiting Township police powers or
as modifying any principle of substantive law. Mediation shall be
provided by and conform to those provisions of § 27-40B and C.
E. In approving a conditional use the Commissioners shall consider the
recommendations, if any, of the Planning Commission and Zoning
Officer and may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed by this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of this chapter and the laws of the
Commonwealth.
A. The application for a special exception or conditional use shall be
submitted on the form provided by the Zoning Officer. No application
shall be accepted unless and until all requested data, information and
plans are complete and the required number submitted and all fees are
paid in full.
B. All requests for special exceptions or conditional uses shall be made in
writing by the legal or equitable owner of the subject property or their
authorized agents.
C. Applications for a special exception or conditional use shall contain the
following:
(1) Accurately scaled site plans, sealed by a registered professional
engineer or land surveyor, showing:
(a) The location, size and topography of the tract.
§ 27-44 RESERVED § 27-45
25:971
(b) Existing and proposed buildings, parking areas, accesses and
improvements.
(c) Location, size and use of open space.
(d) Existing and proposed easements.
(2) A description of any public services and facilities which would be
required to be provided in connection with the special exception or
conditional use.
(3) A description of size and use of all existing and proposed buildings
or structures as well as any other size data for which compliance
with this section and other zoning regulations is required.
(4) A description of covenants, grants of easements or other
restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of the land,
buildings and structures, including proposed easements or grants
from or for public utilities.
(5) In the case of development plans which call for development over a
period of years, the owners or equitable owners shall designate
geographic sections for development under the plan and file a
schedule showing the proposed areas within which applications for
final approval of all sections of the development are intended to be
filed. This schedule must be updated annually, on the anniversary of
its approval, until the development is completed and accepted.
(6) A description of any and all waivers, variances or interpretations
requested or necessary to complete the project as proposed.
(7) Any additional information required by the Planning Commission,
Zoning Hearing Board, Township Engineer or Commissioners.
D. When considering a special exception or conditional use, the Zoning
Hearing Board or Commissioners, as the case may be, shall forward a
copy of the application and corresponding documents the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the special
exception or conditional use and offer its recommendations regarding
the effect of the proposed use on the surrounding property, conformity
to the comprehensive plan and all of the provisions of this chapter. The
Zoning Hearing Board and Commissioners shall not take any action on
the special exception or conditional use request until written comments
from the Planning Commission have been received or the expiration of
45 days from the date the application was submitted, whichever occurs
first.
E. The Zoning Hearing Board and Commissioners shall approve any
special exception or conditional use which meets all of the provisions of
this chapter, and:
(1) The proposed use:
§ 27-45 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-45
25:972
§ 27-46. Reapplication.
No person shall be permitted to reapply to the Zoning Hearing Board
or Commissioners for any variance, interpretation, special exception or
conditional use on the same factual circumstances and seeking the same
(a) Is in accord with the existing Comprehensive Plan and the
spirit, intent and purpose of this chapter.
(b) Is in the best interests of the Township.
(c) Is suitable for the site chosen.
(d) Is designed, maintained and used so as to be in harmony with
adjacent properties in the immediate vicinity.
(2) The proposed use permits the logical, efficient, safe and economic
extension of public services and facilities, including but not limited
to water, sewer, stormwater controls, schools, police and fire
protection.
(3) The proposed use does not:
(a) Substantially increase traffic congestion in the streets.
(b) Increase the danger of fire or panic or otherwise endanger the
public safety.
(c) Overcrowd the land or create an undue concentration of
population.
(d) Impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property.
(e) Adversely affect the comprehensive plan of the Township.
(f) Unduly burden water, sewer, school, park or other public
facilities.
(g) Endanger the safety of persons or property by improper
location or design of facilities for ingress or egress.
(h) Otherwise adversely affect the public health, safety or general
welfare.
(i) Violate any Federal or State law, statute, rule, directive or
regulation. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
(j) Interfere or encroach upon any wetlands or floodplains.
[Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
(4) The proposed use is not:
(a) Inconsistent with the surrounding zoning and uses.
(b) Detrimental to the appropriate use of adjacent property.
§ 27-45 RESERVED § 27-46
25:973
or similar relief previously requested until the expiration of 12 months
from the date of the determination on the original or last application.
Reapplications may be permitted upon a showing of changed circumstances
but only with the unanimous consent of the Zoning Hearing Board or
Commissioners.
§ 27-47. Parties appellant before the Board.
Appeals under § 27-41A(1), (2), (3), (4), (7), (8) and (9) may be filed with the
Zoning Hearing Board in writing by the landowner affected, any officer or
agency of the Township, or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance
under § 27-42 and for special exception under § 27-43 may be filed with the
Zoning Hearing Board by any landowner, equitable landowner or any tenant
with the permission of such landowner.
§ 27-48. Time limitations.
§ 27-49. Stay of proceedings.
A. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Zoning
Hearing Board later than 30 days after an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been approved by an appropriate Township
officer, agency or body if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal
or to limit the approval in any manner unless such person alleges and
proves that he had no notice, knowledge or reason to believe that such
approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to his interest
after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his
predecessor in interest. The failure of anyone other than the landowner
to appeal from an adverse decision on a tentative plan pursuant to § 709
of the Municipalities Planning Code or from an adverse decision by a
Zoning Officer on a challenge to the validity of an ordinance or map
pursuant to § 27-51 shall preclude an appeal from a final approval
except in the case where the final submission substantially deviates
from the approved tentative approval.
B. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowners shall be
filed by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination
is issued.
A. Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in § 27-47 and during its
pendency before the Zoning Hearing Board, all land development
pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning
Officer or of any agency or body and all official action thereunder, shall
be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or
body certifies to the Township facts indicating that such stay would
cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the development
or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining
order granted by the Court on petition after notice to the Zoning
Officer. When an application for development, preliminary or final, has
been duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the
§ 27-46 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-49
25:974
§ 27-50. Validity of ordinance; substantive questions.
approval are filed with the Board by persons other than the applicant,
the applicant may petition the Court to order such persons to post bond
as a condition to continuing the proceedings before the Board.
B. After the petition is presented, the Court may hold a hearing to
determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. It shall be the burden of
the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous. After
consideration of all evidence presented, if the Court determines that
the appeal is frivolous, it may grant the petition for a bond.
C. The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the Court.
D. If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an
order of the Court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond
and the appellant Court sustains the order of the Court below to post a
bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the
petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses and attorney
fees incurred by the petitioner.
A. A landowner who, on substantive grounds, desires to challenge the
validity of an ordinance or map or any provision thereof which prohibits
or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest
shall submit the challenge either:
(1) To the Zoning Hearing Board under § 27-41A.
(2) To the Commissioners under § 27-41B(4) together with a request
for a curative amendment under § 609.1 of the Municipalities
Planning Code.
B. Persons aggrieved by the use or development permitted on the land of
another by an ordinance or map, or any provision thereof, who desires
to challenge its validity on substantive grounds shall first submit their
challenge to the Zoning Hearing Board for a decision thereon under
§ 27-41A(1).
C. The submissions referred to in Subsections A and B shall be governed
by the following:
(1) In challenges before the Zoning Hearing Board, the challenging
party shall make a written request to the Zoning Hearing Board
that it hold a hearing on its challenge. The request shall contain the
reasons for the challenge. Where the landowner desires to
challenge the validity of such ordinance and elects to proceed by
curative amendment under § 609.1 of the Municipalities Planning
Code, his application to the Commissioners shall contain, in
addition to the requirements of the written request hereof, the
plans and explanatory materials describing the use or development
§ 27-49 RESERVED § 27-50
25:975
proposed by the landowner in lieu of the use or development
permitted by the challenged ordinance or map. Such plans or other
materials shall not be required to meet the standards prescribed
for preliminary, tentative or final approval or for the issuance of a
permit, so long as they provide reasonable notice of the proposed
use or development and a sufficient basis for evaluating the
challenged ordinance or map in light thereof. Nothing herein
contained shall preclude the landowner from first seeking a final
land development or subdivision approval conditioned upon
satisfactory resolution of all zoning issues before submitting his
challenge.
(2) If the submission is made by the landowner to the Commissioners
under § 27-50A(2), the request also shall be accompanied by an
amendment or amendments to the ordinance proposed by the
landowner to cure the alleged defects therein.
(3) If the submission is made to the Commissioners, the Township
Solicitor shall represent and advise them at any and all hearings.
(4) The Commissioners may retain an independent attorney to present
the defense of the challenged ordinance or map on its behalf and to
present witnesses on its behalf.
(5) Based upon the testimony presented at the hearing or hearings, the
Commissioners or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may be,
shall determine whether the challenged ordinance or map is
defective, as alleged by the landowner. If a challenge heard by the
Commissioners is found to have merit, the Commissioners shall
proceed as provided in § 609.1 of the Municipalities Planning Code.
If a challenge heard by the Zoning Hearing Board is found to have
merit, the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board shall include
recommended amendments to the challenged ordinance which will
cure the defects found. In reaching its decision, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall consider the amendments, plans and explanatory
material submitted by the landowner and shall also consider:
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
(b) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of
the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise
unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of the
ordinance or map.
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by
the site's soils, slopes, woodland, wetlands, floodplains,
aquifers, natural resources and other natural features.
§ 27-50 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-50
25:976
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and
any adverse environmental impacts.
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
(6) The Commissioners or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may
be, shall render its decision within 45 days after the conclusion of
the last hearing.
(7) If the Commissioners or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may
be, fails to act on the landowner's request within the time limits
referred to in Subsection C(6), a denial of the request is deemed to
have occurred on the 46th day after the close of the last hearing.
D. The Zoning Hearing Board or Commissioners, as the case may be, shall
commence hearings within 60 days after the request is filed unless the
landowner requests or consents to an extension of time.
E. Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of the
ordinance or map is in question and shall give the place where and the
times when a copy of the request, including any plans, explanatory
material or proposed amendments may be examined by the public.
F. The challenge shall be deemed denied when:
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board or Commissioners, as the case may be,
fails to commence the hearing within the time limits set forth in
§ 27-50D.
(2) The Commissioners notify the landowner that it will not adopt the
curative amendment.
(3) The Commissioners adopt a curative amendment which is
unacceptable to the landowner.
(4) The Zoning Hearing Board or Commissioners, as the case may be,
fails to act on the request 45 days after the close of the last hearing
on the request, unless the time is extended by mutual consent by
the landowner and Township.
G. Where a curative amendment proposal is approved by the grant of a
curative amendment application by the Commissioners pursuant to
§ 27-41B(4) or a validity challenge is sustained by the Zoning Hearing
Board pursuant to § 27-41A(1) or the court acts finally on an appeal
from a denial of a curative amendment proposal or a validity challenge,
and the proposal or challenge so approved requires a further
application for subdivision or land development, the developer shall
have two years from the date of such approval to file an application for
§ 27-50 RESERVED § 27-50
25:977
§ 27-51. Procedure to obtain preliminary opinion.
In order not to unreasonably delay the time when a landowner may secure
assurance that the ordinance or map under which he proposed to build is
free from challenge, and recognizing that the procedure for preliminary
approval of his development may be too cumbersome or may be unavailable,
the landowner may advance the date from which time for any challenge to
the ordinance or map will run under § 27-48 by the following procedure:
preliminary or tentative approval pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
22, Subdivision and Land Development, or the planned residential
development sections of this chapter. Within the two year period, no
subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other
governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner which
adversely affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the curative
amendment or the sustained validity challenge. Upon the filing of the
preliminary or tentative plan, the provisions of § 508(4) of the
Municipalities Planning Code shall apply. Where the proposal appended
to the curative amendment application or the validity challenge is
approved but does not require further application under any
subdivision or land development ordinance, the developer shall have
one year within which to file for a building permit. Within the one year
period, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision
or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner
which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the
curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge. During these
protected periods, the court shall retain or assume jurisdiction for the
purpose of awarding such supplemental relief as may be necessary.
A. The landowner may submit plans and other materials describing his
proposed use or development to the Zoning Officer for a preliminary
opinion as to their compliance with the applicable ordinances and
maps. Such plans and other materials shall not be required to meet the
standards prescribed for preliminary, tentative or final approval or for
the issuance of a building permit so long as they provide reasonable
notice of the proposed use or development and a sufficient basis for a
preliminary opinion as to its compliance.
B. If the Zoning Officer's preliminary opinion is that the use or
development complies with the ordinance or map, notice thereof shall
be published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall include a
general description of the proposed use or development and its
location, by some readily identifiable directive and the place and times
where the plans and other materials may be examined by the public.
The favorable preliminary approval under § 27-48 and the time therein
specified for commencing a proceeding with the Board shall run from
the time when the second notice thereof has been published.
§ 27-50 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-51
25:978
ARTICLE VI
Zoning Map and Boundaries
§ 27-52. Zoning Map and Boundaries. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord.
No. 1657]
The boundaries of the districts enumerated in § 27-66 are hereby
established on a map entitled "Zoning Map of Whitehall Township"
(hereinafter referred to as "map" or "official Zoning Map"), which map
accompanies and is hereby declared to be a part of this chapter. Where
uncertainty exists as to the precise location of the boundaries shown on said
map, the following rules shall apply:
§ 27-53. Overlays. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
Any and all airport zones, floodplains, floodways, flood prone areas and
stormwater management plans described or referenced in this chapter or
otherwise required shall be overlays to the existing districts as shown on
the official Zoning Map of Whitehall Township and, as such, the provisions
of these zones shall serve as supplements to the underlying districts. Where
any conflicts exist between the provisions of the aforementioned sections
and the underlying districts, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
§ 27-54. Official Zoning Map.
A. District boundary lines generally follow the center line of streets and
streams and lot or property lines as they exist on plans of record at the
time of the adoption of this chapter. Where a district boundary line
divides a lot, location of said boundary, unless the same is identified by
dimensions, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on
the map.
B. Where a district boundary is not fixed by dimensions and where it
approximately follows a lot line and where it does not scale more than
20 feet therefrom, such lot line shall be construed to be such boundary
unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. In case any further uncertainty exists, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
interpret the intent of the map as to the location of the district
boundary lines.
A. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the
President of the Board of Commissioners, attested by the Township
Secretary, bear the adoption date of this chapter and the official
Township seal.
B. Amendments to the Official Zoning Map shall occur only in conformity
with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
C. The Official Zoning Map shall be located in the Township office and
shall be the final authority on districts and boundary lines. [Amended
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
§ 27-52 RESERVED § 27-55
25:979
§ 27-55. Lots divided by zoning district boundary line. [Amended
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657; 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
§ 27-56. Table of Zoning Map and Boundary Amendments.
The Table of Zoning Map and Boundary amendments is included at the end
of this chapter.
A. Lots shall not be created by subdivision, consolidation or otherwise
which are divided by a zoning boundary line.
B. In the event that a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, which lot
is legally existing as of the date of adoption of this chapter, then:
(1) Each portion of that lot which is in a different zoning district shall
be used and developed in accordance with all of the provisions of
the respective different zoning district applicable to that portion of
the lot, unless a variance (see § 27-42) is obtained.
(2) But where at least 75% of the lot area of that lot is governed by the
provisions of one zoning district (hereinafter the "dominant zoning
district"), and after conditional use approval by the Commissioners
(see §§ 27-44 and 27-45), the applicant then may use or develop the
remaining area of the land which was not governed by the
dominant zoning district, but which shall not exceed 10 acres,
pursuant to all of the provisions of the dominant zoning district.
Provided that, once the remaining area of the land has been use or
developed, it may not thereafter be used or developed pursuant to
the provisions of any other zoning district without the additional
prior conditional use approval of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 27-55 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-56
25:980
ARTICLE VII
Definitions and Limitations Uses
§ 27-57. Classifications of uses.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following classes of uses are
established:
§ 27-58. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses are uses permitted by right provided said use is shown as
an accessory use in the zoning district schedule for the district in which the
accessory use is located or proposed and the use complies with all other
provisions of this chapter, and further provided that:
§ 27-59. Conditional uses. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
It is hereby recognized that certain uses may be necessary to serve the
needs and convenience of the Township but which may become inimical to
the public health, safety and general welfare by reason of their inherent
nature or operation and therefore require special and proper consideration
of their effect on existing and probable future conditions and characteristics
of the surrounding area. Such uses are hereby declared to be conditional
uses and may be permitted upon application to and approval by the Board
of Commissioners, which shall give due consideration to the provisions of
A. Accessory uses.
B. Conditional uses.
C. Nonconforming uses.
D. Permitted uses.
E. Prohibited uses.
F. Similar uses.
G. Special exception uses.
H. Temporary uses.
A. The proposed accessory use is customarily associated with, incidental
to or provided with the permitted use existing on the lot.
B. The extent, size and intensity of such proposed accessory use is in
keeping with the scale, nature and characteristics of the permitted use
on the lot.
C. The accessory use shall not be permitted to exist unless the primary use
exists upon the same lot. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
D. The accessory use is not situate in any front yard or side yard that abuts
a street.
§ 27-57 RESERVED § 27-59
25:981
§§ 27-44 and 27-45 and provided said use is stated as a conditional use in
the zoning district schedule for the district in which the use is located.
§ 27-60. Nonconforming uses.
A. Within the districts established by this chapter, there exist, may exist or
will exist lots, uses of land, and/or characteristics of use which were
lawful before this chapter was enacted but which would be prohibited,
regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter. Inasmuch as
these nonconformities are, by definition, alien to the zoning scheme of
the districts created under this chapter, it is the intent of this chapter to
restrict, rather than increase, such nonconformities.
B. A use which legally existed at the time of the passage of this chapter
which shall be made nonconforming at the time of the passage of this
chapter may be continued except as otherwise set forth in this article.
C. Existing nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged, reconstructed,
substituted, moved or structurally altered unless required to do so by
law or order or as specified in Subsection D(1); nor shall they be
extended or enlarged after passage of this chapter by attachment to a
building or premises or by the addition of other uses of a nature which
would be prohibited generally in the district involved.
D. Nonconforming uses are further subject to the following:
(1) Any nonconforming use may be enlarged or expanded up to but not
more than 25% of its floor or use area as it existed at the time of
passage of the first zoning ordinance adopted by the Township
which created the nonconformity, provided that such enlargement
shall conform to all other regulations of the district in which it is
situate.
(2) Normal maintenance, repairs and incidental alterations of a
building or other structure containing a nonconforming use are
permitted provided they do not extend the area or volume of space
occupied by the nonconforming use.
(3) Residential nonconforming uses may be altered in any way to
improve interior livability, provided that no structural alterations
shall be made which would increase the number of dwelling units
within the building.
(4) A nonconforming use shall not be extended to displace or replace a
conforming use.
(5) A nonconforming use may be changed into a conforming use at any
time at which its nonconforming status is lost.
(6) A nonconforming use may be continued but shall not be changed to
another nonconforming use except by special exception from the
Zoning Hearing Board and when all of the following conditions are
§ 27-59 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-60
25:982
met to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board: [Amended
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(a) All of the proposed use is conducted within a building.
(b) The building cannot reasonably be modified to contain a
conforming use.
(c) The proposed nonconforming use is less detrimental to its
neighborhood, surroundings and the general public welfare
than the use it is to replace. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
take into consideration all factors which might affect the
public's interest including: traffic generated, nuisance
characteristics such as emission of noise, odor, dust and
smoke, fire hazards and hours and manner of operation.
(7) Buildings or structures, regardless of conformity or ownership,
shall not be combined for the purpose of extending an existing
nonconforming use or for creating a different nonconforming use.
E. In the event that any floor area, volume or use of land of a
nonconforming use is voluntarily razed, legally condemned, structurally
changed or destroyed by fire, explosion, flood or other phenomenon, it
may not be restored, reconstructed or used as before except in strict
compliance with the zoning regulations of the zoning district in which it
is situate, unless such restoration, reconstruction or use commences
within six months from the date of the damage and is brought to
completion within a reasonable period of time thereafter. [Amended
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
F. Termination and abandonment of nonconforming uses shall be subject
to the following:
(1) Any nonconforming use that is replaced by a conforming use shall
be deemed immediately abandoned and cannot thereafter be
revived.
(2) A nonconforming use discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive
months shall be deemed to have its nonconformity abandoned and
cannot thereafter be revived unless the owner thereof can prove to
the Board that at least one of the elements as set forth in
Subsection F(4) has been met. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord.
No. 1657]
(3) The following shall be deemed to be evidence of the discontinuance
and abandonment of a nonconforming use:
(a) Removal of any and all furniture, equipment and machinery.
(b) Leaving the property to the elements, without heat, water or
property security.
(c) Use of the property for a conforming use.
§ 27-60 RESERVED § 27-60
25:983
§ 27-61. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses are uses permitted by right provided said use is shown as
a permitted use in the zoning district schedule for the district in which the
use is located or proposed and the use complies with all other provisions of
this chapter.
§ 27-62. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are expressly prohibited:
(d) Demolition of the structure.
(e) Failure to apply for any licenses necessary to continue such
nonconforming use.
(f) Failure to appeal the denial of a permit to continue the use.
(4) A nonconforming use shall not be deemed abandoned under the
following circumstances:
(a) War and the consequent restrictions imposed upon the used by
a governmental authority, or the entry of the operator of the
nonconforming use into the armed services or the shortage of
materials and supplies necessary for the continued operation
of the nonconforming use.
(b) Extended inability of the owner to find a tenant desirous of
using the premises despite continuous active attempts to do so.
(c) Destruction of the property by natural disaster.
(d) Cessation of business during a repair of or to the property,
provided that the repair is continuous during the period of
cessation.
A. A use not listed in a zoning district schedule and not similar as per
§ 27-63. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
B. A lot, parcel or tract of land used for the open dumping or burning of
trash, garbage, rubbish or other waste products including, but not
limited to, asphalt, concrete and demolition materials. [Amended
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no use may be
made of any land or water within any zoning district so as to:
(1) Create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communications between aircraft and the Lehigh Valley
International Airport. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
(2) Make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and
others.
§ 27-60 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-62
25:984
§ 27-63. Similar uses. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
The Zoning Hearing Board may, by special exception, determine that a
proposed use is sufficiently similar in character and impact to that of a
listed use to permit the proposed use with such conditions as the Zoning
Hearing Board deems appropriate. No use which is listed in a use schedule
of a zoning district, whether permitted, accessory, special exception or
conditional, shall be considered as a "similar use" in any other zoning
district.
(3) Result in glare to pilots using the airport.
(4) In any way endanger or interfere with the landing, taking off or
maneuvering of aircraft.
D. The use of a detached accessory building as a dwelling.
E. Commercial or industrial businesses or uses in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5
and R-6 Zoning Districts, unless otherwise permitted herein.
F. Residences in an I, Industrial Zoning District. [Amended 12-18-1989
by Ord. No. 1657]
G. The use of a storage trailer as a permanent accessory structure.
H. The maintenance or use of an outhouse or cesspool.
I. Creation or expansion of a salvage yard in a zoning district other than
an I, Industrial zoning district. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
J. Parking or storing of junked vehicles, or parts thereof, except in
accordance with Chapter 5, Code Enforcement; unless:
(1) Said parking or storing is necessary for the operation of or in
conjunction with a lawful business enterprise. [Amended
3-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2221]
K. Any alteration, construction, conversion, erection, excavation,
extension, placement, reconstruction, repair, replacement or
restoration of any building or structure or any part thereof, or use or
development of land which violates any State or Federal statute, law,
rule, directive or regulation, or violates other Whitehall Township
ordinance, or which interferes with or encroaches upon any wetland or
floodplain, unless otherwise permitted. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord.
No. 1729]
L. The use of a structure in any zoning district as a juice bar or similar
establishment. [Amended 10-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2264]
§ 27-62 RESERVED § 27-64
25:985
§ 27-64. Special exception uses. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
It is hereby recognized that certain uses may be necessary to serve the
needs and convenience of the Township but which may become inimical to
the public health, safety and general welfare by reason of their inherent
nature or operation and therefore require special and proper consideration
of their effect on existing and probable future conditions and characteristics
of the surrounding area. Such uses are hereby declared to be special
exception uses and may be permitted upon application to and approval
by the Zoning Hearing Board, which shall give due consideration to the
provisions of §§ 27-43 and 27-45 provided said use is stated as a special
exception use in the zoning district schedule for the district in which the
use is located.
§ 27-65. Temporary uses. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
It is hereby recognized that certain uses and activities which might
otherwise be prohibited by this chapter are nevertheless such that their
establishment and operation for a limited period of time would serve the
public interest. For the purposes of this chapter, such uses are declared to
be temporary uses which may be permitted in any district upon application
to and approval by special exception of the Zoning Hearing Board subject
to the following:
A. The proposed use is of such a nature that at the time of application that
it would not exert a detrimental effect upon the use of neighboring
properties.
B. The duration of the proposed use shall be established by specific dates
as will, in the judgment of the Board, serve the intended purpose of the
temporary use, but in no case, however, shall the use be permitted for
more than one year from the date of Board approval. In the event that
the temporary use is needed for an additional time period, an applicant
shall submit a request to the Board for an extension of time. The
duration of such extension shall be subject to the time restrictions as
stated hereinbefore.
C. A temporary use, if permitted shall:
(1) Conform to all lot coverage and dimensional requirements of the
zoning district in which the temporary use is proposed to be
situate.
(2) Not be placed in any front or side yard.
(3) Not interfere with traffic visibility.
(4) Not occupy designated parking, driveway or access areas.
(5) Not obstruct traffic flow on, in, into or out of the lot upon which the
use is situate.
§ 27-64 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-65
25:986
(6) Not exceed 35 feet in height, unless such use is otherwise
permitted to be 45 feet elsewhere in this chapter.
D. The property owner shall restore the site upon which the temporary use
was situate to its original condition or to a condition that complies with
the requirements of this chapter. The Township Engineer shall
determine if restoration is complete, adequate and sufficient for its
intended purpose.
§ 27-65 RESERVED § 27-65
25:987

ARTICLE VIII
Zoning Districts
§ 27-66. Districts.
The Township is hereby divided into the following districts:
Airport zones
Commercial zones: [Amended
4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
C-1, Neighborhood Commercial
C-2A, Local Commercial
C-2, Regional/Community
Commercial
Floodplain and stormwater
management zones
Industrial zone: [Amended
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
I, Industrial
Office park zone
Open space zones: OS-1, Open Space — Residential/
Agricultural
OS-2, Open Space — Limited
Industrial
Residential zones: [Amended
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
R-1 to R-6
§ 27-67. Intent of districts.
The intended uses of the various zoning districts are described as follows
and shall be relied upon for interpretation and administration of this
chapter:
A. The airport zones are designed to insure and promote the health, safety
and welfare of the general public and property in and about the Lehigh
Valley International Airport, to protect the users, facilities and services
of the airport, to prevent hazardous conditions to the users, facilities or
services of the airport and to eliminate, remove, mitigate, mark or light
any existing hazard which cannot be completely abated. [Amended
8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
B. The commercial zones are intended to provide sufficient area in
appropriate locations for various forms and types of business uses and
development; to satisfy the needs of modern business development by
providing off-street parking, loading and unloading areas, safe and
efficient means of vehicle ingress and egress, and continuity and
homogeneity of business development; to encourage the development
of attractive, functional and economic forms of commercial buildings
under proper standards; to encourage the enhancement and
beautification of commercial areas and to minimize the effect of
§ 27-66 RESERVED § 27-67
25:989
commercial areas on adjoining residential areas. [Amended
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
C. The floodplain and stormwater management zones are intended to
prevent the loss of property and life, the creation of health and safety
hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the
extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for floor
protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by regulating
uses, activities and development which, acting alone or in combination
with other existing or future uses, activities and development, will
cause increases in flood heights, velocities and frequencies; restricting
or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development from locating
within areas subject to flooding; requiring all those uses, activities and
developments that do occur in flood prone areas to be protected and/or
floodproofed against flooding and flood damage; and protecting
individuals from buying lands and structures which are unsuited for
intended purposes because of flood hazards.
D. The industrial zone is intended to provide suitable space for industrial
and commercial types of business and development not ordinarily found
nor desirable in neighborhood or regional/community commercial
districts, to satisfy the needs for this type of development by providing
for off-street parking and loading and unloading areas in the course of
the development of attractive functional and economic forms of
commercial and office uses as well as industrial development and to
minimize the effect of industrial commercial areas on the adjoining
residential areas, if any. The industrial zone is not intended to contain
residences. In the event that there is an existing single-family detached
or semidetached dwelling in an industrial zone, the expansion of said
building or the establishment of accessory uses for said dwellings may
be permitted provided the proposal is in compliance with the residential
zone closest to the dwelling, or if remote from a residential zone, the
minimum standards of an R-5 Residential District shall be followed.
[Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
E. The office park zone is designed to create a buffer district between
residential neighborhoods and commercial or industrial zones in order
to limit the adverse environmental effects nonresidential areas have
upon residential neighborhoods in the Township. In addition, this zone
is intended to alleviate intense traffic congestion which is experienced
in areas of high commercial retail use. This zone is intended to provide
sufficient area in appropriate locations for various forms and types of
professional services, banks, businesses, clinics and other specified
uses which would serve as a buffer to residential zones. [Amended
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
F. The open space zones are designed to secure, promote and provide
suitable space and area for residential and industrial uses while limiting
the intensity of development to maintain sufficient and adequate open
space.
§ 27-67 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-67
25:990
G. The residential zones are intended to provide sufficient area in
appropriate locations for residential uses and development to meet the
housing needs of the Township with due allowance for providing a
choice of sites and types of housing without sacrificing desirable
established residential patterns. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
§ 27-67 RESERVED § 27-67
25:991

ARTICLE IX
Schedule of Permitted, Accessory, Special Exception and
Conditional Uses
§ 27-68. OS-1, Open Space-Residential/Agricultural.
A. The following uses are permitted by right, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Agriculture, limited to crop farming and related agricultural
processing and specifically excluding livestock and poultry farms.
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Churches and related uses.
(4) Conservation areas and uses.
(5) Fish and wildlife refuges.
(6) Forestry, subject to the provisions of § 27-97. [Added 5-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2559]
(7) Golf courses.
(8) Municipal uses.
(9) Nature preserves.
(10) Schools.
(11) Single-family detached dwellings.
(12) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(13) No-impact home-based business. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord.
No. 2578]
B. The following accessory uses, if situate on the same lot, are permitted
by right, provided said uses comply with all other applicable
requirements of this chapter and any amendments thereto:
(1) Any use customarily associated with, incidental to or provided with
a permitted use.
(2) Garages (private).
(3) Greenhouses (noncommercial).
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Satellite earth station dishes.
(6) Sheds.
§ 27-68 RESERVED § 27-68
25:993
(7) Support infrastructure. Substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(8) Swimming pools (private).
C. The following special exception uses are permitted when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 27-43, provided said uses
comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Animal husbandry.
(2) Single-operator barbershops as in home occupations. [Amended
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1791]
(3) Single-operator beauty shops as in home occupations. [Amended
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1791]
(4) Day-care centers.
D. The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to § 27-44, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Camps.
(2) Heliports. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(3) Outdoor recreation facilities. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
(4) (Reserved)136
(5) Wind turbines/windmill. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
E. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted
or authorized use, unless otherwise specified:
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Area: two acres.
(b) Width: 200 feet.
(c) Frontage: 150 feet.
(2) Minimum yard requirements.
(a) Front: 50 feet.
(b) Rear: 40 feet.
136. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(4), which provided for storage and distribution
facilities, indoor recreation facilities and funeral homes as conditional uses, as amended
5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 2171, was repealed 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2702.
§ 27-68 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-68
25:994
§ 27-69. OS-2, Open Space/Limited Industrial. [Amended 9-18-1989
by Ord. No. 1651; 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657; 2-12-1996 by Ord.
No. 1959; 3-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2219]
(c) Side (one): 35 feet.
(d) Side (both): 80 feet.
(3) Maximum impervious coverage: 30%.
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet above finished grade.
[Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(5) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
A. The following uses are permitted by right, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Agriculture, limited to crop farming and related agricultural
processing and specifically excluding livestock and poultry farms.
(2) Any permitted industrial use as set forth in § 27-81A.
(3) Conservation areas and uses.
(4) Fish and wildlife refuges.
(5) Forestry, subject to the provisions of § 27-97. [Added 5-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2559]
(6) Golf courses.
(7) Indoor recreation facilities.
(8) Municipal uses.
(9) Nature preserves.
(10) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(11) Outdoor recreation.
B. The following accessory uses, if situate on the same lot, are permitted
by right, provided said uses comply with all other applicable
requirements of this chapter and any amendments thereto:
(1) Any use customarily associated with, incidental to or provided with
a permitted use.
(2) Satellite earth station dishes.
(3) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
§ 27-68 RESERVED § 27-69
25:995
C. The following special exception uses are permitted when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 27-43, provided said uses
comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
D. The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to § 27-47, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Camps.
(2) Cement and cement products manufacturing.
(3) (Reserved)137
(4) Heliports.
(5) Hunting and fishing clubs.
(6) Minimarts. Said use shall comply with all provisions of § 27-87 of
this chapter. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
(7) (Reserved)138
(8) Outdoor recreation facilities. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
(9) Quarrying and related uses. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
(10) Research facilities. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
(11) Rifle ranges. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
(12) Confined animal feeding operations. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord.
No. 2578]
(13)Wind turbines/windmill. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
E. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted
or authorized use, unless otherwise specified:
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Area: two acres.
137. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(3), Commercial greenhouses, was repealed
12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2702. Original Subsection (4)(D), Forestry, which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2559. See now permitted uses
of this section.
138. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(4), Offices, as amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578,
was repealed 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2702.
§ 27-69 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-69
25:996
(b) Width: 200 feet.
(c) Frontage: 150 feet.
(2) Minimum yard requirements.
(a) Front: 50 feet.
(b) Rear: 40 feet.
(c) Side (one): 35 feet.
(d) Side (both): 80 feet.
(3) Maximum impervious coverage: 45%.
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet above finished grade.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
F. Offices shall be permitted to have an unlimited number of office uses
conducted within a single building regardless of the nature of the
tenants. For example, a single office building may contain offices for
doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants, corporate headquarters, etc.
and still be considered as a single principal use of the lot.

§ 27-70. R-1, Very Low Density Residential.
A. The following uses are permitted by right, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Agriculture, limited to crop farming and related agricultural
processing and specifically excluding livestock and poultry farms.
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Churches or related facilities. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord.
No. 1657]
(4) Conservation areas and uses.
(5) Fish and wildlife refuges.
(6) Forestry, subject to the provisions of § 27-97. [Added 5-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2559]
(7) Municipal uses.
(8) Nature preserves.
(9) Schools.
(10) Single-family detached dwellings.
§ 27-69 RESERVED § 27-70
25:997
(11) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(12) No-impact home-based business. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord.
No. 2578]
(13) Adaptive reuse for affordable housing and multifamily housing.
[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 3061]
B. The following accessory uses, if situate on the same lot, are permitted
by right, provided said uses comply with all other applicable
requirements of this chapter and any amendments thereto:
(1) Any use customarily associated with, incidental to or provided with
a permitted use.
(2) Garages (private). [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(3) Greenhouses (noncommercial).
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Satellite earth station dishes.
(6) Sheds.
(7) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(8) Swimming pools (private). [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
C. The following special exception uses are permitted when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 27-43, provided said uses
comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Single-operator barbershops as in home occupations. [Amended
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1791]
(2) Single-operator beauty shops as in home occupations. [Amended
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1791]
(3) Day-care centers.
D. The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to § 27-44, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
(2) Camps.139
(3) Golf courses.
§ 27-70 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-70
25:998

(4) Hunting and fishing clubs.140
(5) Outdoor recreation facilities.
(6) Indoor recreation facilities.
(7) 141Wind turbines/windmill. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
E. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted
or authorized use, unless otherwise specified:
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Area: one acre.
(b) Width: 120 feet. [Amended 1-13-1992 by Ord. No. 1755]
(c) Frontage: 115 feet.
(2) Minimum yard requirements.
(a) Front: 40 feet.
(b) Rear: 40 feet.
(c) Side (one): 25 feet.
(d) Side (both): 60 feet.
(3) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet above finished grade.
(5) Maximum impervious coverage (total): 30%.

§ 27-71. R-2, Low Density Residential.
A. The following uses are permitted by right provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Agriculture. Limited to crop farming and related agricultural
processing and specifically excluding livestock and poultry farms.
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Churches or related facilities. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord.
No. 1657]
139. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 4C, Forestry, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2559. See now permitted uses of this
section.
140. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 4F, Minimarts, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578.
141. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(7), Active adult residential community, added
12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 2656, was repealed 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2701.
§ 27-70 RESERVED § 27-71
25:999
(4) Conservation areas and uses.
(5) Fish and wildlife refuges.
(6) Forestry, subject to the provisions of § 27-97. [Added 5-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2559]
(7) Municipal uses.
(8) Nature preserves.
(9) Schools.
(10) Single-family detached dwellings.
(11) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(12) No-impact home-based business. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord.
No. 2578]
(13) Adaptive reuse for affordable housing and multifamily housing.
[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 3061]
B. The following accessory uses, if situate on the same lot, are permitted
by right, provided said uses comply with all other applicable
requirements of this chapter and any amendments thereto:
(1) Any use customarily associated with, incidental to or provided with
a permitted use.
(2) Garages (private). [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(3) Greenhouses (noncommercial).
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Satellite earth station dishes.
(6) Sheds.
(7) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(8) Swimming pools (private). [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
C. The following special exception uses are permitted when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 27-43, provided said uses
comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Single operator barber shops as in home occupations. [Amended
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1791]
§ 27-71 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-71
25:1000
(2) Single operator beauty shops as in home occupations. [Amended
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1791]
(3) Day-care centers.
D. The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to § 27-44, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
(2) Camps.142
(3) Golf courses.
(4) Hunting and fishing clubs.
(5) Indoor recreation facilities.
(6) Outdoor recreation facilities.
(7) Wind turbines/windmill. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
E. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted
or authorized use, unless otherwise specified:
(1) Minimum lot size. Any lot not served by public water and sewer
shall have a minimum lot size of one acre. [Amended 12-18-1989
by Ord. No. 1657]
(a) Area: 22,000 square feet. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No.
1729]
(b) Width: 100 feet.
(c) Frontage: 75 feet.
(2) Minimum yard requirements.
(a) Front: 30 feet.
(b) Rear: 30 feet.
(c) Side (one): 15 feet.
(d) Side (both): 30 feet.
(3) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet above finished grade.
(5) Maximum impervious coverage (total): 45%.
[Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
142. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (4)(C), Forestry, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2559. See now permitted uses of this
section.
§ 27-71 RESERVED § 27-71
25:1001

§ 27-72. R-3, Low/Medium Density Residential.
A. The following uses are permitted by right, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Agriculture: limited to crop farming and related agricultural
processing and specifically excluding livestock and poultry farms.
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Churches or related facilities.
(4) Conservation areas and uses.
(5) Fish and wildlife refuges.
(6) Forestry, subject to the provisions of § 27-97. [Added 5-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2559]
(7) Municipal uses.
(8) Nature preserves.
(9) Schools.
(10) Single-family detached dwellings.
(11) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(12) No-impact home-based business. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord.
No. 2578]
(13) Adaptive reuse for affordable housing and multifamily housing.
[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 3061]
B. The following accessory uses, if situate on the same lot, are permitted
by right, provided said uses comply with all other applicable
requirements of this chapter and any amendments thereto:
(1) Any use customarily associated with, incidental to or provided with
a permitted use.
(2) Garages (private). [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(3) Greenhouses (noncommercial).
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Satellite earth station dishes.
(6) Sheds.
§ 27-71 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-72
25:1002
(7) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(8) Swimming pools (private). [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
C. The following special exception uses are permitted when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 27-44, provided said uses
comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Single-operator barbershops as in home occupations. [Amended
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1791]
(2) Single-operator beauty shops as in home occupations. [Amended
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1791]
(3) Day-care centers.
D. The following conditionals uses are permitted when authorized by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to § 27-51, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
(2) Camps.143
(3) Golf courses.
(4) Hunting and fishing clubs.
(5) Outdoor recreation facilities.
(6) Wind turbines/windmill. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
E. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted
or authorized use, unless otherwise specified:
(1) Minimum lot size. Any lot not served by public water and sewer
shall have a minimum lot size of one acre. [Amended 12-18-1989
by Ord. No. 1657]
(a) Area: 12,000 square feet.
(b) Width: 90 feet.
(c) Frontage: 75 feet.
143. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (4)(C), Forestry, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2559. See now permitted uses of this
section.
§ 27-72 RESERVED § 27-72
25:1003

(2) Minimum yard requirements. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657; 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729; 2-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2958]
(a) Single-family detached:
[1] Front: 30 feet.
[2] Rear: 30 feet.
[3] Side (one): 12.5 feet.
[4] Side (both): 25 feet.
(b) All other uses:
[1] Front: 50 feet.
[2] Rear: 50 feet.
[3] Side (one): 25 feet.
[4] Side (both): 50 feet.
(3) Maximum building coverage: [Amended 2-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2958]
(a) Single-family detached: 40%.
(b) All other uses: 35%.
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet above finished grade.
(5) Maximum impervious coverage (total): 55%.
[Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]


§ 27-73. R-3A, Special Care Community Residential.
A. The following uses are permitted by right, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Agriculture: limited to crop farming and related agricultural
processing and specifically excluding livestock and poultry farms.
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Churches or related facilities.
(4) Conservation areas and uses.
(5) Fish and wildlife refuges.
(6) Forestry, subject to the provisions of § 27-97. [Added 5-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2559]
§ 27-72 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-73
25:1004
(7) Municipal uses.
(8) Nature preserves.
(9) Schools.
(10) Single-family detached dwellings.
(11) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(12) No-impact home-based business. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord.
No. 2578]
(13) Adaptive reuse for affordable housing and multifamily housing.
[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 3061]
B. The following accessory uses, if situate on the same lot, are permitted
by right, provided said uses comply with all other applicable
requirements of this chapter and any amendments thereto:
(1) Any use customarily associated with, incidental to or provided with
a permitted use.
(2) Garages (private). [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(3) Greenhouses (noncommercial).
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Satellite earth station dishes.
(6) Sheds.
(7) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(8) Swimming pools (private). [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
C. The following special exception uses are permitted when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 27-43, provided said uses
comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Single-operator barbershops as in home occupations. [Amended
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1791]
(2) Single-operator beauty shops as in home occupations. [Amended
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1791]
(3) Day-care centers.
D. The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to § 27-44, provided said uses comply
§ 27-73 RESERVED § 27-73
25:1005
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
(2) Camps.144
(3) Golf courses.
(4) Hunting and fishing clubs.
(5) Outdoor recreation facilities.
(6) Outdoor theaters and stages.
(7) Special care community residences.145
(8) Stadiums.
(9) Wind turbines/windmill. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
E. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted
or authorized use, unless otherwise specified:146 [Amended
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(1) Minimum lot size. Any lot not served by public water and sewer
shall have a minimum lot size of one acre.
(a) Area: 13,000 square feet.
(b) Width: 100 feet.
(c) Frontage: 75 feet.
(2) Minimum yard requirements. [Amended 2-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2958]
(a) Single-family residential:
[1] Front: 35 feet.
[2] Rear: 35 feet.
[3] Side (one): 15 feet.
[4] Side (both): 30 feet.
(b) All other uses:
[1] Front: 50 feet.
144. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (4)(C), Forestry, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2559. See now permitted uses of this
section.
145. Editor's Note: For special care residential community requirements refer to Article XI.
146. Editor's Note: For special care residential community requirements refer to Article XI.
§ 27-73 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-73
25:1006
§ 27-74. R-4, Medium Density Residential.
[2] Rear: 50 feet.
[3] Side (one): 25 feet.
[4] Side (both): 50 feet.
(3) Maximum building coverage: 40%.
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet above finished grade.
(5) Maximum impervious coverage (total): 55%.
A. The following uses are permitted by right, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Agriculture: limited to crop farming and related agricultural
processing and specifically excluding livestock and poultry farms.
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Churches or related facilities.
(4) Conservation areas and uses.
(5) Fish and wildlife refuges.
(6) Forestry, subject to the provisions of § 27-97. [Added 5-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2559]
(7) Municipal uses.
(8) Nature preserves.
(9) Schools.
(10) Single-family detached dwellings.
(11) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(12) No-impact home-based business. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord.
No. 2578]
(13) Adaptive reuse for affordable housing and multifamily housing.
[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 3061]
B. The following accessory uses, if situate on the same lot, are permitted
by right, provided said uses comply with all other applicable
requirements of this chapter and any amendments thereto:
(1) Any use customarily associated with, incidental to or provided with
a permitted use.
§ 27-73 RESERVED § 27-74
25:1007
(2) Garages (private). [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(3) Greenhouses (noncommercial).
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Satellite earth station dishes.
(6) Sheds.
(7) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(8) Swimming pools (private). [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
C. The following special exception uses are permitted when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 27-43, provided said uses
comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Single-operator barbershops as in home occupations. [Amended
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1791]
(2) Single-operator beauty shops as in home occupations. [Amended
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1791]
(3) Day-care centers.
D. The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to § 27-44, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
(2) Camps.147
(3) Golf courses.
(4) Hunting and fishing clubs.
(5) Outdoor recreation facilities.
(6) Outdoor theaters and stages.
(7) Wind turbines/windmill. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
E. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted
or authorized use, unless otherwise specified:
147. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (4)(C), Forestry, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2559. See now permitted uses of this
section.
§ 27-74 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-74
25:1008
§ 27-75. R-5, High Density Residential. [Amended 12-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 1657; 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729; 11-9-1992 by Ord. No.
1791; 2-12-1996 by Ord. No. 1959]
(1) Minimum lot size. Any lot not served by public water and sewer
shall have a minimum lot size of one acre. [Amended 12-18-1989
by Ord. No. 1657]
(a) Area: 9,600 square feet. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No.
1729]
(b) Width.
[1] Single-family detached: 80 feet.
[2] All other uses: 80 feet.
(c) Frontage.
[1] Single-family detached: 60 feet.
[2] All other uses: 60 feet.
(2) Minimum yard requirements. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657; 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729; 2-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2958]
(a) Single-family detached:
[1] Front: 25 feet.
[2] Rear: 25 feet.
[3] Side (one): eight feet.
[4] Side (both): 20 feet.
(b) All other uses:
[1] Front: 50 feet.
[2] Rear: 50 feet.
[3] Side (one): 25 feet.
[4] Side (both): 50 feet.
(3) Maximum building coverage: 35%. [Amended 12-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 1657]
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet above finished grade.
[Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(5) Maximum impervious coverage (total): 50%.
§ 27-74 RESERVED § 27-75
25:1009
A. The following uses are permitted by right provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Apartments.
(2) Agriculture: limited to crop farming and related agricultural
processing and specifically excluding livestock and poultry farms.
(3) Cemeteries.
(4) Churches or related facilities.
(5) Conservation areas and uses.
(6) Fish and wildlife refuges.
(7) Forestry, subject to the provisions of § 27-97. [Added 5-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2559]
(8) Municipal uses.
(9) Nature preserves.
(10) Schools.
(11) Single-family attached dwellings.
(12) Single-family detached dwellings.
(13) Single-family semidetached dwellings (twins).
(14) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(15) No-impact home-based business. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord.
No. 2578]
(16) Adaptive reuse for affordable housing and multifamily housing.
[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 3061]
B. The following accessory uses, if situate on the same lot, are permitted
by right, provided said uses comply with all other applicable
requirements of this chapter and any amendments thereto:
(1) Any use customarily associated with, incidental to or provided with
a permitted use.
(2) Garages (private).
(3) Greenhouses (noncommercial).
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Satellite earth station dishes.
§ 27-75 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-75
25:1010
(6) Sheds.
(7) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(8) Swimming pools (private).
C. The following special exception uses are permitted when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 27-43, provided said uses
comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto.
(1) Single-operator barbershops as in home occupations.
(2) Single-operator beauty shops as in home occupations.
(3) Day-care centers.
(4) New construction of facilities which provide elderly housing for
persons 55 years of age and older pursuant to the Fair Housing Act
of 1988; provided that a restrictive covenant be attached to the
land that obligates the developer to maintain the property as
elderly housing for a minimum period of 30 years. Conversion of
existing structures to housing permitted under this section is
prohibited. For those developments proposed on tracts of 10 acres
or more, the provisions of § 27-139 of this chapter shall apply.
[Amended 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2085]
D. The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to § 27-44, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
(2) Camps.148
(3) Golf course.
(4) Hunting and fishing clubs.
(5) Indoor recreation facilities.
(6) Mobile home parks.
(7) Outdoor recreation facilities.
(8) Adult residences accessory to an existing assisted living facility.
[Added 8-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2692]
(9) Wind turbines/windmill. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
148. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (4)(C), Forestry, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2559. See now permitted uses of this
section.
§ 27-75 RESERVED § 27-75
25:1011
E. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted
or authorized use, unless otherwise specified:
(1) Minimum lot size. Any lot not served by public water and sewer
shall have a minimum lot size of one acre.
(a) Area.
[1] Single-family detached: 7,500 square feet.
[2] Single-family semidetached: 10,000 square feet (5,000
square feet per unit).
[3] Single-family attached: 2,500 square feet.
[4] Apartments: See Article XI.
[5] Elderly housing: 1.5 acres (minimum lot area per dwelling
unit: 1,600 square feet). [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord.
No. 2050]
[6] All other uses: 10,000 square feet. [Amended
11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 2050]
(b) Width.
[1] Single-family detached: 70 feet.
[2] Single-family semidetached: 100 feet (50 feet per unit).
[3] Single-family attached: 20 feet per unit.
[4] Apartments and all other uses: 100 feet.
(c) Frontage.
[1] Single-family detached: 55 feet.
[2] Single-family semidetached: 100 feet (50 feet per unit).
[3] Single-family attached: 20 feet per unit.
[4] Apartment buildings and all other uses: 100 feet.
(2) Minimum yard requirements.
(a) Front. [Amended 2-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2958]
[1] Single-family detached, semidetached (twins and end-ofrow
townhouses) and attached (townhouses): 25 feet.
[2] All other uses: 50 feet.
(b) Rear. [Amended 2-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2958]
[1] Single-family detached, semidetached (twins and end-ofrow
townhouses) and attached (townhouses): 25 feet.
§ 27-75 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-75
25:1012
§ 27-76. R-5A, High Density Residential Without Apartments.
[Added 10-8-1990 by Ord. No. 1701; amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No.
1729; 11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1791; 2-12-1996 by Ord. No. 1959]
[2] All other uses: 50 feet.
(c) Side. [Amended 2-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2958]
[1] Single-family attached for end units only and
semidetached dwellings: 12.5 feet.
[2] Single-family detached: 10 feet.
[3] All other uses: 25 feet.
(d) Side (both). [Amended 2-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2958]
[1] Single-family attached for end units only and
semidetached dwellings: 25 feet.
[2] Single-family detached: 20 feet.
[3] All other uses: 50 feet.
(e) Minimum yard requirements for apartments: See Article XI,
Conditional Use Provisions.
(3) Maximum building coverage: 40%.
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet above finished grade.
(5) Maximum impervious coverage (total): 70%.
A. The following uses are permitted by right, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Agriculture, limited to crop farming and related agricultural
processing, but specifically excluding livestock and poultry farms.
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Churches or related facilities.
(4) Conservation areas and uses.
(5) Fish and wildlife refuges.
(6) Forestry, subject to the provisions of § 27-97. [Added 5-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2559]
(7) Municipal uses.
(8) Nature preserves.
(9) Schools.
§ 27-75 RESERVED § 27-76
25:1013
(10) Single-family attached dwellings.
(11) Single-family detached dwelling.
(12) Single-family semidetached dwellings (twins).
(13) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(14) (Reserved)149
(15) No-impact home-based business. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord.
No. 2578]
(16) Adaptive reuse for affordable housing and multifamily housing.
[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 3061]
B. The following accessory uses, if situate on the same lot, are permitted
by right, provided said uses comply with all other applicable
requirements of this chapter and any amendments thereto:
(1) Any use customarily associated with, incidental to or provided with
a permitted use.
(2) Garages (private).
(3) Greenhouses (noncommercial).
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Satellite earth station dishes.
(6) Sheds.
(7) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(8) Swimming pools (private).
C. The following special exception uses are permitted when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 27-43, provided said uses
comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Single-operator barbershops as in home occupations.
(2) Single-operator beauty shops as in home occupations.
(3) Day-care centers.
D. The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to § 27-44, provided said uses comply
149. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(14), which provided for dwellings consisting of not
more then two dwelling units as a use permitted by right, was repealed 12-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 2702.
§ 27-76 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-76
25:1014
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
(2) Camps.150
(3) Golf course.
(4) Hunting and fishing clubs.
(5) Indoor recreation facilities.
(6) Mobile home parks.
(7) Outdoor recreation facilities.
(8) Wind turbines/windmill. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
E. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted
or authorized use unless otherwise specified:
(1) Minimum lot size. Any lot not served by public water and sewer
shall have a minimum lot size of one acre.
(a) Area.
[1] Single-family detached: 7,500 square feet.
[2] Single-family semidetached: 10,000 square feet (5,000
square feet per unit).
[3] Single-family attached: 2,500 square feet.
[4] Apartments: See Article XI.
[5] All other uses: 10,000 square feet.
(b) Width.
[1] Single-family detached: 70 feet.
[2] Single-family semidetached: 100 feet (50 feet per unit).
[3] Single-family attached: 20 feet per unit.
[4] Apartments and all other uses: 100 feet.
(c) Frontage.
[1] Single-family detached: 55 feet.
[2] Single-family semidetached: 100 feet (50 feet per unit).
150. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (4)(C), Forestry, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2559. See now permitted uses of this
section.
§ 27-76 RESERVED § 27-76
25:1015
§ 27-77. R-6, Mobile Home Park.
[3] Single-family attached: 20 feet per unit.
[4] Apartment buildings and all other uses: 100 feet.
(2) Minimum yard requirements. [Amended 2-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2958]
(a) Front.
[1] Single-family detached, semidetached and attached: 25
feet.
[2] All other uses: 50 feet.
(b) Rear.
[1] Single-family detached, semidetached and attached: 25
feet.
[2] All other uses: 50 feet.
(c) Side (one).
[1] Single-family detached, semidetached and attached: 12.5
feet.
[2] All other uses: 25 feet.
(d) Side (both).
[1] Single-family detached, semidetached and attached: 25
feet.
[2] All other uses: 50 feet.
(3) Maximum building coverage: 40%.
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet above finished grade.
(5) Maximum impervious coverage (total): 70%.
A. The following uses are permitted by right, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Agriculture, limited to crop farming and related agricultural
processing and specifically excluding livestock and poultry farms.
(2) Apartments.
(3) Cemeteries.
(4) Churches or related facilities.
§ 27-76 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-77
25:1016
(5) Conservation areas and uses.
(6) Fish and wildlife refuges.
(7) Forestry, subject to the provisions of § 27-97. [Added 5-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2559]
(8) Mobile home parks.
(9) Municipal uses.
(10) Nature preserves.
(11) Schools.
(12) Single-family attached dwellings.
(13) Single-family detached dwellings.
(14) Single-family semidetached dwellings. [Amended 12-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 1657]
(15) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(16) No-impact home-based business. [Added 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
(17) Adaptive reuse for affordable housing and multifamily housing.
[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 3061]
B. The following accessory uses, if situate on the same lot, are permitted
by right, provided said uses comply with all other applicable
requirements of this chapter and any amendments thereto:
(1) Any use customarily associated with, incidental to or provided with
a permitted use.
(2) Garages (private).
(3) Greenhouses (noncommercial).
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Satellite earth station dishes.
(6) Sheds.
(7) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(8) Swimming pools (private). [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
C. The following special exception uses are permitted when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 27-43, provided said uses
§ 27-77 RESERVED § 27-77
25:1017
comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto.
(1) Single-operator barbershops as in home occupations. [Amended
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1791]
(2) Single-operator beauty shops as in home occupations. [Amended
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1791]
(3) Day-care centers.
D. The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to § 27-44, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
(2) Camps.151
(3) Golf courses.
(4) Hunting and fishing clubs.
(5) Individual mobile home on individual lot.
(6) Indoor recreation facilities.
(7) Outdoor recreation facilities.
(8) Wind turbines/windmills. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
E. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted
or authorized use, unless otherwise specified:
(1) Minimum lot size. Any lot not served by public water or sewer shall
have a minimum lot size of one acre. [Amended 12-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 1657]
(a) Area.
[1] Single-family detached: 6,000 square feet. [Amended
1-10-1994 by Ord. No. 1869]
[2] Single-family attached and apartments.
[3] Mobile home park: See Article XI.
[4] All other uses: 7,200 square feet. [Amended 4-8-1991 by
Ord. No. 1729]
(b) Width.
151. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (4)(C). Forestry, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2559. See now permitted uses of this
section.
§ 27-77 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-77
25:1018
[1] Single-family detached: 60 feet. [Amended 1-10-1994 by
Ord. No. 1869]
[2] Single-family attached and apartments. The requirements
for single-family attached dwelling units and apartments
shall be the same as for the R-5 Zoning District.
[3] Mobile home park: See Article XI.
[4] All other uses: 70 feet.
(c) Frontage.
[1] Single-family detached: 50 feet. [Amended 1-10-1994 by
Ord. No. 1869]
[2] Single-family attached and apartments. The requirements
for single-family attached dwelling units and apartments
shall be the same as for the R-5 Zoning District.
[3] Mobile home park: see Article XI.
[4] All other uses: 70 feet.
(2) Minimum yard requirements. The requirements for single-family
attached dwelling units and apartments shall be the same as for the
R-5 Zoning District. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(a) Front.
[1] Mobile home park: See Article XI.
[2] All other uses: 25 feet.
(b) Rear.
[1] Mobile home park: See Article XI.
[2] All other uses: 25 feet.
(c) Side.
[1] Mobile home park: See Article XI.
[2] All other uses: 7.5 feet. [Amended 1-10-1994 by Ord.
No. 1869]
(d) Side (both).
[1] Mobile home park: See Article XI.
[2] All other uses: 15 feet. [Amended 1-10-1994 by Ord.
No. 1869]
(3) Maximum building coverage: 35%.
§ 27-77 RESERVED § 27-77
25:1019
§ 27-78. C-1, Neighborhood Commercial. [Amended 12-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 1657]
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet above finished grade.
[Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(5) Maximum imperious coverage (total): 70%.
A. The following uses are permitted by right provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Agriculture: limited to crop farming and related agricultural
processing and specifically excluding livestock and poultry farms.
(2) Bank/financial institutions.
(3) Barber/beauty shops.
(4) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(5) Cemeteries.
(6) Churches or related facilities.
(7) Conservation areas and uses.
(8) Day-care centers.
(9) Educational institutions.
(10) Fish and wildlife refuges.
(11) Forestry, subject to the provisions of § 27-97. [Added 5-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2559]
(12) Florist shops.
(13) Funeral homes.
(14) Greenhouses.
(15) Indoor recreation facilities.
(16) Laundries/laundromats.
(17) Municipal uses.
(18) Nature preserves.
(19) Offices.
(20) Repair shops (with floor area less than 5,000 square feet).
(21) Retail stores (with floor area less than 5,000 square feet).
(22) Schools.
§ 27-77 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-78
25:1020
(23) Service establishments (with floor area less than 5,000 square
feet).
(24) Single-family detached residential dwelling.
(25) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
B. The following accessory uses, if situate on the same lot, are permitted
by right, provided said uses comply with all other applicable
requirements of this chapter and any amendments thereto:
(1) Any use customarily associated with, incidental to or provided with
a permitted use.
(2) Garages (private).
(3) Greenhouses (noncommercial).
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Satellite earth station dishes.
(6) Sheds.
(7) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(8) Swimming pools (private).
C. The following special exception uses are permitted when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 27-43, provided said uses
comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Drive-in service establishments.
(2) Golf courses.
(3) Restaurants, fast-food and standard. Said use must comply with all
provisions of Article XI of this chapter. [Amended 10-9-2000 by
Ord. No. 2264]
(4) Taverns.
(5) Minimarts. [Amended 2-8-1999 by Ord. No. 2141]
D. The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to § 27-44, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Apartments.
(2) Automotive service and repair stations.
§ 27-78 RESERVED § 27-78
25:1021
(3) Camps.152
(4) Grocery stores or meat markets having a total floor area of less
than 5,000 square feet.
(5) Heliports.
(6) Hunting and fishing clubs.
(7) New automotive sales establishments.
(8) One apartment in a commercial structure.
(9) Outdoor recreation facilities.
(10) Rooming or boarding homes.
(11) Single-family attached dwellings.
(12) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(13)Wind turbines/windmill. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
E. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted
or authorized use, unless otherwise specified:
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Area: 10,000 square feet. Any lot not served by public water
and sewer shall have a minimum lot size of one acre.
(b) Width: 50 feet.
(c) Frontage: 50 feet.
(2) Minimum yard requirements. There are no side yard requirements
for single-family attached dwellings not situate on the end of a row.
End units shall maintain the stated requirements on the
nonattached side.
(a) Front: 10 feet.
(b) Rear: 25 feet.
(c) Side (one): five feet.
(d) Side (both): 10 feet.
(3) Maximum building coverage: 40%.
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet above finished grade.
(5) Maximum impervious surface: 70%.
152. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (4)(D), Forestry, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2559. See now permitted uses of this
section.
§ 27-78 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-78
25:1022
§ 27-79. C-2A, Local Commercial. [Added 4-8-1991 by Ord. No.
1729; amended 2-8-1999 by Ord. No. 2141; 3-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2220]
(6) For all residential uses, the R-5 dimensional regulations shall apply.
F. Up to three attached principal uses may be conducted on a single
conforming lot provided, however, that each use shall have a minimum
building width of 30 feet, including leased parcels, and appropriate
parking facilities are provided as required under Article XII, provided
that offices shall be permitted to have an unlimited number of office
uses conducted within a single building regardless of the nature of the
tenants. For example, a single office building may contain offices for
doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants, corporate headquarters etc.,
and still be considered as a single principal use of the lot.
A. The following uses are permitted by right provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Agriculture: limited to crop farming and related agricultural
processing but specifically excluding livestock and poultry farms.
(2) Bank/financial institutions.
(3) Barber/beauty shops.
(4) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(5) Cemeteries.
(6) Churches or related facilities.
(7) Conservation areas and uses.
(8) Day-care centers.
(9) Educational institutions.
(10) Fish and wildlife refuges.
(11) Forestry, subject to the provisions of § 27-97. [Added 5-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2559]
(12) Florist shops.
(13) Funeral homes.
(14) Golf courses.
(15) Greenhouses.
(16) Indoor recreation facilities.
(17) Indoor theaters, except adult entertainment facilities.
§ 27-78 RESERVED § 27-79
25:1023
(18) Laundries/laundromats.
(19) Minimarts.
(20) Municipal uses.
(21) Medical or dental laboratories.
(22) Nature preserves.
(23) Offices.
(24) Repair shops (maximum floor area 20,000 square feet).
(25) Retail stores (maximum floor area 20,000 square feet).
(26) Schools.
(27) Service establishments and stores (maximum floor area 20,000
square feet).
(28) Single-family detached residential dwelling.
(29) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelter.
B. The following accessory uses, if situate on the same lot, are permitted
by right, provided said uses comply with all other applicable
requirements of this chapter and any amendments thereto:
(1) Any use customarily associated with, incidental to or provided with
a permitted use.
(2) Garages (private).
(3) Greenhouses (noncommercial).
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Satellite earth station dishes.
(6) Sheds.
(7) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(8) Swimming pools (private).
C. The following special exception uses are permitted when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 27-43, provided said uses
comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) None.
§ 27-79 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-79
25:1024
D. The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to § 27-44, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Apartments.
(2) Amusement facilities.
(3) Automotive and recreational vehicle sales establishments.
(4) Automotive and other motor vehicle repair garages, automotive
fueling stations, and car washes. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord.
No. 2578]
(5) Camps.
(6) Drive-in service establishments.153
(7) Grocery stores or meat markets having a total floor area not
exceeding 10,000 square feet.
(8) Heliports.
(9) Hunting and fishing clubs.
(10) One apartment in a commercial structure.
(11) Outdoor recreation facilities.
(12) Rooming or boarding homes but not including shelters. [Amended
8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
(13) Single-family attached dwellings. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord.
No. 2578]
(14) Single-family semidetached dwellings. [Amended 8-8-2005 by
Ord. No. 2578]
(15) Taverns. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
(16)Wind turbines/windmill. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
E. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted
or authorized use unless otherwise specified:
(1) Minimum lot size. Any lot not served by public water and sewer
shall have a minimum lot size of one acre.
(a) Area: 25,000 square feet.
(b) Width: 100 feet.
153. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (4)(G), Forestry, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2559. See now permitted uses of this
section.
§ 27-79 RESERVED § 27-79
25:1025
§ 27-80. C-2, Regional/Community Commercial. [Amended
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(c) Frontage: 75 feet.
(2) Minimum yard requirements. There are no side yard requirements
for single-family attached dwellings not situate on the end of a row.
End units shall maintain the stated requirements on the
nonattached side.
(a) Front: 50 feet.
(b) Rear: 25 feet.
(c) Side (one): 20 feet.
(d) Side (both): 40 feet.
(3) Maximum building coverage: 35%.
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet above finished grade.
(5) Maximum impervious surface: 70%.
(6) For all residential uses, the dimensional requirements of the R-5
Zoning District shall apply.
F. Up to six attached principal uses may be conducted on a single
conforming lot; provided, however, that each use shall have a minimum
building width of 30 feet, including leased parcels, and appropriate
parking facilities are provided as required under Article XII, Off-Street
Parking and Loading, and further provided that offices shall be
permitted to have an unlimited number of office uses conducted within
a single building regardless of the nature of the tenants. For example, a
single office building may contain offices for doctors, dentists, lawyers,
accountants, corporate headquarters, etc., and still be considered as a
single principal use of the lot.
A. The following uses are permitted by right, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Agriculture: limited to crop farming and related agricultural
processing and specifically excluding livestock and poultry farms.
(2) Amusement facilities.
(3) Automotive and recreational vehicles sales establishments.
(4) Car washes. (For additional provisions see § 27-87, Automotive and
other motor vehicle repair garages, automotive fueling stations,
public garages, public parking areas, car washes and minimarts.)
[Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
§ 27-79 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-80
25:1026
(5) Cemeteries.
(6) Churches and related facilities.
(7) Conservation areas and uses.
(8) Drive-in service establishments (banks, restaurants).
(9) Educational institutions.
(10) Fish and wildlife refuges.
(11) Forestry, subject to the provisions of § 27-97. [Added 5-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2559]
(12) Golf courses.
(13) Indoor recreation facilities.
(14) Indoor theaters, except adult entertainment facilities.
(15) Medical or dental laboratories.
(16) Minimarts. [Amended 2-8-1999 by Ord. No. 2141]
(17) Municipal uses.
(18) Nature preserves.
(19) Printing and publishing establishments.
(20) Rental facilities (i.e., automobile, etc.).
(21) Repair shops.
(22) Restaurants, fast-food and standard. Said use must comply with all
provisions of Article XI of this chapter. [Amended 10-9-2000 by
Ord. No. 2264]
(23) Retail stores.
(24) Schools.
(25) Service stores.
(26) State liquor stores.
(27) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(28) Taverns. [Amended 10-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2264]
(29) Trade shops.
(30) Van and automobile transportation services.
(31) Veterinary offices. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
§ 27-80 RESERVED § 27-80
25:1027
(32)Warehouses.
(33) Wholesale stores and distributors, etc.
(34) C-1 permitted uses, as set forth in § 27-78A except that residential
uses shall not be allowed, unless otherwise permitted.
B. The following accessory uses, if situate on the same lot, are permitted
by right, provided said uses comply with all other applicable
requirements of this chapter and any amendments thereto:
(1) Any use customarily associated with, incidental to or provided with
a permitted use.
(2) Satellite earth station dishes.
(3) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
C. The following special exception uses are permitted when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 27-43, provided said uses
comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Automotive and other motor vehicle repair garages. [Amended
3-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2220]
(2) Automotive fueling stations. [Amended 3-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2220]
(3) Outdoor storage and sale establishments.
(4) Radio and television stations, excluding broadcasting towers.
(5) Single-family detached dwellings.
D. The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to § 27-44, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Adult entertainment facilities: See Article XI.
(2) Camps.
(3) Contractor's yards.154
(4) Heliports.
(5) Hotels.
(6) Hunting and fishing clubs.
154. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (4)(D), Forestry, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2559. See now permitted uses of this
section.
§ 27-80 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-80
25:1028
§ 27-81. I, Industrial. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(7) Motels.
(8) Off-track betting parlors.
(9) Outdoor recreation facilities.
(10) Plumbing, sheet metal, heating and refrigeration shops.
(11) Schools.
(12) Shopping centers and malls.
(13)Wind turbines/windmill. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
E. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted
or authorized use, unless otherwise specified:
(1) Minimum lot size. Any lot not served by public water and sewer
shall have a minimum lot size of one acre.
(a) Area: 25,000 square feet. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No.
1729]
(b) Width: 100 feet.
(c) Frontage: 75 feet.
(2) Minimum yard requirements.
(a) Front: 50 feet.
(b) Rear: 25 feet.
(c) Side (one): 20 feet.
(d) Side (both): 40 feet.
(3) Minimum distance between buildings on one lot: 20 feet.
(4) Maximum building coverage: 35%.
(5) Maximum building height: 35 feet above finished grade.
(6) Minimum building width per establishment: 30 feet.
(7) Maximum impervious surface: 70%.
F. Offices shall be permitted to have an unlimited number of office uses
conducted within a single building regardless of the nature of the
tenants. For example, a single office building may contain offices for
doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants, corporate headquarters, etc.,
and still be considered as a single principal use of the lot.
§ 27-80 RESERVED § 27-81
25:1029
A. The following uses are permitted by right, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto: [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
(1) Agriculture, limited to crop farming and related agricultural
processing and specifically excluding livestock and poultry farms.
(2) Beverage manufacturing or bottling establishments.
(3) Commercial nurseries or greenhouse.
(4) Conservation areas and uses.
(5) Educational institutions.
(6) Fish and wildlife refuges.
(7) Forestry, subject to the provisions of § 27-97. [Added 5-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2559]
(8) Golf courses.
(9) Indoor recreation facilities.
(10) Manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling or
treatment establishments which prepare articles of merchandise
from the following previously prepared materials: bone, canvas,
cellophane, cork, feather, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather,
metal, paint, paper, plastic, precious or semi-precious stone, shell,
straw, textiles, wood, or yarn, plant products, including medical
marijuana growing and processing facilities which are compliant
with all of the Pennsylvania regulations pertaining to such
operations. [Amended 7-10-2017 by Ord. No. 3088]
(11) Municipal uses.
(12) Nature preserves.
(13) Office buildings.
(14) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(15)Warehouses.
(16) A combination of attached principal uses may be conducted on a
single conforming lot; provided, however, that each use shall have a
minimum building width of 50 feet, including leased parcels, and
appropriate parking and loading facilities are provided as required
under Article XII of this chapter, provided that offices shall be
permitted to have an unlimited number of office uses conducted
within a single building regardless of the nature of the tenants. For
example, a single office building may contain offices for doctors,
dentists, lawyers, accountants, corporate headquarters, etc., and
§ 27-81 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-81
25:1030
still be considered as a single principal use of the lot. [Added
7-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2496]
B. The following accessory uses, if situate on the same lot, are permitted
by right, provided said uses comply with all other applicable
requirements of this chapter and any amendments thereto:
(1) Any use customarily associated with, incidental to or provided with
a permitted use.
(2) Satellite earth station dishes.
(3) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(4) Waste products processing provided all operations are conducted
within an enclosed building and all waste processed is generated
onsite.
C. The following special exception uses are permitted when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 27-43, provided said uses
comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) (Reserved)155
D. The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to § 27-44, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Any and all other uses not specifically listed or prohibited in this
chapter.
(2) Asphalt products manufacturing.
(3) Boiler works or metal fabrication shops.
(4) BYOB establishments. [Amended 10-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2264]
(5) Camps.
(6) Concrete or cement products manufacture.
(7) Distribution facilities.156
(8) Heliports.
(9) Hunting and fishing clubs.
155. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1), Windmills, was repealed 9-14-2009 by Ord. No.
2791.
156. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (4)(H), Forestry, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2559. See now permitted uses of this
section.
§ 27-81 RESERVED § 27-81
25:1031
(10) Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment
establishments which prepare products such as bakery goods,
candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs, food stuffs, perfumes,
pharmaceuticals, and toiletries.
(11) Metal foundry or casting establishments.
(12) Nightclubs. [Amended 10-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2264]
(13) Oil or petroleum products storage.
(14) Outdoor recreation facilities.
(15)Railroad yards.
(16) Research facilities.
(17) Salvage yards.
(18) Small parts manufacture or assembly of electronic or mechanical
equipment.
(19) Solid waste management, processing and disposal facilities,
subject to the limitations set forth in the Whitehall Township Solid
Waste Management Ordinance of 1984.
(20) Truck terminals.
(21)Wind turbines/windmill. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
E. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted
or authorized use, unless otherwise specified:
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Area: one acre.
(b) Width: 150 feet.
(c) Frontage: 115 feet.
(2) Minimum yard requirements.
(a) Front: 50 feet.
(b) Rear: 25 feet.
(c) Side (one): 20 feet.
(d) Side (both): 40 feet.
(3) Maximum building coverage: 40%.
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet above finished grade.
(5) Maximum impervious coverage: 70%.
§ 27-81 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-81
25:1032
§ 27-82. Office Park Zone. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
F. Offices shall be permitted to have an unlimited number of office uses
conducted within a single building regardless of the nature of the
tenants. For example, a single office building may contain offices for
doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants, corporate headquarters, etc.,
and still be considered as a single principal use of the lot.
A. The following uses are permitted by right, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Agriculture, limited to crop farming and related agricultural
processing and specifically excluding livestock and poultry farms.
(2) Bank/financial institutions.
(3) Barber/beauty shops.
(4) Churches and related facilities.
(5) Cemeteries.
(6) Conservation areas/uses.
(7) Day-care centers.
(8) Educational institutions.
(9) Fish and wildlife refuges.
(10) Forestry, subject to the provisions of § 27-97. [Added 5-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2559]
(11) Funeral homes.
(12) Indoor recreation facilities.
(13) Nature preserves.
(14) Offices.
(15) Office parks.
(16) Restaurants, both fast-food and standard, provided that the
establishment is located in and confined to the first floor of a
building which is primarily used for office purposes. Said use must
comply with all provisions of Article XI of this chapter. [Amended
10-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2264]
(17) Schools.
(18) Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
§ 27-81 RESERVED § 27-82
25:1033
(19) One apartment may be located in the structure used for
commercial purposes, provided that all necessary parking and land
use requirements are satisfied.157
(20) More than one primary use may occupy a single tract in this zone
and more than one building may be placed upon a single tract in
this zone, provided that such buildings are separated by at least 75
feet at their closest points.
(21)On tracts or parcels of land upon which are situate industrial or
manufacturing buildings not currently, as of the effective date of
this amendment, containing a conforming or otherwise permitted
use in the office park zoning district, the following uses shall be
permitted: [Amended 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 2023]
(a) Warehousing (to include activities customarily referred to as
"self storage" but not to include the warehousing of goods,
completed products or component parts stored in connection
with the distribution of such items as part of any
manufacturing process or sale of such items at the retail or
wholesale level on the premises); and warehousing in portions
of existing structures containing a combination of uses,
provided that the space to be occupied for warehousing:
[Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2512]
[1] Was previously approved by the Zoning Hearing Board for
warehousing as a special exception use;
[2] Is approved by the Whitehall Township Building Code
Official and Fire Code Official for the proposed use prior to
occupancy; and
[3] Has been issued all other necessary permits, licenses and
inspections prior to occupancy.
(b) Nursing homes and personal care facilities licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(c) Day-care centers.
B. The following accessory uses, if situate on the same lot, are permitted
by right, provided said uses comply with all other applicable
requirements of this chapter and any amendments thereto:
(1) Any use customarily associated with, incidental to or provided with
a permitted use.
(2) Garages (private).
(3) Greenhouses (noncommercial).
157. Editor's Note: For the requirements for this use, refer to Article XI.
§ 27-82 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-82
25:1034
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Satellite earth station dishes.
(6) Sheds.
(7) Support infrastructure, substations, pumping stations, bus stop
shelters.
(8) Swimming pools (private).
C. The following special exception uses are permitted when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 27-43, provided said uses
comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Golf courses.
(2) Any combination of permitted uses listed in Subsection A above
located on tracts or parcels described in Subsection A(21). The
combination of uses may be:
(a) Located within one or more buildings on the same lot (provided
that such buildings are separated by at least 75 feet at their
closest point except self-storage buildings which shall be
separated by at least 20 feet at their closest point).
(b) Located in part within one or more buildings on the same lot
(provided that such buildings are separated by at least 75 feet
at their closest point except self-storage buildings which shall
be separated by at least 20 feet at their closest point) with that
portion of any such use not conducted within a building being
conducted on the same lot.
(c) Located upon the same lot entirely outside of a building.
[Amended 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 2023]
D. The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to § 27-44, provided said uses comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter and any
amendments thereto:
(1) Apartments.
(2) Camps.158
(3) Heliports.
(4) Hunting and fishing clubs.
(5) Outdoor recreation facilities.
158. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (4)(C), Forestry, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2559. See now permitted uses of this
section.
§ 27-82 RESERVED § 27-82
25:1035
(6) Single-family attached dwellings.
(7) Single-family detached dwellings.
(8) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
E. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted
or authorized use, except as otherwise specified:
(1) Minimum lot size. Any lot not served by public water and sewer
shall have a minimum lot size of one acre.
(a) Area: 25,000 square feet.
(b) Width: 100 feet. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
(c) Frontage: 75 feet. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
(2) Minimum yard requirements.
(a) Front: 50 feet.
(b) Rear: 25 feet.
(c) Side (one): 20 feet.
(d) Side (both): 40 feet.
(3) Maximum building coverage: 50%.
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet above finished grade.
(5) Maximum impervious coverage (total): 70%.
(6) For all residential uses, the R-5 dimensional regulations shall apply,
unless otherwise specified.
F. Offices shall be permitted to have an unlimited number of office uses
conducted within a single building regardless of the nature of the
tenants. For example, a single office building may contain offices for
doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants, corporate headquarters, etc.,
and still be considered as a single principal use of the lot.
§ 27-82 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-82
25:1036
ARTICLE X
General Provisions
§ 27-83. Application to all Zoning Districts.
The following regulations shall be applicable to all buildings, structures,
uses and lots wherever situate.
§ 27-84. Accessory uses, buildings and structures. [Amended
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657; 6-10-1992 by Ord. No. 1769;
2-12-1996 by Ord. No. 1959]
The following regulations shall apply to any and all accessory uses,
buildings and structures wherever situate.
A. Accessory buildings or structures are buildings and structures
permitted by right provided said building or structure is shown as an
accessory building or structure or contains an accessory use which is
shown in the zoning schedule for the district in which the accessory
building, structure or use is proposed or located and the building,
structure and use complies with all other provisions of this chapter and
further provided that:
(1) The proposed accessory building or structure is customarily
associated with, incidental to or provided with the permitted use,
building or structure existing upon the lot.
(2) The extent and size of such proposed accessory building or
structure is in keeping with the scale, nature and characteristic of
the permitted use on the lot.
(3) The accessory building or structure shall not be permitted to exist
unless the primary building, use or structure exists on the same lot.
B. Accessory uses, buildings and structures shall conform to the front yard
setbacks of the primary use, building or structure situate upon the lot.
C. Buildings or structures attached to or which form an integral part of a
primary building or structure and utilized for an accessory use shall not
be considered as an accessory building or structure but shall be
considered as part of the building or structure to which it is attached
and shall meet the same setbacks as the principal building or structure.
D. Accessory buildings, structures or uses shall not be located in any front
yard area. [Amended 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 2303]
E. Detached accessory buildings or structures shall be: [Amended
4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 2303]
(1) For residential uses situated within the rear or side yard areas, and
must not be less than three feet from all property lines and six feet
from any alley right-of-way.
§ 27-83 RESERVED § 27-84
25:1037
§ 27-85. Antennae, towers and satellite earth station dishes.
[Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657; 5-11-1992 by Ord. No.
1765; 10-13-1997 by Ord. No. 2045; 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 2118;
3-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2222; 9-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2333]
(2) For commercial or industrial uses situated within the rear or side
yard areas, and must not be less than 10 feet from all property lines
and 20 feet from any alley right-of-way. As well, any structure
which contains both residential and commercial uses shall be
required to adhere to this section.
F. Porches, patios, decks and similar structures which are attached to the
principal structure with or without roofs, but not enclosed, may be
permitted within the rear and side yard areas, provided, however, that
same shall not exceed 1/3 of the rear yard setback requirements of the
district in which the property is situated, or shall not be located closer
than 10 feet to the rear property line, whichever is greater; provided
further, that no enclosing of same shall be permitted unless the original
porch, patio, deck or similar structure meets the same district setback
requirements as the principal structure. [Amended 4-9-2001 by Ord.
No. 2303]
G. Detached accessory buildings located on a lot of less than one acre in
residential zones, or on properties being used for residential purposes,
shall be limited to a height of 22 feet and shall not exceed 1,200 square
feet or the square foot perimeter of the primary structure, including
enclosed porches, whichever is smaller. This restriction shall not apply
to structures which are to be actively used on a working farm for
storage of crops, animal husbandry purposes or for equipment storage
of farm machinery.
H. A special exception may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board for
detached accessory buildings larger than permitted in Subsection G
above in residential zones or for properties being used for residential
purposes, provided that it is found that said structures does not alter
the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
A. Satellite earth station dishes. In the interests of the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Township and the aesthetic interests of
the community, satellite earth station dishes, including those which are
two meters or less in diameter, unless subject to the provisions of
Subsection B of this section, shall be designed, maintained or used in
accord with the following provisions:
(1) No person shall construct, erect or install a satellite earth station
dish without first obtaining a building permit therefor from the
Zoning Officer. An occupant, renter or co-owner shall acquire the
written permission of all owners of the lot, parcel or tract of land
prior to installation or construction of the satellite earth station
dish;
§ 27-84 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-85
25:1038
(2) The applicant shall submit a written application upon forms
provided by the Zoning Officer and shall also submit:
(a) A plot plan of the property or parcel of land showing the exact
location of the proposed satellite earth station dish and all
other structures on the subject property;
(b) A description of the kind of satellite earth station dish propose;
and
(c) Plans showing specifications and elevations of the proposed
satellite earth station dish, including footings, dead load (plus
ice load), wind load (uplift), specifications and sufficient detail
showing the method of assembly and construction, erection or
installation.
(3) The application shall include all names of the owners of the subject
property, the occupant of the subject property and the contractor
or other person proposed to construct, erect or install the proposed
satellite earth station dish;
(4) The Zoning Officer, or his/her appropriate designee, may issue the
building permit, provided the applicant has met all of the
requirements of this section;
(5) All satellite earth station dishes constructed, erected or installed
pursuant to a permit hereunder shall conform to the following
requirements:
(a) No satellite earth station dish shall be located in the front yard
of a lot or in the street side yard of a corner lot;
(b) All satellite earth station dishes shall conform to the setback
and height requirements for the zoning district in which the
satellite earth station dish is situate or proposed;
(c) No satellite earth station dish greater than two meters in
diameter shall be constructed shall be constructed on top of
the roof of a structure, except in C-1, C-2, C-2A, OP, OS-2 and
Industrial Zones;
(d) All satellite earth station dishes shall conform to and be
installed pursuant to the regulations found in the prevailing
Township Building and Electrical Codes;
(e) A satellite earth station dish may not be placed in a rear yard
on a trial basis without first securing a building permit; and
(f) All satellite earth station dishes shall be subject to periodic
inspection by the Zoning Officer or Building Inspector, or their
designated agents, to determine compliance with the
provisions of this section regulating such earth station satellite
dishes.
§ 27-85 RESERVED § 27-85
25:1039
B. Antennae designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service. In the
interests of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Township, antennae that are designed to receive direct broadcast
satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite services, and that
are one meter or less in diameter; antennae that are designed to
receive video programming services via multipoint distribution
services, including multichannel multipoint distribution services,
instructional television fixed services and local multipoint distribution
services and that are one meter or less in diameter or diagonal
measurement or antennae that are designed to receive television
broadcast signals, shall be permitted in all zoning districts and shall
conform to the following:
(1) All antennae shall meet the yard requirements of the primary
permitted use; guy wires and anchors may not be located within
any front or side yards.
(2) The distance between an antennae and a high voltage power line
shall be no less than 125% of the height of the antennae.
(3) No antennae shall be located in a Clear Sight Triangle, as provided
in § 27-91 hereof.
(4) No antenna shall obstruct fire exits and access to and egress from
or visibility of fire exits.
(5) All antennae referenced in this Subsection B, including masts, shall
conform to the antennae height and installation restrictions
provided in the Township Buildings, Electrical and Property
Maintenance Codes [Chapter 5], as amended from time to time.
C. Wireless telecommunications towers and antennae.
(1) The purposes of this subsection are to:
(a) Establish and provide general guidelines for the siting,
development and installation of new wireless communications
towers and antennae.
(b) Protect and promote public health, safety and the general
welfare of the community while ensuring that new
communications towers will be safe and be placed in suitable
locations and, at the same time, not unduly restricting the
development of needed telecommunications facilities.
(c) Ensure that Township land use regulations are in compliance
with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.
(d) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennae.
(e) Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas.
§ 27-85 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-85
25:1040
(f) Minimize the total number of towers throughout the
community.
(g) Encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a
primary option rather than construction of additional singleuse
towers.
(h) Encourage the use of alternative support structures, colocations
of new antennae on existing communications towers,
camouflaged towers, monopoles and construction of towers
with the ability to locate three or more providers.
(i) Encourage users of towers and antennae to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal.
(j) Provide requirements necessary for obtaining approval to site
and construct communications towers and antennae while at
the same time protecting the legitimate interests of the
Township's citizens.
(k) Protect environmentally sensitive areas of the Township by
regulating the location, design and operations of
telecommunications facilities.
(l) Encourage users of towers and antennae to configure them in a
way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers,
antennae and related facilities through careful design and
siting standards, landscape screening and innovative
camouflaging techniques.
(m) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications
services to provide such services to the community quickly,
effectively and efficiently.
(n) Consider the public health and safety of communication
towers.
(o) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower
failure through engineering and careful siting of tower
structures.
(p) Maintain and ensure that a nondiscriminatory, competitive and
broad range of telecommunications services and high-quality
telecommunications infrastructure consistent with the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996 are provided to serve the
community, as well as serve as an important and effective part
of the Township's emergency services network.
(2) In furtherance of these goals, the Township shall give due
consideration to the Township's Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Map,
existing land uses and environmentally sensitive areas in approving
sites for the location of towers and antennae.
§ 27-85 RESERVED § 27-85
25:1041
(3) All new towers or antennae in the Township, as well as new colocations
on existing towers, shall be subject to these regulations.
(4) For the purposes of implementing this Subsection C, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground
system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be
considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation
distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the
tower's guy wires, if any, included in the AM array. Additional tower
units may be added within the perimeter of the tower's guy wires
by right upon securing land development pursuant to Chapter 22,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(5) General requirements.
(a) Antennae and towers shall be considered special exception
uses, pursuant to § 27-64 of this chapter, and shall be subject to
these regulations, except any tower or any antenna that is
under 75 feet in height and is owned and operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio station operation; or issued
exclusively for receive-only antennae, or is subject to the
provisions of Subsections A and B of this section; are intended
for municipal use; or are located or proposed to be located on
property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the
Township; provided that a license or lease authorizing such
antennae or tower has been approved by the Township, in
which case the tower, antennae or similar structure shall be
considered a permitted use. Furthermore, if the tower is a
publicly owned facility and is in the interest of public safety,
the height, setback and screening requirements stated herein
shall not apply. [Amended 7-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2493]
(b) Commercial communications towers and/or communications
antennae and related appurtenances shall not be permitted or
co-located in any R-1, R-2, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-5, R-5A, R-6 and
OS-1 Zoning District. Communications towers, antennae, and
related appurtenances shall not be permitted on any
residential structure, residentially used structure or any
residential accessory structure. [Amended 11-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 2748]
(c) Setbacks. Communications towers attached to the ground
shall:
[1] Have their foundation and base set back a minimum
distance equal to 125% of the height of the communication
tower from all property lines.
[2] Take setback measurements from the dimensions of the
entire lot, even though the tower may be located on leased
parcels within such lot. As well, all other dimensional
§ 27-85 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-85
25:1042
requirements shall be based on the entire lot, and be in
compliance with district regulations that govern the site.
[3] For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to
facilities in the Township, irrespective of municipal and
county jurisdictional boundaries.
[4] Guy wire anchors, if used, shall be set back a minimum of
40 feet from any lot line.
[5] If additional towers are present on the same lot, the
distance from the base of the proposed tower to the base
of the nearest tower, if it is self-supporting, or the nearest
guy anchor of a non-self-supporting tower, shall not be less
than the full height of the tallest tower.
(d) Accessory structures. The following regulations shall apply to
all proposed accessory facilities for this use:
[1] A single accessory facility containing equipment and
control devices for the continuing operation of the tower
may be located on the lot.
[2] No building or facility may be used as an office or as a
broadcast studio. No building or facility may be used for
long-term vehicle storage or for other outdoor storage.
[3] No onsite employees shall be permitted to utilize any
accessory facility as an office. Employees are permitted to
visit the site as often as necessary for maintenance and
inspection of the tower and its accessory uses.
[4] Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing which is not
less than six feet in height and equipped with an
appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, that
the Zoning Hearing Board may waive such requirements,
as it deems appropriate.
[5] A minimum of two paved off-street parking spaces per
tower shall be required, as well as a paved access drive.
[6] Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with
all applicable building codes.
[7] Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall meet all
setback lot, coverage and yard requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located.
[8] If more than one antennae is to be located on a tower, all
equipment must be housed in one building.
§ 27-85 RESERVED § 27-85
25:1043
(e) Lighting. Any proposed tower/antennae lighting shall conform
to the following:
[1] Lighting shall only be installed on a tower if it is required
by the FAA or any other governmental agency having
jurisdiction. Only the minimum lighting necessary to meet
governmental requirements shall be permitted.
[2] If strobe lights or flashing mechanisms are not required,
then such lighting shall not be permitted.
[3] Accessory facilities may be lighted for security or for
maintenance purposes. Any such lighting shall be shielded
and no lights shall be emitted upward or spill over onto
adjacent properties.
[4] Upward lighting shall be permitted only on a temporary
basis as may be required for emergency tower repair or
maintenance.
[5] All lighting of parking lot and accessory structures shall
conform to § 27-103 of this chapter.
(f) Buffers, landscaping and visual impact requirements.
[1] Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish, or
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA be painted a
neutral color so as to be camouflaged to reduce visual
obtrusiveness.
[2] If the proposed tower is less than 200 feet high, and is
exempt from special FAA marking requirements, the tower
shall be painted silver above the tree line level and green
below the tree line level.
[3] Accessory buildings and structures shall, to the extent
possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and
landscaping that will serve to camouflage or blend them
into the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
[4] If antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower,
the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical
equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or
closely compatible with, the color of the supporting
structure so as to make the antenna and related
equipment as visually camouflaged and unobtrusive as
possible.
[5] Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screen the view of the tower
compound from property used for residences. The
standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least
four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
§ 27-85 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-85
25:1044
[6] Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the
site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In
some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots,
natural growth around the property may be sufficient
barrier, as determined by the Zoning Hearing Board.
[7] The equipment structure or cabinet shall be screened by a
solid fence of at least six feet in height or an evergreen
hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet and a planted
height of at least 48 inches.
(g) No signs shall be permitted on an antenna, tower or accessory
structures thereto.
(h) All towers must meet or exceed current standards and
regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the
State or Federal government with the authority to regulate
such towers and antennae. If such standards and regulations
are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennae
governed hereby shall bring such towers and antennae into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within
six months of the effective date of such standards and
regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is
mandated by the controlling State or Federal agency. Failure to
bring towers and antennae into compliance with such revised
standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for removal
of the tower or antennae at the owners' expense.
(i) To ensure the structural integrity of towers and antennae, the
owner of a tower or antenna shall ensure that it is maintained
in compliance with standards contained in applicable State and
Township building codes and the applicable standards for
towers that are published by the Electronic Industries
Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection,
the Township concludes that a tower or antenna fails to comply
with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to
persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the
owner of the tower or antennae, the owner shall have 30 days
to bring such tower or antenna into compliance with such
standards. Failure to bring such tower or antenna into
compliance within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the
removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
(j) All new towers permitted after the effective date of this section
must be engineered to accommodate additional new users.
(6) Application requirements, new towers. An application for
permission to erect a new tower or antenna in the Township shall
include:
(a) A copy of applicant's FCC construction permit (for broadcast
use) or FCC station license (for other uses).
§ 27-85 RESERVED § 27-85
25:1045
(b) A detailed site plan drawn to scale and identifying the site
boundary; the proposed tower and any existing towers; guy
wire anchors; existing and proposed structures; existing
vegetation to be retained, removed or replaced and uses,
structures and land use designations on the site and abutting
parcels.
(c) A technical description of the facility to include:
[1] A description of the tower and the technical and other
design factors of the tower.
[2] A description of the capacity of the tower, including the
number and types of antennas that it can accommodate.
(d) A statement from the FCC, FAA and State Aeronautics Division
that the proposed tower complies with applicable regulations
or that the tower is exempt from those regulations.
(e) An intermodulation analysis certified by a professional
communications engineer, which demonstrates that the
proposed new equipment will not cause undue RF interference
to existing towers or transmitting facilities or communications
service reception by other property owners. The applicant shall
be responsible to resolve all instances of interference caused
by the actual operation of the tower that occurs after its
installation.
(f) Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the
Zoning Officer an inventory of its existing towers, antennae or
sites approved for towers or antennae, that are either within
the jurisdiction of the Township or within one mile of the
border thereof, including the specific information about the
location, height and design of each tower. The Zoning Officer
may share such information with other applicants applying for
special exception use permits under this section or other
organizations seeking to locate antennae within the
jurisdiction of the Township; provided, however, that the
Zoning Officer is not, by sharing such information, in any way
representing or warranting that such sites are available or
suitable.
(g) An applicant shall be required to undertake a visual impact
analysis on any proposed tower or any proposed modification
to an existing tower which causes said tower to exceed 30 feet
in height from its original permitted height. The visual impact
analysis shall assess the cumulative impacts of the proposed
facility and other existing and foreseeable communications
towers in the area, and shall identify and include all feasible
mitigation measures necessary to mitigate any negative visual
impact by the proposed tower. Mitigation measures should be
consistent with the technological requirements of the
§ 27-85 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-85
25:1046
applicant. Further, a tower or antenna shall meet aesthetics
requirements as detailed herein. All costs for the visual impact
analysis, and applicable administrative costs, shall be borne by
the applicant.
[1] The visual impact analysis shall include the following:
[a] A photograph simulation of pre-development versus
post-development views from key viewpoints, as
established by the Township, both inside and outside
of the Township;
[b] An analysis of alternative tower structure design and
color schemes;
[c] An analysis of the visual impact of the tower base,
accessory building and overhead utility lines from
abutting properties and streets.
[d] At the discretion of the Township, an additional
simulation of the tower's visual impact shall be
provided by erecting a mechanical construction crane
to the proposed height of the tower at the proposed
project site. Such height shall be limited to 130 feet,
however. The applicant shall allow the viewing of the
crane simulation by the appropriate Township officials
and interested parties at a reasonable day and time as
established by the Township.
[2] The Township shall review and consider all information
presented in the report. Measures necessary to mitigate
any negative visual impact created by the proposed tower
shall be provided and implemented as required by the
Township.
(h) Applicant shall certify that all franchises required by law for
the construction and/or operation of a wireless communication
system in the Township have been obtained and shall file a
copy of all required franchises with the Zoning Officer.
(i) Airport coordination. The applicant for a proposed
communications tower or antenna, located within a five mile
radius of an existing airport, shall notify the airport of its intent
to place such structure(s). Any comments received from the
airport shall be considered by the Township in the processing
of the application for the proposed communications tower or
antenna.
(j) The applicant shall demonstrate that all National
Environmental Police Act (NEPA) requirements, where
applicable, for any proposed communications tower and/or
antenna facilities have been met. The applicant shall notify the
§ 27-85 RESERVED § 27-85
25:1047
Township at least 30 days prior to any hearing or consideration
of the EA report by the FCC. The applicant shall provide to the
Township any and all documentation demonstrating how any
negative impact on the features noted below will be mitigated.
A copy of the NEPA required Environmental Assessment (EA)
report shall be submitted when the proposed communications
tower and/or antenna falls into one or more of the following
categories:
[1] Facilities that are to be located in an officially designated
wilderness area;
[2] Facilities that are to be located in an official designated
wildlife preserve;
[3] Facilities that may affect listed threatened or endangered
species or designated critical habitats;
[4] Facilities that are likely to jeopardize the continued
existence of any proposed endangered or threatened
species or likely to result in the destruction or adverse
modification of proposed critical habitats, as determined
by the Secretary of the Interior pursuant to the
Endangered Species Act of 1973;
[5] Facilities that may affect districts, sites, buildings,
structures or objects, significant in American history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture, that are
listed, or are eligible for listing in the National Register of
Historic Places;
[6] Facilities that may affect a Native American religious site;
[7] Facilities whose construction will involve significant
change to surface features including, but not limited to,
wetlands, deforestation or water diversion;
[8] Facilities located within a floodplain.
(k) Any applicant for a proposed communications tower and/or
antenna site exceeding FCC standards regarding human
exposure to electromagnetic or radio frequency radiation shall
submit to the Township a copy of the Environmental
Assessment report required under NEPA prior to submitting to
the FCC for its consideration.
(l) Documentation of FAA approval shall be provided for
communication towers or antennae exceeding 200 feet in
height. Communication towers or antennae less than 200 feet
in height shall meet the requirements of 14 C.F.R. Part
77.13(a), as amended.
§ 27-85 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-85
25:1048
(m) Documentation shall be provided that the communications
company is licensed by the FCC, and for the proposed
communication tower or antenna.
(n) Documentation demonstrating that the proposed
communications tower or antenna complies with all applicable
standards established by the FCC governing human exposure
to electromagnetic or radio frequency radiation shall be
provided within 90 days of the facility becoming operational.
Such documentation shall then be provided to the Township on
an annual basis from the date the facility becomes operational.
The Township may secure the services of a qualified
independent radio frequency engineer to review the
documentation and conduct tests as necessary to verify said
documentation. The engineer shall state in a written report
that the radio frequency radiation measurements are accurate
and either conform or not to any and all FCC standards. Should
the facility not meet FCC standards, the Township shall make a
formal complaint, in writing, to the FCC. The applicant shall be
copied on any complaint filed with the FCC by the Township.
(o) Equipment shelters. Information shall be provided detailing
the contents of the proposed equipment shelter servicing the
proposed communications tower and/or antenna. The
information shall include, but not be limited to, the type and
quantity of oil, gasoline, batteries, propane, natural gas or any
other fuel stored within the shelter. Information shall also be
submitted which demonstrates that any hazardous materials
stored on site including, but not limited to, fuel sources, shall
be housed to minimize the potential for any adverse impact on
adjacent land uses. "Material Safety Data Sheets" for any
hazardous material stored or utilized in the equipment shelter
shall be submitted to the Township. The use of fuels and
hazardous material shall also be consistent with any Township
requirements regarding the same.
(p) All applicants requesting permission to erect a new tower in
the Township must demonstrate that existing towers within a
one mile radius of the proposed tower cannot accommodate
the applicant's proposed operation. Documentation must be
provided to show that the applicant has contacted by certified
mail, return receipt requested, all tower owners within a one
mile radius of the proposed tower and that each of these
towers cannot support the new proposed equipment. The
Zoning Hearing Board may deny the application to erect a new
tower if the applicant has not made a good faith effort to
determine the suitability of existing towers.
(q) A wind-loading analysis, certified by a licensed professional
communications engineer or licensed professional civil/
structural engineer, which demonstrates that the proposed
§ 27-85 RESERVED § 27-85
25:1049
telecommunications equipment will exceed the structural
capacity of any existing towers owned by the applicant, and
that the existing tower whose structural capacity would be
exceeded by the applicant's proposed equipment cannot be
structurally reinforced to accommodate the applicant's
proposed equipment at a reasonable cost.
(7) Application requirements; addition of new antenna onto existing
tower/structure. (Including co-location) Prior to the installation of
an antenna on an existing tower, an application for special
exception use shall be filed with the Township. The application for
such approval shall include:
(a) A wind-loading analysis, certified by a licensed professional
communications engineer or a licensed professional civil/
structural engineer, which demonstrates that the proposed
equipment will not exceed the structural capacity of the
existing tower.
(b) An intermodulation analysis which demonstrates that the
proposed transmitting facility will not cause RF interference to
any existing communications services (including, but not
limited to, other towers or transmitting facilities,
communication services reception by other property owners,
etc.) in accordance with the FCC requirements for the
applicant's class of operation. The applicant shall be
responsible to resolve all instances of interference caused by
the actual operation of the tower, and any additional antennas,
after installation.
(c) Information demonstrating that the RMS field intensity of EMR
from the applicant's tower (with all existing and proposed
antennas) measured at the nearest point on the boundary of
applicant's site from the proposed antenna will not exceed the
level allowed under applicable ANSI standards, as amended.
(8) Removal of abandoned antennae and towers. Any antenna or tower
that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be
considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower or
the property owner on whose property this structure is located
shall dismantle and remove the same within 90 days of receipt of
notice from the Township. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna
or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds for the Township to
remove the tower or antenna at the owner's and property owner's
expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this
provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the
tower.
(9) Nonconforming uses.
(a) Towers that are constructed, and antennae that are installed,
in accordance with the provisions of this subsection shall not
§ 27-85 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-85
25:1050
§ 27-86. Attached dwellings.
The maximum number of connected single-family attached dwellings
permitted in any zoning district is six.
§ 27-87. Automotive and other motor vehicle repair garages,
automotive fueling stations, public garages, public parking areas,
car washes and minimarts. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657;
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1792; by Ord. No. 2141; 3-13-2000 by Ord.
No. 2220]
be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use
or structure.
(b) Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue their usage as
they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including
replacement with a new tower of like construction and height)
shall be permitted on such preexisting towers. New
construction other than routine maintenance on a preexisting
tower shall comply with the requirements of this section.
A. All automotive service stations, public garages, public parking areas
and car washes, wherever situate or proposed, shall:
(1) Conduct any and all services upon the premises.
(2) Be situate on lots having a minimum lot area of 22,000 square feet.
[Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
(3) Have a minimum of 150 feet of frontage on the principal street
serving the use.
(4) Not place any gasoline pump, oil pump, air or water hose stand
within 35 feet of any street right-of-way or property line.
(5) Not place any gasoline pump, oil pump, air and water hose stand
within 65 feet of any residential zoning district.
(6) Not permit any outdoor storage of display of any item except for the
display of merchandise for retail sale and then only during the
hours of operation.
(7) Not permit or use lighting of any type unless said lighting is
shielded so as not to interfere with any residential district and
complies with the glare provisions specified in § 27-103.
(8) Not permit the outdoor parking or storing of damaged or junked
motor vehicles or parts thereof upon the premises for more than 72
hours.
(9) Not have an entrance closer than 200 feet to an entrance of a
school, church, theater, hospital, public park, playground or fire
station. Said measurement shall be taken as the shortest distance
§ 27-85 RESERVED § 27-87
25:1051
§ 27-88. Special regulations for beauty and barber shop as in home
occupations. [Amended 11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1791]
between such entrances across the street if the entrances are on
opposite sides of the street and along the street frontage if both
entrances are on the same side of the street or within the same
block.
B. All minimarkets, as defined by this chapter, shall conform to the
following:
(1) Said uses shall be permitted only in C-2, Regional/Community
Commercial zones and C-2A, Local/Community. Commercial zones
and by special exception in C-1, Neighborhood Commercial zones.
(2) Shall have a minimum lot frontage of 150 feet on the principal
street serving such use.
(3) Shall be situate on lots having a minimum lot area of 22,000 square
feet.
(4) Shall not have an entrance closer than 200 feet to an entrance of a
school, church, theater, hospital, public park, playground or fire
station. Said measurement shall be taken as the shortest distance
between such entrances across the street if the entrances are on
opposite sides of the street and along the street frontage if both
entrances are on the same side of the street or within the same
block.
(5) Said uses shall not place any gasoline pump, oil pump, air or water
hose stand within 35 feet of any street right-of-way line or property
line.
(6) If said use is adjacent to an existing residence or a residential
zoning district, a 50 foot buffer zone will be required where site
abuts the residential zone or existing residence.
(7) Retail, service, drive-through and food service uses are permitted
as accessory uses within the same structure, provided that
adequate parking facilities be provided in the proper amount based
upon the seating proposed or square footage of retail area.
(8) Any parking area or outdoor lighting shall comply with all glare
provisions contained in § 27-103 of this article.
(9) Parking or storage of any damaged, unlicensed or junked motor
vehicle upon the premises is prohibited.
C. All access drives shall conform to the provisions found in Article X.
D. In all areas of this section, all references to "pumps" shall also mean
"dispenser."
§ 27-87 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-88
25:1052
§ 27-89. Buffer strips and screening.
A. Beauty/barber shop shall meet all applicable State regulations
regarding same.
B. The beauty/barber shop must be a single beautician/barber facility.
A. Buffer strips shall: [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
(1) Be 75 feet wide for any newly developed or expanded industrial use
when such use is abutting a residential zoning district or an
existing residence.
(2) Be 75 feet wide for any newly developed or expanded
nonresidential use in a § 27-80C(2), C-2 Regional/Community
Commercial Zoning District, when such a use is abutting any
residential zoning district; the buffer strip shall be 25 feet wide
when abutting an existing residence in any nonresidential zoning
district.
(3) Be 75 feet wide in the § 27-82, Office Park Zone, and the § 27-79,
C-2A Local Commercial Zone, for any newly developed or expanded
nonresidential use, where such nonresidential use is abutting
either a residential zoning district or an existing residence; except
that the buffer strips for the following specific uses may be only 25
feet wide. If a use is not specifically listed below under this
subsection, then the buffer strip for that use shall be 75 feet wide,
except in accordance with a variance which shall be obtained from
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 27-42, Variances, of this
chapter:
(a) For uses permitted as of right:
[1] Agriculture.
[2] Bank/financial institution.
[3] Barber/beauty shops.
[4] Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
[5] Cemeteries.
[6] Churches or related facilities.
[7] Conservation areas and uses.
[8] Day-care centers.
[9] Educational institutions.
[10] Fish and wildlife refuges.
[11] Florist shops.
§ 27-88 RESERVED § 27-89
25:1053
[12] Funeral homes.
[13] Greenhouses.
[14] Laundromats.
[15] Municipal uses.
[16] Nature preserves.
[17] Schools.
[18] Single-family detached residential dwelling.
[19] Support infrastructure: substations, pumping stations, bus
stop shelters.
(b) For the following accessory uses, permitted by right:
[1] Any use customarily associated with, incidental to or
provided with a permitted use.
[2] Garages (private).
[3] Greenhouses (noncommercial).
[4] Home occupations.
[5] Satellite earth station dishes.
[6] Sheds.
[7] Support infrastructure — substations, pumping stations,
bus stop shelters.
[8] Swimming pools (private).
(c) For the following conditional uses:
[1] Forestry.
[2] Grocery store/meat market less than 5,000 sq. ft.
[3] One apartment in commercial structure.
[4] Outdoor recreation facility.
[5] Rooming or boarding homes, community living
arrangement.
[6] Single-family attached dwellings.
[7] Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(4) Be 25 feet wide in all zoning districts, other than those zoning
districts and uses which are set forth above in § 27-89, Buffer strips
and screening, for newly developed or expended nonresidential
§ 27-89 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-89
25:1054
§ 27-90. Building and structure height. [Amended 9-10-2002 by
Ord. No. 2377]
The maximum height of any building or structure shall be 35 feet above
finished grade, except as noted herein:
use, where such nonresidential use is abutting either a residential
zoning district or an existing residence.
(5) Be appropriately screened as hereinafter provided.
(6) Be free from any and all buildings, structures, signs, driveways,
parking areas, outdoor storage areas, stormwater detention and
retention basins, recreation facilities and activity areas. [Amended
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(7) Be planted with grass seed, sod or groundcover.
(8) Be maintained and kept clean of all debris, rubbish, grass or weeds
more than 15 inches in height.
B. Screening, as required by this subsection, shall be regulated as follows:
(1) Screening shall consist of a fence or dense plant material such as
trees or shrubs and shall extend the full length of the lot line which
must be screened.
(2) Screening shall consist of a plant material, such plant material
shall be of such species and size as will produce within three years
of planting, a complete visual screen of at least six feet in height.
(3) Plant screening shall be so placed that at maturity it will be no
closer than three feet from any street right-of-way or property line.
(4) When the screen is a fence, such fence shall not be less than six
feet in height and shall be placed no closer than one foot to a
property line.
(5) All screening, of whatever nature, shall be permanently
maintained. Dying or dead plant material shall be removed and
replaced immediately.
(6) By special exception, fences may be placed closer than one foot to a
property line or street right-of-way.
A. In OP, Office Park and I, Industrial Zoning Districts, the height of a
building may be increased to a height equal to the distance that such a
portion of a building is set back from all lot lines, up to a maximum
height of 60 feet or five stories, whichever is less. Therefore, for
example, a portion of a building that is set back 60 feet from all lot lines
may have a maximum height of 60 feet; subject to the following special
exception use conditions:
§ 27-89 RESERVED § 27-90
25:1055
§ 27-91. Clear site triangle. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
(See definition, § 27-194) Clear site distance at intersections shall conform
to the following schedule:
§ 27-92. Commercial vehicles. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No.
1729]
Commercial vehicles (as defined in § 27-194A), whether or not licensed,
shall not be parked, stored, housed, repaired, reconstructed or repainted
upon any lot, parcel or tract of land situate in any R-1, R-2, R-3, R-3A, R-4,
R-5, R-5A or R-6 Zoning District unless the primary use of the lot, parcel
or tract of land is agriculture, a cemetery or used for municipal purposes,
(1) No such height increase shall be permitted when the proposed
building or structure is:
(a) In OP, Office Park and I, Industrial Districts: within 200 feet of
a residential zoning district or residentially used structure.
(2) Any structure proposed to exceed 35 feet in height shall be
protected by an automatic fire suppression system approved as
appropriate for the structure and proposed use.
(3) Any structure proposed to exceed 35 feet shall be surrounded with
appropriate perimeter footing of clear space, which shall contain
no trees, heavy brush nor landscaping mulch. The required clear
space shall be as determined by the Fire Chief, depending upon the
use and occupancy of the structure and the actual height proposed.
B. The maximum height of all accessory buildings shall be 22 feet, and the
height of fencing shall be in accordance § 27-96 of this chapter.
C. Exceptions.
(1) The height limitations of this section shall not apply to spires or
steeples of places of worship, belfries, cupolas and domes not used
for human occupancy, nor to chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water
tanks, bulkheads, elevator equipment rooms, similar features and
necessary mechanical appurtenances that customarily extend
above roof level. Such features, however, shall not conflict with
special height limitations regarding airport approaches.
(2) The height limitations of this section shall not apply to permitted
communications towers and antennas; instead, the provisions of
§ 27-85 regarding these uses shall apply.
A. Public, local street: 75 feet
B. If one intersecting street is a collector street: 100 feet
C. If one intersecting street is an arterial street: 150 feet
§ 27-90 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-92
25:1056
or the lot, parcel or tract of land is under construction or development.
For purposes of this definition, a lot, parcel or tract of land shall not
be considered to be "under construction or development" unless either a
building, plumbing, electrical or other construction permit has been issued
or approved by the Township or either a subdivision or land development
plan has been approved by the Board of Commissioners, for the
construction or development and for which construction or development the
commercial vehicle is necessary and actually used.
§ 27-93. Density. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
Density per acre shall be proportionately determined according to the lot
size, any fractions shall be rounded down to the lowest whole number,
i.e., eight dwellings per acre, four dwellings per 1/2 acre, two dwellings
per quarter acre. For multifamily dwelling units, including townhouses,
condominiums and apartments, density shall not exceed eight dwelling
units per gross acre.
§ 27-94. Emergency accesses. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
Emergency accesses shall be provided by way of streets, alleys or
sidewalks, either paved or concrete, at the front and rear of all buildings
which have a width exceeding 250 feet. Such emergency accesses shall not
be located more than 200 feet from the building it services.
§ 27-95. Excavations. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
Excavations which produce a vertical drop in excess of four feet, have
slopes at the edges which are greater than 45° from the horizontal and
which are not performed in the furtherance of approved land development,
but are instead permanent excavations, borrow pits, quarries, soil and clay
fill sources, sand sources or similar purpose other than a coal mine, shall
be deemed "quarries" and shall be regulated by the provisions of § 27-133,
Quarry and mining operations, of this chapter.
§ 27-96. Fences and walls.
A. No fence, wall or similar structure shall be erected without first
obtaining a building permit from the Zoning Officer, pursuant to Article
IV, Permits.
B. Fences and walls may be located in any front, rear or side yard provided
that no fence or wall shall be situate closer than 12 inches to any
sidewalk or right-of-way which is open for use by the general public, or
closer than 12 inches to any property line. No fence or wall structure
may be constructed which constitutes an obstruction within the clear
sight triangle, as defined herein. Fences and similar structures may be
erected as a common barrier between adjacent properties only upon all
of the following conditions having been met and agreed upon by both
property owners: [Amended 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2559]
§ 27-92 RESERVED § 27-96
25:1057
(1) The common boundary(ies) must be surveyed and field marked by a
professional land surveyor, and this surveyed boundary agreed
upon by both parties and the surveyed line shall not deviate from
the record boundary line;
(2) The apportionment of cost for the erection and maintenance of said
fence must be agreed upon by all affected parties; and
(3) All affected parties must agree and acknowledge that the erection
of such fence may affect the owners' property rights under
doctrines such as a consentable line; estoppel; and agreement.
(4) A document must be recorded in the Lehigh County Recorder of
Deeds office reflecting, at a minimum, a record drawing indicating
the line as marked, bearing the seal of a registered professional
surveyor. Subsection B(1), (2) and (3) above shall be spelled out
with sufficient specificity as to identify all parties affected, with
such agreement being indexed against all affected properties, and
authority to erect such fence being withheld by Whitehall Township
until a copy of such said agreement, including the survey, and proof
of recording is furnished to the Zoning Officer of Whitehall
Township.
C. Fences, walls or similar structures shall not have a height exceeding:
(1) Six feet.
(2) Eight feet, if located in the rear yard of a lot situate in a
nonresidential zoning district and the fence is constructed of chain
link. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(3) Six feet above the grade (retained side) of the adjacent ground, if a
retaining wall.
(4) Two feet near or at an intersection and situate within a clear sight
triangle.
D. The following fences, walls, similar structures or fencing and wall
materials shall be prohibited:
(1) Barbed wire.
(a) When the fence, wall or similar structure is located in a
residential zoning district.
(b) When the barbed wire would be located less than six feet above
grade.
(c) When the barbed wire would extend beyond the exterior
facade of the fence, wall or similar structure.
(2) Fabric.
(3) Electrically charged fences.
§ 27-96 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-96
25:1058
§ 27-97. Forestry regulations. [Added 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2559]
Prior to the commencement of any forestry activities on a property, the
property owner shall, at a minimum, submit the following information to the
Township, and shall adhere to the following guidelines:
(4) Broken glass affixed to or on any wall, fence or similar structure.
(5) Junk including, but not limited to, discarded vehicles, automobiles,
trucks, buses, tractors, appliances, such as refrigerators, washers
and dryers, assembled or partially assembled materials, such as
holding tanks, barrels and raw materials, such as stone, cement
and sand.
(6) Turkey or chicken wire or other similar light gauge material.
(7) Snow, expandable or collapsible fences as a permanent fence.
E. Temporary fences, walls or similar structures used on construction sites
are exempt from the permit requirements of this section provided such
fences, walls or similar structures are removed within one year of the
date of their construction or erection or the completion of the project
for which the fence was erected.
F. All fences and walls shall conform to the following:
(1) All chain link fences shall be constructed with the closed loop
situate at the top of the fence.
(2) All entrances or gates shall open into the interior of the enclosure.
(3) If the fence is of masonry construction, a finished surface must be
provided on the exterior side.
(4) If the fence is open metal mesh, supported by posts and frames of
either wood or pipe, such posts and frames shall be on the interior
of the mesh.
(5) If the fence is wood cover on a wood frame, the wood frame must
be on the interior of the fence, unless the fence is designed so as to
provide equal frame and cover area to adjoining yards.
A. A Forestry Management Plan, prepared by a professional forester. This
plan is to be followed for all forestry operations.
B. Documentation that the Forestry Management Plan is consistent with
the Timber Harvesting Guidelines of the Pennsylvania Forestry
Association.
C. Clear cutting shall be prohibited except on tracts less than two acres.
This provision shall not apply to State Game Lands where clear cutting
is done to benefit the natural habitat.
§ 27-96 RESERVED § 27-97
25:1059
§ 27-98. Front yards. [Amended 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 2234]
§ 27-99. Front yard exception.
By special exception, the front yard of a proposed building may be
decreased in depth to the average alignment of existing buildings on the
same block located within 100 feet of the proposed building.
§ 27-100. Frontage on public streets. [Amended 9-9-2002 by Ord.
No. 2378]
No building structure or use shall be utilized or occupied unless the lot upon
which the building, structure or use is situate has the required frontage
on and gains access to a public street as set forth in the use schedules,
Article IX. Access to the use, structure or building lot shall be from the
D. On tracts larger than two acres, at least 30% of the forest cover
(canopy) shall be kept and the residual trees shall be composed of a
higher value species as determined by a professional forester.
E. An Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan shall be submitted to the
Township as well as the Lehigh County Conservation District for any
review and recommendation. Said plan shall be implemented and
adhered to during all activities.
F. Reforestation shall be required except for areas proposed for buildings,
streets and utilities on an approved plan.
G. Forestry is prohibited on areas with slopes greater than 25% or within
the 100-year floodway, as determined on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency Flood Maps.
H. At no time shall earth moving or filling be permitted as part of this
approval, without the necessary additional local, state and/or federal
approvals required for same.
I. A forestry permit shall be completed and appropriate fee paid.
A. Any and all areas fronting on a public street shall be considered as front
yards, with all uses, buildings or structures regulated accordingly.
B. Front yards on corner lots. Corner lots in residential zones fronting on
two intersecting streets shall be considered to have two front yards and
one side yard which shall be the minimum of the applicable zone and
one rear yard. For the principal structure only, one front yard shall meet
the yard requirements for the applicable zone and the other may be
reduced, but shall be not less than 15 feet. These provisions do not
apply to detached accessory structures. The front of the principal
structure must meet the minimum front setback for the applicable
district. However, houses which are situate on a diagonal (fronting the
intersection of two streets) shall maintain the front yard setbacks on
both sides.
§ 27-97 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-100
25:1060
same street used to satisfy the frontage requirement. This street shall
be improved to current Township standards and continuously connected
to another public street on at least one end, and shall be dedicated to
and accepted by the Township. Every building in which a dwelling unit is
located shall have its own frontage on a public street as mentioned herein
without requiring travel in or around another use or building. Townhouses,
apartment or condominium complexes may abut private streets provided
that such private streets are improved to current Township standards.
§ 27-101. Highway easement setback restrictions. [Amended
7-8-1996 by Ord. No. 1989]
In the event that a Federally funded traffic improvement project requires
the Township to acquire highway easements for necessary roadway
improvements, then, in such event, those owners of the properties affected
shall be permitted to calculate the minimum lot size, minimum yard
requirements (front yard, rear yard and side yard), maximum building
coverage and maximum impervious surface from the right-of-way line that
existed immediately prior to the acquisition of the easement.
§ 27-102. Home occupations. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729;
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1791]
A. Home occupations, considered as accessory uses, shall:
(1) Be limited to one per residential dwelling.
(2) Be conducted only by residents of the dwelling in which the use is
situate. Not more than one nonresident employee shall be
permitted at sites only where at least two off-street parking spaces
are available.
(3) Not exhibit any external characteristics or evidence of their
existence. Signs shall be as allowed by otherwise applicable laws,
regulations or permits and shall be limited to one non-illuminated
wall sign having a maximum sign display area of two square feet.
(4) Only be conducted in a principal residential structure or, if
permitted by special exception, in an accessory building or
structure, such as a garage, barn or storage structure. If a new
structure is to be erected, then the exterior design of the new
structure shall reflect the principal residential use of the structure.
(5) Not occupy more than one building or structure.
(6) Not occupy more than 250 square feet of the total aboveground
floor area of the building or structure in which the home occupation
is situate.
(7) Not exhibit any nuisance characteristics such as dust, noise
discernible beyond the property line, odor, smoke or fumes or be
detrimental to the general public health, safety and welfare.
§ 27-100 RESERVED § 27-102
25:1061
§ 27-103. Lighting and glare limitations. [Amended 4-8-1991 by
Ord. No. 1729]
(8) Shall not have more than two vehicles at any given time patronizing
the business.
(9) Not require or need any additional parking spaces.
B. Any person desiring to create, maintain or expand a home occupation
shall first secure a use permit therefore as set forth in Article IV,
Permits.
C. No-impact home-based businesses. Those businesses or activities which
meet the definition of "no-impact home-based business" shall be a
permitted use in all residential, C-1, C-2A, and OS-1 Districts, and shall
not be subject to the issuance of a use permit, provided that the
following criteria are met: [Added 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 2571]
(1) The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses.
(2) The business shall employ no employees other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
(3) There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling
or inventory of a substantial nature.
(4) There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including,
but not limited to, parking, signs, or lights.
(5) The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or
electronic interference, including interference with radio or
television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
(6) The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
(7) The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling
and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
(8) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
A. No direct glare, as defined in this chapter, shall be permitted beyond
the property lines of a parcel, with the exception that parking areas and
walkways may be illuminated by luminary so hooded or shielded that
the maximum angle of the cone of direct illumination shall be 60° drawn
perpendicular to the ground, such luminary shall be placed not more
than 35 feet above the ground level and the maximum illumination at
ground level shall not be excess of three footcandles.
§ 27-102 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-103
25:1062
§ 27-104. Limitations on use of lot. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord.
No. 1657]
B. A luminary of less than four feet above the ground may have a cone
angle of 90°.
C. Indirect glare produced by illuminating or reflecting surface shall not
exceed 0.3 footcandle instantaneous maximum measurement or 0.1
footcandle average measurement.
D. Deliberately induced sky-reflected glare, as by casting a beam upward
for advertising purposes, shall be permitted only after the acquisition of
a building and other necessary permits and shall not be allowed on a
premises for more than three nights within a six-month period.
E. The provision of this section shall only apply to commercially used or
zoned property and apartments and not to residential uses.
A. Each zoning lot may not contain more than one principal use, together
with accessory uses related thereto, unless otherwise specifically
provided.
B. In all zoning districts except I, Industrial, OP, Office Park and OS-2,
Open Space — Limited Industrial, only one principal building shall be
permitted per zoning lot, unless otherwise permitted.
C. Lots used or developed for residential purposes shall only be used and
developed for one, single-family dwelling unit, unless otherwise
permitted.
D. In the event that a zoning lot is developed for a principal use which
employs or uses more than one principal building, each building so
constructed shall:
(1) Meet all minimum lot requirements (e.g., if a developer desires to
construct three buildings upon his lot and the minimum lot area is
two acres, the developer would need a minimum of six acres of land
in order to construct the three buildings.
(2) Meet all dimensional requirements (e.g., setbacks, etc.).
(3) Meet all parking, loading and unloading requirements.
(4) Be a minimum unobstructed distance of 50 feet from another
building, unless otherwise specified.
E. Principal buildings in the C-2, Regional/Community Commercial, and
C-2A, Local Commercial Zoning Districts shall be permitted to have up
to two attached permitted uses, provided that the building shall have
one common entranceway (which may be a vestibule) serving both uses,
and only one single structure on the lot. All dimensional, parking, and
other requirements must still be satisfied for each use proposed.
[Added 2-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2711]
§ 27-103 RESERVED § 27-105
25:1063
§ 27-105. Minimum lot size.
Any and all lots not serviced by public water and sewer facilities shall have
a minimum lot size of one acre.
§ 27-106. Nonconforming buildings, structures and lots.
A. Within the districts established by this chapter, there exist, may exist or
will exist buildings, structures (which includes signs), and/or
established building lots preexisting the passage of this chapter, which
were lawful before this chapter was enacted but which would be
prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter.
Inasmuch as these nonconformities are, by definition, alien to the
zoning scheme of the districts created under this chapter as amended,
it is the intent of this chapter to restrict, rather than increase, such
nonconformities.
B. A building or structure which legally existed at the time of the passage
of this chapter which shall be made nonconforming at the time of the
passage of this chapter may be continued except as otherwise set forth
in this article.
C. An existing nonconforming building or structure shall not be enlarged,
reconstructed, substituted, moved or structurally altered so as to
extend or increase the nonconformity.
D. In the event that any floor area, volume or use of land of a
nonconforming building or structure is voluntarily razed, legally
condemned, structurally changed or destroyed by fire, explosion, flood
or other phenomenon, it may not be restored, reconstructed or used as
before except in strict compliance with the zoning regulations of the
zoning district in which it is situate, unless such reconstruction is
commenced within six months of the date of the damage and is carried
to completion within a reasonable period of time.
E. Termination and abandonment of nonconforming buildings and
structures shall be governed by § 27-60F. [Amended 12-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 1657]
F. Lots which appear on a previously approved plan of record which met
all dimensional requirements for a building lot at the time of subdivision
shall be deemed to be permissible building lots provided that:
[Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(1) Any lot not connected to both public water and sewer shall have a
minimum lot size of one acre.
(2) Any nonresidential use must comply with the use standards set
forth in this article, unless protected by a strict application of the
provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code, § 508, codified as
53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 27-105 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-106
25:1064
§ 27-107. Obstruction of vision.
(See also § 27-90)
§ 27-108. Permanence of yards and open spaces.
Any area necessary to satisfy a setback, yard or open space requirements
for a building, structure, use or lot shall not be part of, incorporated into
or considered as any required setback, yard or open space for any other
building, structure, use or lot.
G. The subdivision of a lot which is nonconforming as to any part of this
chapter shall be permitted as of right (without complying with all other
provisions of the chapter), provided that: [Amended 9-14-1992 by
Ord. No. 1785]
(1) The total square footage of the lot is increased or a nonconforming
situation is abated (e.g., driveway or part thereof located on an
adjacent lot relocated by adjustment of lot line).
(2) Appropriate subdivision approval is secured from the Whitehall
Township Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners.
(3) No additional lots are created by the subdivision.
(4) The lot or lots decreased in size by the subdivision remain
conforming in all respects on any lot affected.
(5) The subdivision does not create additional or increased
nonconforming situations.
(6) The area of land to be added to the nonconforming lot is less than
1,000 square feet or less than 10% of the total area of the
nonconforming lot, whichever is greater.
(7) A consolidation deed in a from acceptable to the Township Solicitor
must be filed upon final subdivision plan approval by the Township.
A. Within any clear site triangle there shall be no obstruction between two
feet and eight feet above grade (the visibility area).
B. Existing and proposed trees having eight feet or more of clear trunk
with limbs and foliage trimmed in such a manner so as not to extend
into the visibility area shall be permitted, provided there is no traffic
hazard. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
C. No landscaping shall be maintained in such a manner so as to obscure
or otherwise interfere with the clear site triangle.
§ 27-106 RESERVED § 27-109
25:1065
§ 27-109. Private garage entrances. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord.
No. 1657]
Private garages accommodating more than five cars shall not have an
entrance closer than 200 feet to an entrance of a school, church, theater,
hospital, public park, playground or fire station. Said measurement shall be
taken as the shortest distance between such entrances across the street if
the entrances are on opposite sides of the street or along the street frontage
if both entrances are on the same side of the street or within the same block.
§ 27-110. Roads, driveways and parking areas.
A. All private roads and driveways shall be:
(1) Constructed to Township standards.
(2) Properly graded, constructed and drained to channel, divert or
retain stormwater runoff.
(3) Properly maintained.
B. All private parking areas shall be:
(1) Constructed to Township standards.
(2) Properly graded, constructed and drained to channel, divert or
retain stormwater runoff.
(3) Properly maintained.
C. Private driveways shall conform to the following:
(1) Driveways for single-family detached dwellings, semidetached
dwellings and townhouses shall not be less than 35 feet from any
intersection, measured from the curbline or edge of the pavement
to the center of the driveway and shall not exceed 40 feet in width
at the curbline. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
(2) All other driveways shall not be less than 20 feet nor more than 40
feet in width at the curbline.
(3) No driveway shall be less than 50 feet from an intersection,
measured from the center lines at the intersection to the center
line of the driveway, if one of the streets at the intersection is a
collector street.
(4) No driveway shall be less than 100 feet from an intersection,
measured from the center lines at the intersection to the center
line of the driveway, if both of the streets at the intersection are
collector streets. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
(5) No driveway shall be less than 200 feet from an intersection,
measured from the center of the intersection to the center line of
§ 27-109 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-110
25:1066
§ 27-111. Recycling. [Added 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
Recycling facilities for solid waste which involve the separation of waste by
mechanical or manual means shall be fully enclosed by a roof and walls.
All recycling facilities other than resorted drop-off locations shall comply
with all requirements of § 27-140 of this chapter in addition to all other
applicable statutes and regulations including the Pennsylvania Solid Waste
Management Act, as amended.
§ 27-112. Sewer services. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
Sewer services to any building, structure, or part thereof, or use shall
conform to the following:
§ 27-113. Solid waste disposal areas. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord.
No. 1657]
the driveway if one of the streets at the intersection is an arterial
street. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(6) No driveway servicing a nonresidential use or building shall be
within 25 feet of a residential property line.
(7) No driveway servicing common parking areas for more than 10
dwellings shall be within 20 feet of a property line or building.
A. Any building, structure or part thereof or use which is regularly utilized
by the general public shall be provided with flush-type toilets.
B. Any building, structure or part thereof or use which is utilized by an
employer or employees for more than two consecutive hours at any
given time, shall be provided with flush-type toilets.
C. No cesspool, privy, outhouse or drilled sinkhole shall be constructed or
used for the disposal of any sewage or similar waste.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A and B above, any
building, structure or part thereof or use which is utilized for outdoor
recreation shall provide, within one year of the commencement of the
outdoor activity, permanent toilet facilities for the use of the general
public, employees and employers. Prior to the expiration of the one year
period referenced in this subsection, there shall be provided alternative
sanitary rest rooms, facilities, which may include temporary facilities
which are not flush-type and which shall comply with all applicable
State and Federal laws, rules, regulations and directives as well as all
other applicable ordinances of Whitehall Township.
A. All owners of lots with nonresidential structures situate thereon must
identify an area for the storage of solid wastes generated by the lot use.
No solid wastes or any materials being stored for pickup including, but
not limited to wastepaper, pallets, cardboard, industrial wastes, used or
abandoned merchandise or building debris may be stored outside of
§ 27-110 RESERVED § 27-113
25:1067
§ 27-114. Steep slopes.
this area which shall meet all the regulations for accessory uses as
defined in § 27-84.
B. The accumulation of solid wastes shall be kept to a minimum and shall
in no case be more than the amount of material generated in one month
of normal operations. Furthermore, no material shall be stored for a
period exceeding 30 days.
C. Storage, as required hereby of waste materials, shall neither create
dusts, odors, airborne debris or trash, or otherwise create a public
nuisance nor be stored in such a manner as to harbor or attract
animals, insects, vectors or vermin.
D. Solid wastes shall be stored in metal containers equipped with lids
which shall remain closed at all times, when not depositing or emptying
the contents.
A. The purpose of slope zoning shall be to limit the intensity of
development in areas which the topography is less accommodating to
conventional development.
B. The average property slope for the purposes of this regulation shall be
the slope calculated by summing the length of all two foot contour lines
for the existing ground conditions and multiplying that sum by two.
That product shall then be divided by the lot area to find the average
property slope.
(2) x (sum of length of
contours)
= Average Lot Slope
Lot Area
C. Each lot which requires onsite sewage disposal systems shall have the
following minimum areas, unless a larger minimum lot size is required
for the use in the zoning district in which the lot is situate, in which case
the more restrictive requirements shall apply:
Slopes 0% up to and including
12.00%
No change (1.0 acre)
Slopes greater than 12.00% up to
and including 13.00%
58,000 sq. ft. plus a 10% increase
in frontage
Slopes greater than 13.00% up to
and including 14.00%
72,000 sq. ft. plus a 15% increase
in frontage
Slopes greater than 14.00% up to
and including 15.00%
2.0 acres plus a 20% increase in
frontage
Slopes greater than 15.00% up to
and including 20.00%
2.5 acres plus a 35% increase in
frontage
§ 27-113 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-114
25:1068
§ 27-115. Swimming pools. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
Slopes greater than 20.00% up to
and including 25.00%
3.0 acres plus a 50% increase in
frontage
D. Each lot which is to be served by public sewage disposal systems shall
have the following minimum area, unless a larger minimum lot size is
required for the use in the zoning district in which the lot in situate, in
which case the more restrictive requirements shall apply: [Amended
4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
Slopes 0% up to and including
12.00%
No change
Slopes greater than 12.00% up to
and including 13.00%
20% increase in square footage
plus a 10% increase in frontage
Slopes greater than 13.00% up to
and including 14.00%
40% increase in square footage
plus a 15% increase in frontage
Slopes greater than 14.00% up to
and including 15.00%
0.75 acre minimum plus a 20%
increase in frontage
Slopes greater than 15.00% up to
and including 17.00%
1.0 Acre minimum Plus a 25%
increase in frontage
Slopes greater than 17.00% up to
and including 20.00%
1.5 Acre minimum Plus a 35%
increase in frontage
Slopes greater than 20.00% up to
and including 25.00%
2.0 Acre minimum plus a 50%
increase in frontage
E. Development shall not be permitted on slopes greater than 25% unless
the structural and support stability of any proposed structures are
approved by the Township Engineer and appropriate pre- and postconstruction
soil erosion and sedimentation and stormwater
management plans are approved by the Board of Commissioners. In
addition, any approved development must include an increase in lot
frontage of 100%.
F. The Zoning Officer shall be entitled to consult with the Township
Engineer for interpretation and determination of average lot slope.
A. Swimming pools shall be considered as accessory uses and shall
conform in design, location, maintenance and use as indicated in the
Whitehall Township Swimming Pool Regulations, adopted by the Board
of Commissioners, as amended. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
2578]
B. Swimming pools must be located not less than six feet from all property
lines, and not less than 10 feet from any alley. A swimming pool shall
not be located in any front yard.
C. Special regulations for temporary, storable aboveground pools: [Added
4-11-2011 by Ord. No. 2857]
§ 27-114 RESERVED § 27-115
25:1069
§ 27-116. Temporary utility trailers and storage containers, job site
construction office and sales offices trailers. [Amended 2-18-1989
by Ord. No. 1657; 6-11-2001 by Ord. No. 2322]
(1) The pool must be erected and removed within the same swimming
season, and in no case shall be permitted to exist for more than five
months from the date of erection.
(2) The pool may situate not less than three feet from all side and rear
property lines. No pool may be located within a front yard setback.
(3) The pool must adhere to all applicable enclosure, inspection and
safety requirements as established in the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code, as amended.
A. Use and/or placement of temporary utility trailers and storage
containers shall conform to the following requirements and shall:
(1) Not be situated less than six feet from any property line or less than
10 feet from any alley;
(2) Not interfere with traffic visibility;
(3) Not occupy designated and required parking spaces;
(4) Not obstruct interior traffic flows;
(5) Not exceed 35 feet in height;
(6) Not be located in any residential zoning district, unless trailer/
container is being used for storage of construction materials for a
site under construction which possesses a valid building permit;
(7) Not be leased or used by any other entity other than the property
owner, contractor or lessee of the site where such trailer or
container is to be located. No subleasing shall be permitted;
(8) Not be placed closer than 10 feet to any building; and
(9) There shall be a maximum of five temporary utility trailers or
storage containers permitted to any single applicant, address and/
or leased parcel at any given time.
B. Temporary job site office trailers, storage trailers used for construction
and sales offices shall:
(1) Not be situated less than three feet from any property line or less
than 10 feet from any alley;
(2) Not interfere with traffic visibility;
(3) Not occupy designated and required parking spaces;
(4) Not obstruct interior traffic flows;
§ 27-115 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-116
25:1070
§ 27-117. Ultimate right-of-way.
When a lot has frontage on a public street which is or will be subject
to a widening of the right-of-way, all required dimensional requirements,
restrictions and limitations shall be measured from the edge of the ultimate
right-of-way.
§ 27-118. Wetlands. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
The following provisions shall govern the use and/or development of, in or
around wetlands:
(5) Not be placed closer than 10 feet to any building.
C. A building permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Officer prior to
placement or use of a temporary utility trailer, storage container, job
site office trailer or sales trailer upon a lot. These facilities shall be
inspected by both the Building and Fire Inspectors prior to their use
and shall conform to all applicable code regulations. A permit sticker
shall be issued which must be attached to the trailer or container in a
prominent location for easy inspection by Township staff. Escrow
monies are not transferable from one permit to another.
(1) Permits for storage trailers used for construction, temporary job
site office and sales trailers shall be valid during the duration of
construction, until the certificate of occupancy is issued for the
structure under construction or until the job is considered
complete by the Township Engineer.
(2) Permits for temporary utility storage trailers or containers shall be
valid for six months from the date of issuance and may not be
"renewed" for the same trailer.
D. Temporary utility trailers, storage containers, job site office and sales
trailers shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition.
E. Fees for permits to place or use temporary utility trailers, storage
containers, job site office and sales trailers shall be established by the
Board of Commissioners and set forth in the fee schedule, as amended.
F. The provisions of the within section shall not apply to portable, ondemand
storage containers which are located on private property for
the purpose of temporary residential storage for a period not to exceed
30 days, consecutive or cumulative. [Added 3-13-2007 by Ord. No.
2609]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct in, enlarge, repair, alter,
remove, maintain, operate or abandon any dam, water obstruction or
encroachment prior to the issuance of a general or individual permit by
the Department of Environmental Protection (Department); or contrary
to the terms and conditions of a general or individual permit issued by
§ 27-116 RESERVED § 27-118
25:1071
the Department or the rules and regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
B. Prior to such operation, maintenance, modification, enlargement or
abandonment of any dam, water obstruction or encroachment, the
owner of the lot, parcel or tract shall file a copy of the current
Department permit with the Zoning Officer.
C. Prior to the construction, use or development of any property, the
owner thereof shall indicate to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer
that no wetlands shall be adversely affected as more particularly
prescribed by the Dam Safety and Encroachments Act the Dam Safety
and Waterway Management Rules and Regulations. In the vent that it is
apparent that wetlands will be adversely affected, said person shall
obtain a permit from the Department prior to such construction, use or
development of the property and shall file said permit as set forth
hereinabove.
D. For the purposes of this section, "encroachment" shall be defined as any
structure or activity which, in any manner changes, expands or
diminishes the course, current or cross section of any watercourse,
wetland, floodway or body of water. For definitions of each of these
terms, refer to 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 105, § 105.1, "Definitions," DEP
Regulations, "Dam Safety and Waterway Management," as amended
from time to time. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
§ 27-118 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-118
25:1072
ARTICLE XI
Conditional Use Provisions
§ 27-119. Introduction. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
In addition to those provisions as set forth in §§ 27-44 and 27-45, the
conditional uses as listed herein shall comply with the provisions as
hereinafter set forth.
§ 27-120. Adult entertainment facilities.
All adult entertainment facilities shall be separated from any and all
churches, schools, public buildings or residences by a distance of at least
2,500 feet measured from building to building.
§ 27-121. Apartments. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
Apartments shall:
A. When individual units:
(1) Have the minimum living area as required by Chapter 5, Code
Enforcement.
(2) Provide off-street parking areas which shall be designed and
dedicated to the use of the residents only.
(3) Provide emergency exits if located on a floor other than the ground
floor.
(4) Have an aggregate minimum lot area equal to 5,500 square feet
plus the minimum lot area of any other use situate upon the tract.
B. When apartment buildings (two or more apartments in a structure):
(1) If 2 1/2 stories or less in height, be restricted to no more than 16
dwelling units in one continuous structure and no portion of the
building below the first story or above the second story shall be
used for dwelling purposes.
(2) Have double side and rear yard setbacks as those set forth in the
use scheduled for the district in which the apartment is located or
proposed.
(3) Maintain a distance of 35 feet between buildings upon the same lot.
(4) Maintain the minimum living area requirements as set forth in
Chapter 5, Code Enforcement.
(5) Maintain off-street parking areas and shall dedicate and designate
such areas for use of the residents and their guests only.
(6) Maintain the density requirement of no more than eight dwelling
units per gross acre.
§ 27-119 RESERVED § 27-121
25:1073
§ 27-122. Bed-and-breakfast facilities. [Amended 12-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 1657]
§ 27-123. Bring your own bottle (BYOB) establishments. [Amended
10-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2264]
(7) Be served by public sanitary sewer and public water facilities.
(8) Be screened from adjoining residential uses. [Amended 4-8-1991
by Ord. No. 1729]
A. Bed-and-breakfast facilities shall:
(1) Have a minimum lot size of 12,000 square feet.
(2) Provide a maximum of five guest rooms.
(3) Permit no more than four persons to occupy any one particular
guest room.
(4) Provide at least two off-street parking spaces for each guest room.
(5) Provide at least one full bathroom, separate from the host family's
bathroom, for every three guest rooms.
(6) Be conducted only by members of the immediate family who reside
on the premises.
(7) Only serve food to registered guests.
(8) Prior to applying for a use permit, have the existing on-site sewage
disposal system reevaluated to determine whether the same is
adequate and in accord with local and State regulations.
(9) Comply with all applicable labor and industry and handicapped
requirements, standards and regulations.
(10) Only occupy existing single-family detached dwellings.
B. Bed-and-breakfast facilities shall not:
(1) Use show windows or any type of display or advertising visible from
outside the premises.
(2) Provide any separate kitchen or cooking facilities in any guest
room.
A. A forty-foot buffer yard shall completely separate the structure and all
off-street parking areas from any lot line of any residential use or any
undeveloped residentially zoned lot.
B. If any type of entertainment offered at such a facility at any time is adult
entertainment, the requirements of an adult entertainment facility must
be met.
§ 27-121 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-123
25:1074
§ 27-124. Conversions to condominiums. [Amended 4-8-1991 by
Ord. No. 1729]
Conversions to condominiums shall be permitted, by conditional use, and
shall comply with or provide the following:
§ 27-125. Heliports. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
C. Any such use shall be separated from any school, church or similar
facility, from property line to property line, a minimum of 500 feet.
D. The hours of operation for such a facility shall be limited from 12:00
noon to 11:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
E. For purposes of enforcing this and other applicable ordinances,
inspections of said premises may be conducted at any time by both law
enforcement and code enforcement personnel.
F. Any such establishment shall have a minimum lot size of one acre.
G. The structure of a BYOB establishment with a capacity of 300 or more
persons shall be set back a minimum of 300 feet from the lot line of any
residential use or residential zoning district. Said measurement shall be
from property line to property line.
H. Security must be provided on site during all operating hours.
A. Prior to conversion, the owner or developer shall file with the Township
Zoning Officer a copy of the declaration of condominium required the
Uniform Condominium Act, P.L. 286, No. 82, § 1, July 2, 1980, as
amended.
B. Building permits shall be acquired for each individual unit of the
conversion.
C. An occupancy permit for each individual unit shall not be issued until
said unit is substantially complete as evidenced by proof of the
recording of a certificate of completion with the Lehigh County
Recorder of Deeds.
D. A temporary occupancy permit may be issued prior to the recording of
the certificate of completion in accordance with § 27-21 of this chapter.
E. In the event that a condominium is terminated, a copy of the
termination agreement that is recorded with the Lehigh County
Recorder of Deeds shall also be filed with the Township Zoning Officer.
Thereafter, the units comprising the condominium will again be
considered as one unit and shall be regulated accordingly.
A. Heliports or their operators shall:
(1) Obtain and maintain a valid license from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation.
§ 27-123 RESERVED § 27-125
25:1075
§ 27-126. Individual mobile homes on individual lots. [Amended
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
Individual mobile homes on individual lots shall:
§ 27-127. Mobile home parks. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
(2) Have a minimum landing are at least twice the length of the
helicopter used.
(3) Have a landing pad not less than 32 feet in diameter.
(4) Be approachable from two directions.
(5) Provide sufficient clearances, 8:1 ratio, so as to permit landings
and take-offs from the outer limits of the landing pad.
(6) Have an 8:1 ratio approach lane.
(7) Have a flight path 200 feet wide and 500 feet outward from the
outer edge of the landing pad.
(8) If located near or adjacent to water, have a boat positioned at a
landing to aid in rescue operations.
(9) Have a wind direction indicator and appropriate lighting.
(10) Conform to all regulations when and as promulgated by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation.
B. A heliport shall not be used, maintained or operated until such time as a
building permit therefor is secured from the Zoning Officer.
C. Building permits issued by the Zoning Officer for heliports shall be
automatically revoked if:
(1) The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of
Aviation, revokes or refuses to relicense an operator or heliport.
(2) An operator of a heliport fails to cure any defect or nonconformity
with regulations as established by this section or the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation within 30 days of
being notified of such defect or nonconformity.
A. Have adequate sewage disposal facilities.
B. Adhere to the single-family dimensional requirements of the R-5, High
Density Residential Zoning District as set forth in § 27-75E.
C. Be placed on a permanent masonry foundation, have the wheels
removed and skirting placed around the entire structure.
A. Mobile home parks shall:
§ 27-125 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-127
25:1076
§ 27-128. Nightclubs. [Amended 10-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2264]
§ 27-129. Oil or petroleum products storage. [Amended 12-18-1989
by Ord. No. 1657]
Oil or petroleum product storage tanks or areas shall:
(1) Have a minimum lot size of four acres.
(2) Have a minimum lot width of 200 feet.
(3) Have a maximum density of eight units per acre.
(4) Provide adequate fire protection.
(5) Maintain a minimum distance of 25 feet between individual units.
(6) Adhere to the following setbacks from a private street:
(a) Front: 20 feet.
(b) Side (one): eight feet.
(c) Side (both): 20 feet.
(d) Rear: 15 feet.
(7) Adhere to the screening requirements of § 27-89B.
B. Mobile home parks shall not be designed, maintained or used so as to
permit any mobile home or accessory structure to be placed closer than
100 feet to any property line abutting a public street or closer than 50
feet to any rear or side property line.
A. A forty-foot buffer yard shall completely separate the structure and all
off-street parking areas from any lot line of any residential use or
undeveloped residentially zoned lot.
B. Nightclubs shall have a minimum lot size of one acre for each 150 seats
or 150 person capacity.
C. The structure of a nightclub with a capacity of 300 or more persons
shall be set back a minimum of 300 feet from the lot line of any
residential use or residential district.
D. All such uses shall maintain a setback of at least 500 feet from any
school, church or similar facility. Said setback shall be measured from
property line to property line.
E. For purposes of enforcing this and other applicable ordinances,
inspections of said premises may be conducted at any time by both law
enforcement and code enforcement personnel.
F. Security must be provided on site during all operating hours.
§ 27-127 RESERVED § 27-129
25:1077
§ 27-130. Off-track betting facilities. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord.
No. 1657]
All off-track betting facilities shall be separated from any and all churches,
schools, public buildings or residences by a distance of at least 2,500 feet
measured from building to building.
§ 27-131. Offices. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
Additional requirements for offices shall conform to those requirements as
set forth in § 27-134, Research facilities.
§ 27-132. Outdoor recreation facilities. [Amended 12-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 1657]
Outdoor recreation facilities shall:
A. Provide a bermed basin around each individual tank sufficient to
contain 150% of the tank capacity.
B. Provide double setbacks than those required in the district in which the
use is situate or proposed.
C. If underground storage tanks, adhere to all applicable State and
Federal regulations therefor.
A. For all buildings and active recreation areas, be set back from adjacent
residentially zoned and used properties, a minimum of 25 feet.
B. Provide lighting in accord with Article X.
C. Provide buffer yards and screening in accord with Article X.
D. Provide parking as required in Article XII.
E. Have a minimum lot size of three acres.
F. Provide onsite public rest room facilities.
G. Maintain a minimum of 25 feet between all permanent structures used
as dwellings.
H. Provide all permanent structures with potable water and adequate
sewage facilities.
I. When designed for use by recreational vehicles, be equipped with
adequate electric, water and sewage hook ups as well as adequate
sewage dumping facilities which are in accord with all Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection regulations. [Amended
8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
§ 27-129 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-133
25:1078
§ 27-133. Quarry and mining operations. [Amended 12-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 1657]
All proposed or expanded quarry and mining operations shall be completely
enclosed by a chain link fence of at least eight feet in height. During all
periods when no authorized personnel are on the property, all gates of the
fence shall be closed and locked.
§ 27-134. Research facilities. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
Research facilities shall:
§ 27-135. Rifle, shooting and target ranges. [Amended 12-18-1989
by Ord. No. 1657]
A. Conduct all business within a completely enclosed building.
B. Provide buffer yards and screening pursuant to the requirements of
Article X.
C. Provide adequate storm drainage, sewage disposal, domestic water
supply and all other appropriate utilities.
D. Provide vehicular access to a highway or street traffic control to
maximize public safety and to avoid traffic congestion.
E. Provide access drives and parking areas in accord with Article X.
A. Rifle, shooting and target ranges shall have a minimum lot area of seven
acres.
B. Ranges for fixed target fire arm shooting must be backed by an earthen
mound at least 10 feet in height and have a suitable bullet trap
structure to deflect and stop bullets and projectiles.
C. Ranges must have a clearly defined and established firing line.
D. For trap and skeet shooting ranges where targets will be propelled or
hurled into the air, the point of fire of discharge shall be set back at
least 300 yards from any property line in the direction of shooting.
E. Fields of fire must be completely enclosed by a chain link fence at least
six feet in height.
F. Private indoor shooting ranges need not comply with § 27-132D and F,
provided that the range is fully enclosed within a building.
G. Archery ranges or ranges established by and used for the training of
police, military or authorized Federal personnel shall not be subject to
the provisions of this section.
§ 27-133 RESERVED § 27-136
25:1079
§ 27-136. Salvage yards. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
Salvage yards shall:
§ 27-137. Shopping centers. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
Shopping centers shall:
A. Provide buffer yards and screening in accord with Article X.
B. Maintain double the required setbacks for the district in which the
facility is situate or proposed.
C. Control and contain stormwater runoff for a period of time sufficient for
separation of volatile compounds and other man-made components
from the stormwater itself.
D. Not be located in existing or projected future areas of urban growth,
nor affect or destroy any outstanding natural attributes of the
immediate surrounding area.
E. Not be increased in land area without the prior conditional approval of
the Board of Commissioners.
A. Consist of a harmonious selection of uses and groupings of buildings (if
desired), service and parking areas and open spaces, designed,
maintained and used as an integrated unit in such a manner so as to
constitute a safe, efficient and convenient retail shopping center.
B. Provide buffer yards and screening in accord with Article X.
C. Provide safe and efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation
within the boundaries of the center or planned business development.
D. Provide raised curbs or medial walkways which shall prohibit vehicles
from straying from their designed circulation routes.
E. Suitably plan walkways to help reinforce the proper routing of traffic
and add to the overall appearance of the shopping center.
F. Be serviced by public sewer and water facilities.
G. If developed in stages, be so planned that the foregoing requirements
and the intent of this chapter are fully complied with at the completion
of each and every stage.
H. Have a minimum lot size of 25 acres.
I. Not store or display any materials, equipment or goods outside of a
building except in compliance with the following:
(1) Only merchandise intended for immediate sale shall be displayed
on the sidewalk in front of it. At least eight feet of sidewalk shall
§ 27-136 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-137
25:1080
§ 27-138. Single-family attached dwellings. [Amended 12-18-1989
by Ord. No. 1657]
Single-family attached dwellings shall:
§ 27-139. Single-family detached and semidetached dwellings.
[Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
Single-family detached and semidetached dwellings shall:
§ 27-140. Solid waste management. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord.
No. 1657]
Solid waste management facilities used for solid waste disposal or transfer
shall:
remain unobstructed for pedestrian use between the merchandise
display area and the curb.
(2) Any other area of a shopping center area proposed for storage or
display purposes shall be subject to site plan approval by the Board
of Commissioners. All such areas shall be enclosed in a suitable
fence or plant screen, located adjacent to the main building, in such
a manner so as to prevent a view of the stored items from any
adjacent property at ground level and placed in such a manner so
as to control pedestrian and vehicular movement in the area.
J. Provide off-street parking and off-street loading spaces as required by
Article XII.
A. Have the minimum living area requirements as set forth in the
Whitehall Township Building Code [§ 5-101 et seq.].
B. Designate and dedicate all required off-street parking to the use of
residents only.
C. Have a density not exceeding eight units per gross acre.
D. Be served by the public water and sewer system.
E. Not have more than six attached units (townhouses, etc.).
A. Maintain the dimensional requirements as set forth in the R-5, High
Density Residential Zoning District as set forth in § 27-75E.
B. Be permitted only on single lots. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed so as to permit the construction of single-family detached
and semidetached residences in combination on a single lot in the form
of a residential housing complex.
C. Be designed so as to protect the character of the zoning district in
which the use is located or proposed.
§ 27-137 RESERVED § 27-140
25:1081
§ 27-141. Special care community residences. [Amended
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
A. Maintain a one-hundred-yard setback from any property line or public
right-of-way within which no solid waste shall be deposited for storage,
removal or transfer.
B. Within the 100 yard setback as referenced hereinabove, have two
parallel rows of six foot high arborvitaes set three feet apart as well as
trees, shrubs and other suitable vegetation, planted and landscaped to
fully obscure any view of the site or facility from public roads and
adjacent public or private properties. The arborvitaes referenced to in
this paragraph shall be set back not less than 50 yards from property
lines and rights-of-way.
C. Be completely enclosed by a chain link fence or such other durable
fencing as approved by the Township, which shall be not less than six
feet and not more than eight feet in height. All fencing shall be set back
at least 15 feet from any and all property lines and rights-of-way.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to assure safe, humane,
comfortable, supportive and convenient residential settings for aged,
blind and disabled persons who are able to live independently, for aged,
blind, disabled and other dependent or infirm adult persons who
require assistance beyond the basic necessities of food and shelter but
who are not in need of hospitalization or skilled nursing care; and for
residents who become in need of hospitalization, skilled or continued
nursing care, or any combination thereof. Residents will receive the
encouragement and assistance they need to develop and maintain
maximum independence and self-determination. Unnecessary
institutionalization will be prevented and individuals who might
otherwise be required to stay in an institution will be able to live in the
community. While it is recognized that a municipality may not
discriminate against individuals based on a physical or mental handicap
or based on age, this section regulates a higher density type
construction which will allow cost-efficient professional care of
individuals requiring special care or supervision, and this section is
intended to regulate building type and location rather than the identity
of the residents.
B. Applicable zones. A special care community, a conditional use, is
permitted in an R-3-A Zone, provided it can be demonstrated, to the
satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners, that the specific conditions,
standards and requirements set forth in this article will be met and that
the community as designed is in the public interest.
C. Definitions. When used in this article, the words and phrases defined in
this section shall have the following meanings, unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
§ 27-140 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-141
25:1082
ASSOCIATED USES —
CONGREGATE HOUSING —
INDEPENDENT DWELLING UNITS — Single-family detached
dwellings, single-family semidetached dwellings, single-family attached
dwellings (provided that no more than eight single-family dwelling units
are attached in a linear row), and single-family units in multifamily
dwellings. Each individual dwelling unit shall contain complete kitchen,
toilet and bathing facilities, and shall have at least one outside window.
PERSONAL CARE FACILITIES — Premises, or a portion thereof, in
which food, shelter and personal assistance or supervision are provided
for a period exceeding 24 consecutive hours, for residents requiring
supervision and assistance in such manners as dressing, bathing, diet
or medication prescribed for self-administration, but not requiring
hospitalization or skilled nursing care.
QUALIFIED PERSON —
Administrative and service facilities designed for and adequate to
serve the residents of the special care community.
(1)
Gift and personal service shops and professional offices reasonably
integrated into the community and intended for its exclusive use,
provided that such shops and offices shall be adjacent to common
areas and no public advertisement by sign or other medium shall
be permitted for such uses.
(2)
The following facilities for the primary use of residents of the
special care community: auditoriums, activity, craft and hobby
rooms, libraries, lounges, chapels, recreational facilities,
community centers, medical health centers, outdoor recreation
facilities and other ancillary uses of a similar nature.
(3)
Detached, semidetached, attached and multifamily dwellings in
which each group of personal living units is associated with one or
more common units designed for the exclusive benefit of the group.
(1)
Each personal living unit shall contain, at a minimum, a private
or semiprivate bedroom and shall have a private access to toilet/
powder room facilities. Each personal living unit shall contain at
least one outside window.
(2)
Each group of common units shall provide space and facilities for
cooking and related kitchen activities, dining, clothes washing and
bathing and toilet functions, to the extent such activities cannot be
performed in all of the personal living units of the group. Common
units may also be provided for recreation, relaxation and similar
activities.
(3)
(1) A person 55 years of age or older.
(2) A mentally or physically disabled or handicapped person.
§ 27-141 RESERVED § 27-141
25:1083
RESIDENTIAL USES — Independent dwelling units and congregate
housing.
RESIDENTIAL CLASS ZONE — All uses permitted in the R-3 zone shall
be permitted in the R-3-A zone. The uses permitted by this section,
however, shall be permitted in the R-3-A zone only.
SKILLED CARE FACILITIES — Premises, or a portion thereof, used
to house and care for residents or former residents requiring
hospitalization, skilled or continuous nursing care or any combination
thereof for periods exceeding seven consecutive days.
SUPPORT USES — Personal care facilities, skilled care facilities, outpatient
health care facilities for residents, common kitchen facilities to
prepare meals for residents, common dining facilities for residents.
TRACT — One or more contiguous lots which are dedicated in common
to the development of an elderly or handicapped community. For
purposes of this paragraph, lots shall not be deemed noncontiguous
merely because they are separated by a public road.
A member of the administrative staff of the elderly or handicapped
community.
(3)
The spouse of any one of the above persons if living with such
person.
(4)
The adult-sibling of any person defined in Subsections A through B
above.
(5)
The spouse widow(er) or adult-sibling of a person who formerly
resided in the community as a qualified person under Subsection
A or B of this definition, provided that such spouse, widow(er) or
sibling resided with the former elderly or handicapped resident in
the community immediately before the time he cased to reside in
the community.
(6)
D. Uses in a special care community.
(1) A special care community is a development situated on one tract
which provides:
(a) One or more residential uses exclusively for qualified persons.
(b) One or more support uses.
(2) A special care community may also provide one or more associated
uses and any accessory uses customarily incidental to the
permitted use existing on the tract. No other uses shall be
permitted.
E. Community management. Each special care community facility shall be
developed and managed by a single managing body. If the ownership of
the tract on which the community is located should be divided in any
fashion, deed and other restrictions shall insure that common
§ 27-141 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-141
25:1084
development, management and responsibility with respect to the
community is maintained.
F. Relationship to other ordinances. Since this article imposes
requirements specifically designed for special care communities, the
provisions of this article shall supersede all other ordinances of the
Township to the extent of any conflict between this article and such
other ordinances.
G. Residential living space regulations.
(1) Each individual dwelling unit shall have a minimum habitable floor
area in accordance with the following schedule:
(a) Efficient units: 400 square feet.
(b) One bedroom units: 500 square feet.
(c) Two bedroom units: 700 square feet.
(d) Three bedroom units: 900 square feet.
(2) Each personal living unit in a congregate housing arrangement
shall have a minimum habitable floor area in accordance with the
following schedule:
(a) Private: 240 square feet.
(b) Semiprivate: 300 square feet.
(3) Each group of personal living units and common units in a
congregate housing arrangement shall have a total minimum
habitable floor area of 400 square feet for each personal living unit
in the group, exclusive of hallways, janitorial areas, community
kitchen facilities, lobbies and other facilities not readily available
for the personal use of the residents.
H. Area regulations.
(1) Tract area. The minimum area of any tract to be developed into a
special care community shall be 10 acres and the maximum area
shall be 100 acres.
(2) Building area. Not more than 45% of the gross area of any tract
developed into an elderly or handicapped community shall be
covered by buildings.
(3) Retail area. Not more than 5% of the total floor area in buildings
constructed in the community shall be used for retail, personal
service and professional shops and offices, not counting medical or
dental care services.
(4) Common open space. Not less than 25% of the gross area of any
tract developed into a special care community shall be dedicated to
§ 27-141 RESERVED § 27-141
25:1085
use as common open space for the residents of the community, and
not less than 70% of the common open space shall be designed for
passive use. Open space shall contain no major structures other
than those related to the purpose of the open space, shall be
maintained by the common management of the community and
shall be deemed to include landscaped or sodded areas, buffer
strips, building courtyards and unfenced stormwater control areas.
(5) Building setbacks. No independent dwelling unit or congregate
housing building shall be closer than 40 feet from the right-of-way
of any public street or from any boundary of the tract. No personal
care facility or skilled care facility (whether located in a separate
building or as a part of a building containing other uses) shall be
closer than 125 feet from the right-of-way of a public street or 125
feet from any boundary of the tract. No structure shall be within 25
feet of a private street or access drive.
I. Height regulations. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height or three
stories, excluding elevator, mechanical stair penthouses and parapets
or antennas.
J. Density regulations.
(1) Personal care facilities and skilled care facilities. A maximum total
of 30 beds shall be permitted in personal care facilities and skilled
care facilities in any elderly or handicapped community for each
acre of the gross tract on which the community is developed.
(2) Other residential uses. A special care community shall not provide
more than a total of 18 independent dwelling units and personal
living units in congregate housing for each acre of the gross tract
on which the community is developed.
(3) Mixed uses. A special care community containing both (i) personal
or skilled care facilities and (ii) housing shall be required to meet
the density requirements of both Subsection J(1) and (2) of this
section.
K. Building arrangement.
(1) Grouping. All buildings shall be arranged in a group or groups of
buildings.
(2) Distance, in general. The minimum distance between any two
buildings or groups of attached buildings shall not be less than two
feet for each one foot in height of the highest such building.
(3) Distance, independent dwelling units. In addition to the
requirements of Subsection B, no building housing independent
dwelling units in the form of single story, single-family detached
dwellings shall be closer than 20 feet to another building. No
building housing individual dwelling units in the form of multistory
§ 27-141 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-141
25:1086
buildings or single-family semidetached or attached dwellings shall
be closer than 50 feet to another building.
(4) Wings. No two wings of any building shall form an interior angle of
less than 45°. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2801]
(5) Access to natural light. All buildings shall be so located in relation
to one another that the angle off horizontal from the sill of the
lowest window in any independent dwelling unit or in any personal
living unit in congregate housing to the highest point of another
building (excluding towers, chimneys and similar fixtures) does not
exceed 45°.
(6) Positioning of independent dwelling units. Where possible, the
design layout of independent dwelling units shall be such that the
front of one structure does not face the rear of another.
L. Building design.
(1) All building stairways, stairwells and landings shall be
architecturally integrated into the building.
(2) No more than one external master television antenna shall be
permitted on each building. No more than one satellite dish
antenna shall be permitted on a single tract.
M. Storage space. In addition to any ancillary storage area contained
inside individual dwelling units and congregate housing personal living
units and common units, there shall be provided for each individual
dwelling unit and personal living unit in congregate housing at less 35
contiguous square feet of storage area where personal belongings and
effects may be stored without constituting a fire hazard. These storage
areas may be located either inside individual dwelling units and
personal living units or in common storage facilities containing
individual storage areas where personal belongings and effects may be
kept locked and separated from those of other residents. If common
storage facilities are maintained, the interiors of the individual storage
areas shall not be visible from the common access area.
N. Wheel chair access. All buildings and facilities in an elderly or
handicapped community shall be accessible to wheel chairs.
O. Safety systems. The elderly or handicapped community shall be
designed to include individual dwelling unit/personal living unit and
central control of security, fire and life safety systems.
P. Parking regulations.
(1) The community shall provide at least the following number of allweather
paved off-street parking or storage spaces for
automobiles.
§ 27-141 RESERVED § 27-141
25:1087
(a) One space for each independent dwelling unit to be used
primarily by the residents of such units.
(b) One space for every five independent dwelling units to be used
primarily by visitors to such units.
(c) One space for every three personal dwelling units in
congregate housing to be used primarily by the residents of
such units and their visitors.
(d) One space for every four beds in personal care facilities and
skilled care facilities. An additional area sufficiently large to
accommodate an equivalent number of spaces shall be
reserved and indicated on the development plans of the facility
for future parking. For the purposes of stormwater
management, this area shall be considered as a paved surface.
Development of this area may be required or waived at the
discretion of the Township Commissioners.
(e) One space for each staff doctor.
(f) One space for each employee working on the largest shift.
(g) Such additional spaces as required under Article XII, for any
supplementary parking-generated activities.
(2) No building shall be closer than 25 feet from any parking area
access driveway nor closer than 10 feet from any parking area.
(3) Each parking space shall be no more than 300 feet from an
entrance to the building for which such space is required under
Subsection A.
(4) Off-street parking areas shall not open directly onto a public or
private street, but shall be provided with access drives or other
controlled accesses. This provision shall not apply with respect to
single-family detached and semidetached dwellings.
(5) Access drives, interior streets and loading and unloading zones
shall not serve as part of a specified parking area and shall be kept
clear of parked vehicles.
Q. Streets.
(1) Public and private streets within the special care community shall
be related to land uses and to the adjacent street system, as well as
to the layout of the residential, support and associated uses.
(2) Each street shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the applicable specifications of Chapter 22, Subdivision and Land
Development. However, where the purposes of this article would be
served, the Board may modify the specific terms of Chapter 22,
§ 27-141 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-141
25:1088
Subdivision and Land Development, provided that a similar
standard in performance is achieved.
(3) Interior streets shall be so designed as to minimize the hazards to
pedestrians and to vehicles on streets within the community and on
streets in adjacent areas. Crosswalks shall be adequately designed.
(4) Where private streets are proposed, acceptable provision for their
maintenance shall be an essential part of the development plant.
R. Pedestrian walkways. Pedestrian walkways shall be provided wherever
normal pedestrian traffic will occur, shall be paved with all-weather
surfaces, and shall be not less than four feet in width. All pedestrian
walkways and principal access ways to buildings shall meet all Federal,
State and Township engineering standards. Particular attention shall be
given to pedestrian safety in the design of pedestrian walkways.
S. Trash receptacles. Adequate trash receptacles shall be provided in
outdoor recreation areas and along connecting walkways to discourage
littering.
T. Lighting regulations. Interior streets, parking areas, building
entranceways, loading and service areas and pedestrian walkways shall
be provided with sufficient illumination to minimize hazards to
pedestrians and vehicles utilizing the same, and shall, where necessary,
be shielded to avoid disturbing and hazardous glares to residents of the
community and adjacent properties and to vehicles on streets.
U. Loading, deliveries and garbage collection.
(1) Areas for loading, deliveries, garbage and refuse collection and
other service vehicles shall be provided in adequate numbers and
sizes and shall be arranged to prevent the blocking or interfering
with the use of access roads or automobile parking facilities.
(2) Garbage and refuse collection areas shall be located so as not to
detract from the aesthetic character of the development and shall
be enclosed and shielded from view by fencing, walls or shrubbery
of at least seven feet in height around the perimeter.
V. Landscaping.
(1) All special care communities shall be provided with a liberal and
functional landscaping scheme.
(2) Interior streets, parking areas and pedestrian walkways shall be
provided with shade trees which are of an appropriate size and
character.
(3) Open space adjacent to buildings, areas between buildings and
border strips along the sides of pedestrian walkways shall be
graded and seeded to provide a thick strand of grass or other plant
materials.
§ 27-141 RESERVED § 27-141
25:1089
§ 27-142. Taverns. [Amended 10-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2264]
§ 27-142.1. Wind turbines/windmills. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No.
2791]
All windmills or wind turbines, whether commercial or residential, shall
adhere to the following regulations:
(4) Approaches and entrance areas to buildings shall be provided with
trees and attractive shrubbery.
(5) Areas not used for buildings, drives, streets and parking space shall
be seeded or landscaped and shall be kept in attractive condition.
(6) The land shall be so graded, paved areas so pitched and storm
drains and catch basins so located and sized as to provide rapid
runoff of stormwaters and to avoid undue accumulations of water
under the normal range of weather conditions.
(7) Topsoil shall not be removed from the tract during construction but
shall be stored and redistributed to areas most exposed to view by
residents and the public and such areas shall be stabilized by
seeding and planting.
W. Utilities.
(1) All utility lines in a special care community shall be underground.
(2) All special care communities shall be serviced by sanitary sewer
and water facilities satisfactory to the Board.
X. Development schedule. The development of a tract as a special care
community may be carried out in a single phase or in multiple phases,
subject to the review and approval of the Township Commissioners. All
phases of the development of a special care community must be
completed within five years of final land development approval.
Reasonable extensions of time may be granted by the Board of
Commissioners at its discretion, upon due cause shown.
A. A forty-foot buffer yard shall completely separate the structure and all
off-street parking areas from any lot line of any residential use or
undeveloped residentially zoned lot.
B. All such uses shall maintain a setback of 500 feet from any church,
school or similar facility.
A. They shall be independent of any structure and shall be located a
minimum distance of 110% times the structure height from any
structure or property line. No buildings, structures, street, alley or road
right-of-way or driveway not servicing the structure itself may be
located within this area.
§ 27-141 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-142.1
25:1090
B. No part of the structure shall be located within or above any required
front, side or rear yard setback.
C. They shall be erected and maintained in accordance with current
building codes.
D. The structure shall not be climbable up to 12 feet above the ground
surface.
E. The design of the structure shall conform to applicable industry
standards, including those of the American National Standards
Institute. The applicant for such a structure shall submit certificates of
design compliance obtained by the equipment manufacturers from a
nationally recognized testing laboratory.
F. The structure shall be equipped with a redundant braking system. This
includes both aerodynamic over speed controls (including variable
pitch, tip and other similar systems) and mechanical brakes.
Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a fail-safe mode. Stall
regulation shall not be considered a sufficient braking system for over
speed protection.
G. Structures shall be white, off-white, gray or another approved natural
color.
H. Structures shall not be artificially lighted, except to the extent required
by the Federal Aviation Administration.
I. The applicant must submit documentation from the Lehigh Valley
International Airport that the proposed structure does not constitute an
obstruction in the Airport Hazard District in Whitehall, and shall further
comply with all provisions of § 27-190, Airport zone permits, as
amended.
J. Structures shall not display advertising.
K. On-site transmission and power lines shall be placed underground to
the maximum extent practicable.
L. A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage must be placed at the
base of all pad-mounted transformers and substations.
M. Structures requiring guy wires must submit additional information
regarding hazard identification of same.
N. If a mechanical building is necessary, the building must not exceed 150
square feet in area, and 15 feet in height. This structure must not be
located in any front, side or rear setback area.
O. A decommissioning plan must be submitted with the application for
conditional use, where the landowner, at his/her expense, agrees to
decommission the structure at the end of its useful life. The end of the
useful life shall be determined when no electricity is generated for a
§ 27-142.1 RESERVED § 27-142.1
25:1091
§ 27-143. Confined animal feeding operations. [Amended 3-13-2000
by Ord. No. 2219]
All confined/concentrated animal feeding operations shall be considered as
industrial uses and shall adhere to the following:
continuous period of 12 months. The decommissioning plan shall
include removal of the structure and all components and accessory
structures.
P. The structure shall be subordinate to and located on the same lot as the
principal use which it serves.
Q. Not more than one such structure shall be located on any one improved
lot.
R. As part of the plan submission for conditional use approval, a detailed
site plan by a registered design professional must be submitted.
S. Nothing contained in this specific section shall permit the creation of a
commercial wind farm, which would contain more than one structure. A
commercial wind farm use shall be considered as a conditional use in
the Industrial District, and shall adhere to all provisions contained
herein in addition to any additional conditions or recommendations
imposed by the Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners
when considering the impact of such a facility on the health, safety and
general welfare of the Township.
T. The proposed structure height must be clearly identified on the
application, and shall not exceed 100 feet.
U. The resultant energy harnessed from the wind shall only be used on the
property on which the wind turbine/windmill is located.
A. The minimum lot size for any such proposed operation shall be 20
acres.
B. There shall be a minimum buffer yard between any such use and the
nearest residentially used property of 1,000 feet.
C. All such operations shall maintain a minimum setback of 500 feet from
all property lines.
D. All such operations shall only be permitted on tracts which are served
with municipal water and sewer.
E. All such facilities shall adhere strictly to all applicable State and
Federal regulations.
F. All such uses shall maintain a minimum setback between buildings of
70 feet.
G. All setbacks noted herein shall be measured from property line to
property line.
§ 27-142.1 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-143
25:1092
§ 27-143.1. (Reserved)159
§ 27-143.2. Adult residential community accessory to an existing
assisted living facility. [Added 8-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2692]
H. These regulations shall apply to all such operations, whether housing
livestock or fowl.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this conditional use is to provide housing for
"older persons" as that term is defined in the Federal Fair Housing Act,
as amended, in regulations promulgated (or to be promulgated)
thereunder. This use recognizes that compared to housing that is not
age-restricted, the majority of households of persons aged 55 and older
without minor children: do not create burdens upon the public school
system, create little demand for athletic fields, generate less traffic,
involve lower water and sanitary sewage flows and need fewer parking
spaces. This use recognizes the sense of community and lessened
private maintenance responsibilities associated with homes being
located closer together than in most other single-family home
developments not involving a community owner's association.
B. An adult residence accessory to an existing assisted living facility use
shall be a residential development that meets the following criteria:
(1) The tract must be located within the R-5 High Density Residential
District and consist of not less than a total of five contiguous acres
under common ownership or control and be developed as part of
the same adult residential community. Ownership shall refer to
legal and/or equitable ownership.
(2) The tract must be served by public water and public sewer.
(3) The tract must include an existing assisted living facility.
(4) The tract restricts the age of its residents to age 55 and older.
(5) The tract may include private internal streets and shall include
landscaped buffer areas along public streets.
(6) The tract is a unified development.
C. Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
active adult residential community.
(1) Clubhouses, community centers, private outdoor and indoor
recreation facilities, areas, and amenities, provided such uses are
for the exclusive use of the residents of the adult residential
community and their guests, and excluding retail or commercial
uses except retail sales to residents or their guests incidental to a
clubhouse, social hall, or similar use within the community,
159. Editor's Note: Former § 27-143.1, Active adult residential community, added 12-11-2006
by Ord. No. 2656, was repealed 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2701.
§ 27-143 RESERVED § 27-143.2
25:1093
provided that sufficient on-site parking exists to support such
accessory uses pursuant to Article XII of the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) No-impact home-based business.
(3) Administrative offices used for the management of the community.
(4) Uses that are customarily incidental and are subordinate to a
dwelling unit permitted in an adult residential community, provided
that sufficient off-site parking exists to support such uses pursuant
to Article XII of the Zoning Ordinance.
D. Performance standards: dimensional requirements. Section 27-75 and
other dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (SALDO)160 shall be
modified in the following particulars for an adult residence accessory to
an existing assisted living facility:
(1) An adult residence accessory to an existing assisted living facility
community use shall only be permitted on tracts of land consisting
of parcels totaling not less than five acres of land under common
ownership or control, which are contiguous to each other and
proposed to be combined and developed as part of the same adult
residential community.
(2) An adult residence accessory to an existing assisted living facility
shall be accessory to an existing assisted living facility.
(3) An adult residence accessory to an existing assisted living facility
shall observe a rear yard setback of 25 feet unless such facility is
accessory to an existing use which observes a lesser rear yard
setback, in which case the rear yard setback shall be not less than
that observed by the existing use but in no event less than 10 feet.
(4) The minimum density for an adult residence accessory to an
existing assisted living facility shall be at least 1,100 square feet
per dwelling unit.
(5) The maximum building coverage for all buildings shall be 45%.
(6) The minimum separation distance shall be 20 feet between
buildings.
(7) The maximum building height shall be 35 feet as defined herein.
(8) Each single-family unit shall have a minimum of one all-weather
paved off-street parking space for automobiles.
E. Performance standards: miscellaneous.
(1) An adult residence accessory to an existing assisted living facility
community shall require the community owners' association (if
160. Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 27-143.2 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-143.2
25:1094
applicable) to maintain all private streets and other commonly
owned or association owned areas and facilities.
(2) All internal streets (if any) shall be privately owned and
maintained. Alternative decorative curbing may be permitted along
the private streets within the community. An access easement over
all private streets (if any) shall be granted to the Township to allow
access for emergency and other Township purposes.
(3) Each dwelling unit shall be served by public water and public
sanitary sewerage facilities.
(4) To the extent consistent with applicable law, each dwelling unit in
an adult residence accessory to an existing assisted living facility
shall be limited by individual deed restriction and/or global
development covenant, by condition of subdivision and land
development approval, and by any lease: to require occupancy by
at least one person age 55 or older, and to prohibit occupancy for
more than four weeks in any twelve-month time period by anyone
under the age of 19. The Township shall have no obligation
whatsoever to enforce the age restriction provisions set forth
herein, but shall have the right to do so in its sole discretion.
(5) Each parking space shall enter onto an internal street or parking
court system within the community. No parking space for a
dwelling shall enter directly onto a public street in the Township
unless authorized by the Board of Commissioners.
(6) All dwelling units shall be maintained in accordance with
applicable Township regulations.
(7) Wherever there is a conflict between minimum standards or
requirements set forth in this section and those contained in any
other Township ordinance or regulation, this section shall apply.
§ 27-143.2 RESERVED § 27-143.2
25:1095

ARTICLE XII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 27-144. New and existing uses. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
§ 27-145. Design and construction.
A. Adequate off-street parking spaces and loading areas shall be provided
for all new construction and uses.
B. Every parcel or lot used as a public or private parking garage, lot or
loading area and all off-street parking and loading areas shall be
designed, maintained and used in accordance with the provisions as set
forth in this section.
C. All residential uses shall meet the off-street parking and loading
requirements as set forth in this section.
A. All nonparallel parking spaces shall be at least 10 feet wide and 20 feet
long, exclusive of aisle space.
B. All parallel parking spaces shall be at least 10 feet wide and 22 feet
long, exclusive of aisle space.
C. Parking areas shall be designed so that a vehicle may proceed to and
from a parking space without requiring the movement of any other
vehicle.
D. The minimum width of aisles providing access to parking spaces shall
be:
Minimum Aisle Width
[Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
Angle of Parking
One-Way Traffic
(feet)
Two-Way Traffic
(feet)
Parallel 12 22
Less than 45° 17 24
45 to 60° 19 24
60 to 90° 22 25
E. All parking areas shall be:
(1) Adequately graded.
(2) Drained.
(3) Both access driveway and parking areas shall be constructed of a
nonbiodegradable hard surface, including but not limited to
concrete, macadam, paving units or similar commercially available
§ 27-144 RESERVED § 27-145
25:1097
product recognized for vehicle parking and storage. Where curbing
and/or sidewalks are required, the driveway apron must be
installed in accordance to current Township specifications. [Added
10-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2589; amended 11-13-2017 by Ord.
No. 3098]
(4) Maintained annually.
(5) Designed to channel, divert and/or retain stormwater runoff to
prevent or minimize flooding both upstream and downstream and
not adversely affect the rate of flow.
(6) Shall take into consideration the effect of future development
within the watershed in assuring compliance with the provisions of
this section.
F. All parking areas shall be confined within concrete curbing or
guardrails but not anchored bumper blocks.
G. All parking spaces shall be clearly marked.
H. All parking areas, accessways and driveways, except those provided for
single-family detached, semidetached and single-family attached
dwelling units, shall be adequately illuminated during the hours
between sunset and sunrise.
I. All nonresidential off-street parking areas designed for more than five
vehicles and all off-street loading areas shall be landscaped on any side
facing a public right-of-way and shall be screened with a fence or
compact hedge on each side which adjoins or faces premises situate in
any residential zone or premises used for residential, hospital or
institutional purposes. The landscaping shall conform to the
specifications and regulations set forth in Chapter 22, Subdivision and
Land Development, as amended from time to time. Such fence or hedge
shall not be less than four feet in height, no solid portion thereof shall
be more than six feet in height and each shall be maintained in good
condition and provide year round screening in accordance with
§ 27-89B, Buffer strips and screening, except as provided otherwise in
this chapter. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
J. Any and all lighting required by this section and located on a
nonresidential lot shall conform with the provisions of Article X
pertaining to lighting and glare. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657]
K. No part of any parking area for more than five vehicles shall be closer
than 10 feet to any dwelling, school, hospital or other institution for
human care unless the parking area is covered or within a principal
structure.
L. No parking area shall be used for a use that interferes with its
availability as a parking area for passenger vehicles or those
§ 27-145 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-145
25:1098
patronizing the use conducted on the site. Surplus parking may be used
for accessory, temporary functions upon approval by the Zoning Officer,
and upon securing any necessary permits. No overnight parking of any
vehicle or part thereof shall be permitted in any commercial, industrial
or multifamily residential parking area, unless otherwise permitted by
the Township as part of the operation or use. [Amended 8-10-2009 by
Ord. No. 2786]
M. Required off-street parking shall be on the same lot, parcel or tract as
the principal use, or, if permitted by special exception, not to be on the
same lot, parcel or tract, then within 300 feet of the principal use and
within the same zoning district, provided that customers are not
required to traverse an arterial road without the aid of a cross walk,
tunnel or overpass. In the event that parking is allowed off-site, the
applicant shall provide a legally valid lease agreement or other
agreement authorizing the use of the off-site property, it being
expressly understood that at such time as the lease or agreement
terminates, any occupancy of the building permitted by the off-street
off-site parking will either cease and desist, terminate or not be
permitted until such time as the lease or agreement is revived.
[Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
N. Uses legally existing prior to the date of the adoption of this chapter
shall not be subject to the requirements of this chapter. At such time as
the use is changed or expanded, the parking requirements for such
change or expansion shall be met.
O. Accessible parking spaces shall: [Amended 1-12-2009 by Ord. No.
2759]
(1) Be located on the shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent
parking lot to an accessible building entrance. In parking facilities
that do not serve a particular building, accessible parking spaces
shall be located on the shortest route to an accessible pedestrian
entrance to the parking facility. Furthermore, all spaces shall be
located in strict accordance to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code and ANSI A117.1-2003, or the most
recent version thereof.
(2) Conform in all aspects, size, type, identification, loading area and
amount, with the current provisions of the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code, and ANSI A117.1-2003, or most recent version
thereof.
(3) Where more than one parking facility is provide on a site, the
number of parking spaces required to be accessible shall be
calculated separately for each parking facility.
(4) Be established pursuant to the following:
§ 27-145 RESERVED § 27-145
25:1099
Total Number of Parking
Spaces
Required Number of
Handicapped Spaces
1-25 1
26-50 2
51-75 3
76-100 4
101-150 5
151-200 6
201-300 7
301-400 8
401-500 9
501-1000 2% of Total
1001- 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1000
(5) Be designated by above grade signs which shall indicate that the
designated parking space(s) are restricted to use by the physically
handicapped as well as painted markings on the parking space(s)
themselves.
P. Parking areas shall maintain a minimum setback of 10 feet from any
street, alley or highway right-of-way. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord.
No. 1657]
Q. Publicly owned indoor and outdoor recreation facilities shall be exempt
from the off-street parking provisions of this chapter. However, when at
all possible and feasible, every attempt shall be made for the provision
of adequate facilities, with either paved or stoned areas. [Amended
4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1727]
R. All residential off-street parking areas designed for more than 10
vehicles shall be landscaped on any side facing a public right-of-way
and shall be screened on each side which adjoins or faces premises
situate in any residential zone or premises used for residential, hospital
or institutional purposes with a fence or a compact hedge. Such fence
or hedge shall not be less than four feet in height and each shall be
maintained in good condition and provide year-round screening.
[Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
S. All establishments which provide drive-up, drive-through or self-service
facilities shall provide appropriate queuing lanes which shall, at all
times, be adequately marked, but not less than 10 feet in width and
shall not interfere with established parking spaces or aisles. [Amended
4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
T. (Reserved)161
§ 27-145 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-145
25:1100
§ 27-146. Off-street parking standards. [Amended 12-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 1657; 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729; 11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
2050; 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2378]
U. All parking lot markings, directional signs and interior traffic controls
required as part of the original land development or zoning approval
shall be maintained and shall be clearly visible at all times except in
instances of snow, sleet or ice. [Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2949]
A. Off-street parking standards are as follows:
(1) Agricultural uses: one space for each employee.
(2) Automobile, boat, recreational vehicle or manufactured home sales
or rental: one space for every 20 vehicles, boats, or homes on
display, plus one space per employee. [Amended 12-9-2013 by
Ord. No. 2949]
(3) Automotive service stations: one space for each gasoline pump,
plus three spaces for each vehicle bay or similar facility, plus one
space for every two employees.
(4) Banks and financial institutions: one space for every 200 square
feet of building area, plus one space for each 100 square feet of
building area used to serve customers.
(5) Bowling alleys: five spaces for each bowling lane.
(6) Churches, theaters, auditoriums and other places of assembly,
including spectator recreation or cultural facilities: one space for
every three seats or persons to be accommodated.
(6.1) Day-care facilities: [Added 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 2759]
(a) Day-care center/nursery school: one off-street parking space
for every employee, plus one off-street parking space per 12
persons served, designed for safe and convenient drop-off and
pickup.
(b) Family day-care: one off-street parking space designed for safe
and convenient dropoff and pickup, plus one off-street parking
space for nonresident employee.
(c) Group day-care: one off-street parking space for every
nonresident employee, plus one off-street parking space per
eight persons served, designed for safe and convenient dropoff
and pickup.
(7) Education facilities and other schools: one space for every
employee, including teachers and administrators, plus off-street
161. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection T, added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2949, which set forth
requirements for end-of-row spaces in parking areas of newly developed commercial or
industrial lots, was repealed 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 3098.
§ 27-145 RESERVED § 27-146
25:1101
space for loading and unloading of students, plus additional
facilities for student parking at the high school level at the ratio
of five spaces for each classroom and continuing post high school
education facilities at the ratio of 10 spaces for each classroom.
(8) Funeral homes: one space for each family residing on the premises,
plus one space for every two employees (other than residents on
the premises), plus one space for every 50 square feet of aggregate
floor area in the viewing rooms, slumber rooms, parlors and
individual funeral service rooms.
(9) Hospitals: one space for every 1 1/2 beds.
(10) Indoor recreation facilities: one space for every three persons of
total capacity or one space for every 200 square feet of building
area, whichever is greater.
(11) Manufacturing establishments: one space for all vehicles used
directly in the conduct of the business, plus one space for each
employee.
(12) Medical, dental and veterinarian offices and clinics: three spaces
for every doctor, dentist or professional person, plus one space for
every two employees.
(13) Motels, hotels, inns or bed-and-breakfast: four spaces for every
three sleeping rooms.
(14) Nightclubs, taverns, bars or cocktail rooms or such facilities which
provide dance areas: one space for each two seats and one space
for each four square feet of dance area.
(15) Offices and office buildings: one space for every 300 square feet of
building area.
(16) Outdoor recreation facilities: one space for each two potential peak
day users or one space for every three persons of total capacity,
whichever is greater.
(17) Private clubs, social halls and lodges: one space for every 200
square feet of building area.
(18) Residential dwelling: two spaces per dwelling unit.
(19) Restaurants and diners: one space for every three seats (20 inches
of a bench = one seat).
(20) For the purposes of this Subsection A(20) the term "accessible
area" shall mean that area of a retail, service or commercial
establishment to which a member of the public, customer or
potential customer is or may be admitted or have access,
regardless of number or frequency. [Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord.
No. 2553]
§ 27-146 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-146
25:1102
(a) Retail, service and commercial establishments having less than
500,000 square feet of accessible area: one space for each 200
square feet of accessible area.
(b) Retail, service and commercial establishments having 500,000
or more of accessible area: one space for each 250 square feet
of accessible area.
(20.1) Establishments which provide retail sales limited to the
following: furniture, lumber, carpeting, bedding or floor covering:
one space for every 400 square feet of floor area to which a
member of the public, customer or potential customer is or may be
admitted or have access, regardless of number or frequency.
(21) Rooming house: one space for each bed.
(22) Self-service establishment, car washes etc.: one space for each
employee plus one space for each building or structure (such as
vacuum stations).
(23) Wholesale or warehouse establishments and freight trucking
terminals: one space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of
the business plus two spaces for each employee; provided,
however, that the public, customers or potential customers are not
admitted to and do not have access to any portion of the
establishment or terminal.
(24) Elderly Housing: one space for each dwelling unit.
B. When a computation of the number of required spaces results in a
fraction, such fraction shall be rounded to the next highest whole
number.
C. Where a building contains a number of uses or activities that require
off-street parking, the number of spaces required shall be the
aggregate sum of that which would be required for each use
individually.
D. The collective provisions for off-street parking by two or more buildings
or uses located on adjacent industrial or commercial class district lots is
permitted, provided there is a recorded right for the adjacent
properties to continue using those facilities so long as either use or
building continues to exist and that the total parking facilities available
shall not be less than the sum required of the various buildings or uses
computed separately.
E. For the purpose of this article, the number of employees of a use shall
be based on the estimated maximum daily or maximum eight hour shift
requirements in a 24 hour period.
F. Any business with company-owned vehicles or vehicles which are used
directly in the conduct of the business shall provide a minimum of one
space for each such vehicle in addition to spaces required for the
§ 27-146 RESERVED § 27-146
25:1103
§ 27-147. Off-street loading spaces.
parking calculation for that use. [Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No.
2949]
A. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided for the following uses
wherever situate: automobile rental and sales establishments; places of
public assembly; education facilities and schools; funeral homes;
hospitals; manufacturing, wholesale and warehouse establishments;
medical, dental and veterinary clinics; motels, hotels, inns. etc. and
retail, service and commercial establishments.
B. Any and all off-street loading spaces shall have dimensions not less than
12 feet in width, 35 feet in length and 14 feet in height. Off-street
loading spaces shall be provided in addition to off-street parking spaces
and shall not be counted as or considered as off-street parking spaces.
C. Off-street loading spaces shall be designed so as to provide adequate
space for standing, turning, loading and unloading and shall not
interfere with the public use of the streets and alleys.
D. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided according to the following
table:
Floor Area
(Square Feet)
Loading and Unloading Space Required
in Terms of Square Feet of Floor Area
0 to 4,000 None
4,001 to 20,000 1 space
20,001 to 100,000 1 space for the first 20,000 square feet plus 1
space for each additional 20,000 square feet
up to 100,000 square feet
100,001 to 500,000 5 spaces plus 1 space for each 40,000 square
feet in excess of 100,000 square feet up to
500,000 square feet
Over 500,000 15 spaces plus 1 space for each 80,000
square feet in excess of 500,000 square feet
E. The phrase "floor area," as used in Subsection C above, for offices,
trade or service types of uses shall mean the gross floor area used or
intended to be used for service to the public and shall also include areas
occupied by fixtures and equipment used for display or sale of
merchandise. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
F. The Board of Commissioners may, upon their finding that the minimum
parking space requirements as set forth in this chapter appear to
require an excessive number of parking spaces for the particular use
and application which is being proposed, by conditional use, provide lot
owners relief from the minimum parking space requirements as set
§ 27-146 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-147
25:1104
forth in this chapter, provided that the following conditions are
established or provided: [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729]
(1) The area equal to the total number of parking spaces eliminated
shall be preserved and used as green space.
(2) The green space shall be designated on the development,
subdivision or site plan as being reserved for future parking
purposes.
(3) The green space so reserved shall be considered impervious
surface.
(4) The green space shall be contiguous to and be usable as parking
spaces when required.
(5) When, in the sole discretion of the Zoning Officer, the green space
is needed for parking, the landowner shall convert the green space
to usable parking following the design and construction
requirements as set forth in this chapter and Chapter 22,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(6) The relief granted pursuant to this section as well as plan depicting
the green space shall be designated on and attached to any and all
buildings, use or occupancy permits issued to the owner or
developer.
§ 27-147 RESERVED § 27-147
25:1105

ARTICLE XIII
Signs
§ 27-148. Permit.
No sign shall hereafter be erected, constructed, attached, changed,
enlarged or reconstructed without a building or temporary sign permit
being issued therefor by the Zoning Officer pursuant to Article IV, Permits.
§ 27-149. Duration of sign permits.
§ 27-150. General sign regulations.
A. Permits shall be valid until such time as the sign is structurally
changed, enlarged or reconstructed.
B. Permits for advertising signs and billboard shall be renewed annually
on or before March 31.
C. Permits for temporary signs are valid for 20 days and may be issued
only three times within a 12 month period from the date that the first
temporary sign permit was issued. A period of 90 days shall elapse from
the original issuance date to the date of renewal. [Amended
8-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2106]
A. No sign shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, changed,
erected, sited or illuminated so as to:
(1) Cause confusion or hazard to motorists or conflict with any traffic
control signal.
(2) Rotate, flash, have intermittent illumination or beacon-ray
characteristics, other than time and temperature signs.
(3) Adversely affect vision within a clear site triangle.
(4) Be within, project onto or over any street, highway, road or alley
right-of-way.
(5) Be within 25 feet on any side or rear yard of a residentially zoned or
used lot, parcel or tract.
B. All signs shall:
(1) Conform with the provisions of the Outdoor Advertising Act of
1971, as amended and other applicable State and Federal
regulations.
(2) Be constructed of durable material and kept in good repair.
(3) If an electrical sign, be designed, constructed, maintained and used
in strict conformity with the Township electrical code and shall, in
the discretion of the Township Electrical Inspector, be periodically
inspected and shall be certified by a national testing laboratory.
§ 27-148 RESERVED § 27-150
25:1107
§ 27-151. Types of signs.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following types of signs are permitted:
C. The maximum height of any sign is 35 feet above the finished grade
upon which the sign is sited.
D. Establishments which have as a principal business the sale of gas and
fuel for automobiles may display other signs in addition to the size and
type of signs permitted by this section. Such signs shall be limited to
three in number, have a maximum sign display area of 16 square feet
each, and shall not be located closer to a right-of-way than any gasoline
pump. These signs are not subject to the permit requirements of this
section.
A. Accessory use signs.
B. Advertising signs or billboards.
C. Business signs.
D. Freestanding signs.
E. Directional signs.
F. Identification signs.
G. Name signs.
H. Professional signs.
I. Real estate signs.
J. Roof signs.
K. Temporary signs.
L. Wall signs.
M. Under canopy signs. [Amended 9-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2332]
N. LED (light emitting diode) and electronic signs as regulated herein.
LED signs shall include those signs such as an electronically or
electrically controlled public service time, temperature and date sign,
message center or reader board, where different copy changes are
shown on the same lamp bank. Automatic changing signs such as public
service time, temperature and date signs or electronically controlled
message centers are classed as changing signs, not flashing signs.
[Added 5-10-2004 by Ord. No. 2467]
§ 27-150 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-152
25:1108
§ 27-152. Accessory use, name and professional signs. [Amended
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
One single-faced accessory use, name or professional sign is permitted
provided that the sign only indicates the name, profession or activity of the
occupant and has a minimum sign display area of two square feet.
§ 27-153. Advertising signs or billboards.
§ 27-154. Business signs. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
Signs which direct attention to a person, business, profession, occupation
or activity are permitted in any zoning district provided that the sign is
situate on the premises wherein the person, business, profession or activity
is situate and the maximum sign display area is not more than two square
feet.
§ 27-155. Freestanding signs.
A. Advertising signs and billboard shall:
(1) Be located only in commercial or industrial zoning districts.
(2) Be located not less than 2,000 feet from any residential zoning
district.
(3) Be located not less than 200 feet from any building or structures.
(4) Be located not less than 1,200 feet from another advertising sign or
billboard.
(5) Not be erected parallel to or at an angle less than 45° to any rightof-
way;
(6) Not be erected on buildings or within any easement.
(7) Not exceed 35 feet in height above ground and the bottom of the
sign display area shall be sufficiently high so as to provide
adequate traffic visibility.
(8) Be illuminated internally or by reflected light, provided that the
source of light is not directly visible and is arranged so as to cast
light away from adjoining properties.
B. Advertising signs and billboard shall have a maximum sign display area
of 360 square feet per side.
A. Freestanding signs shall:
(1) Have a maximum sign display area equal to 1/2 square foot for each
lineal foot of lot frontage on a road, street or highway (but not
including alleys, private roads or drives) or 75 square feet per side
(150 square feet total), whichever is less; provided, that for
§ 27-152 RESERVED § 27-155
25:1109
§ 27-156. Directional signs.
Directional signs shall:
§ 27-157. Identification signs.
Identification signs for schools, churches, hospitals, clubs, lodges, farms,
estates or similar uses and structures shall be limited to a single faced sign
having a maximum sign display area of 32 square feet.
§ 27-158. Real estate signs.
shopping centers or shopping malls constructed on tracts of land
containing 20 acres or more there may be one freestanding sign
with a maximum of 120 square feet per side, to identify the
shopping center or shopping mall and some or all of the tenants
in the shopping center or mall. [Amended 4-8-1991 by Ord. No.
1729]
(2) Meet all rear and side yard requirements for the zoning district in
which the sign is situate.
(3) Not be located less than 25 feet from any right-of-way.
(4) Not be located within any clear site triangle.
(5) Not exceed 35 feet in height.
B. Only one freestanding sign may be erected to service one lot,
regardless of the number of businesses conducted on said lot.
A. Have a maximum sign display area of three square feet.
B. Not contain any advertising.
C. Not be included in the total sign display area permitted for a residence
or a building.
D. Not be located in any right-of-way.
A. Real estate signs shall:
(1) Include signs advertising the sale or lease of a building, structure,
lot, parcel or tract of land.
(2) Have a maximum sign display area of 12 square feet per side.
(3) When indicating the location of or direction to a building, structure,
lot, parcel or tract of land being developed, have a maximum sign
display area of 24 square feet per side.
(4) When denoting an "open house," be permitted only during the time
period for which the house is open for inspection.
§ 27-155 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-158
25:1110
§ 27-159. Roof signs.
§ 27-160. Temporary signs. [Amended 8-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2106]
§ 27-161. Wall signs.
(5) Not be located in any right-of-way.
(6) Not obstruct traffic visibility at driveways or intersections.
B. Any one real estate-land for sale sign shall be permitted along any lot,
parcel or tract fronting a road, highway or street and not more than two
such signs per development.
A. Roof signs may be used instead of a freestanding sign.
B. Roof signs shall:
(1) Have the same maximum sign display area as a freestanding sign;
maximum sign display areas shall be computed in the same manner
as for freestanding signs.
(2) Not project beyond the building facade except that lighting may
project a maximum of four feet.
A. Temporary signs shall have a maximum sign display area of 32 square
feet per side, with a maximum sign display area of 64 square feet for a
two-sided sign; and shall not be located closer than 10 feet from any
right-of-way. [Amended 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 2840]
B. Election and campaign signs and signs advertising special events for
charitable organizations shall be removed within 15 days after the
election or event for which such signs were posted.
C. Temporary signs must be totally removed at the end of the permit
period. This means the entire sign structure shall be remove, simply
removing letters from a readerboard sign face will not constitute
removal of a sign.
D. Temporary LED or electronic signs shall limit the sign face change to a
maximum of four changes per hour/once every 15 minutes. The
message shall not include any video. Such signs shall adhere to all other
provisions of this section and all others that pertain to temporary signs.
[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 2840]
A. Wall signs shall:
(1) Be limited to one per business establishment and one per tenant,
except that two wall signs may be used if there is no freestanding
sign and the business establishment fronts on two streets.
§ 27-158 RESERVED § 27-161
25:1111
§ 27-162. Nonconforming signs.
Nonconforming signs shall be regulated as nonconforming structures
pursuant to § 27-106.
§ 27-163. Exemptions. [Amended 6-14-1993 by Ord. No. 1839]
(2) Have a maximum sign display area of either two square feet per
lineal foot of building frontage or 150 square feet, whichever is
less.
(3) Not project more than 15 inches from any wall.
B. The maximum sign display area of a wall sign shall be computed by
drawing a rectangle around the perimeter of the attached letters or
symbols to form an enclosure. Such enclosure is deemed the sign
display area.
A. Public notices by governmental bodies, traffic control signs and other
official signs and notices are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
B. No permit shall be required for:
(1) Signs advertising the sale or lease of real estate having a maximum
sign display area of 12 square feet or less.
(2) Signs identifying any school, church or hospital, provided said
signs are located on the premises and have a maximum sign display
area of 32 square feet.
(3) Signs directing individuals to a temporary activity or point of
interest, provided that the sign is located upon the premises and
has a maximum sign display area of two square feet or less.
C. Advertising signs on public property owned by Whitehall Township.
(1) Signs not exceeding four feet by eight feet may be placed at
locations owned by Whitehall Township or by a Whitehall Township
recognized park or playground association for a permit duration of
one year under the following established standards:
(a) The signs must be approved by the Director of Recreation for
appropriateness in a location frequented by children and
physical placement.
(b) The signs shall be painted on or adhered to suitable material
such as plywood or other durable material kept in good repair.
(c) The signs shall not be mounted with the top edge of the sign
higher than five feet above ground level. Signs may be
attached to fences or walls so long as they do not obstruct clear
site triangles or create other safety hazards.
§ 27-161 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-163
25:1112
§ 27-164. Under canopy signs. [Amended 9-10-2001 by Ord. No.
2332]
A sign which is mounted entirely under a canopy or the roof of a covered
walkway. Under canopy signs shall:
§ 27-165. Light emitting diode (LED) and electronic display signs.
[Added 5-10-2004 by Ord. No. 2467]
LED and electronic display signs shall:
(d) The signs must be kept in good repair and shall be removed by
the Township, Recreation Association or Playground
Association in the event that they fall into a state of disrepair
or create a danger. Sign faces shall be mounted toward the
park or playing field areas, and the backs of all signs, if visible,
shall be of a uniform color as determined by the Township or
the recognized park or Playground Association.
A. Be limited to one per business establishment and mounted entirely
under a canopy or the roof of a covered walkway;
B. Have a minimum sign display area of three square feet; and
C. Maintain a minimum clear vertical distance above any sidewalk or
pedestrian way of eight feet.
A. Be calculated as part of the overall permitted sign display area, and
shall be limited to the same square footage maximums as all other
signs.
B. Only be permitted in C-2 and C-2A Zoning Districts.
C. Be located not less than 50 feet from any street, highway, or other
public right-of-way (this includes wall signs); and shall be not less than
10 feet from any side property line.
D. Be located not less than 1,000 feet from any residence or residential
zoning district.
E. Limit the frequency of display changes to four per hour/every 15
minutes.
F. Preclude the placement of any temporary sign on the premises,
including but not limited to banners, readerboard type signs and any
other temporary display.
G. Illuminated signs which indicate the time, temperature, date, or other
public service information shall not be subject to the provisions of
Subsections B through F herein.
§ 27-163 RESERVED § 27-165
25:1113

ARTICLE XIV
Floodplain Districts and Flood-Prone Areas
[Amended 9-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1651; 12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1657; 5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 2310; 9-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2745;
5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 3010]
§ 27-166. Intent.
The intent of this article is to:
§ 27-167. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or development
anywhere within Whitehall Township unless a permit has been obtained
from the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 27-168. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in
effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this article, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 27-169. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the article, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this article are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 27-170. Warning; disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this article is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
§ 27-166 RESERVED § 27-170
25:1115
§ 27-171. Administration.
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This article does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This article shall not create liability on the part of the Whitehall
Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
A. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
(1) The Whitehall Township Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to
administer and enforce this article and is referred to herein as the
"Floodplain Administrator." The Floodplain Administrator may:
(a) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these
regulations;
(b) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these
regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners,
inspectors, and other employees; or
(c) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with
another agency or private sector entity to administer specific
provisions of these regulations.
(2) Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity
shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to
the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR
59.22.
(3) In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the
Floodplain Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Mayor.
B. Permits required. A permit shall be required before any construction or
development is undertaken within any area of Whitehall Township.
C. Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
(1) The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has
been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be
in conformance with the requirements of this article and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator
shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other
necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
§ 27-170 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-171
25:1116
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended),162 the
Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended);163 the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394,
as amended);164 and the United States Clean Water Act, Section
404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this
determination has been made.
(3) During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or
other authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine
that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable
municipal laws and ordinances. He/she shall make as many
inspections during and upon completion of the work as are
necessary.
(4) In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises
or development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation
of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the
provisions of this article.
(5) In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work
does not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws
and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator
shall revoke the permit and report such fact to the Whitehall
Township Board of Commissioners for whatever action it considers
necessary.
(6) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all
records associated with the requirements of this article, including,
but not limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting,
inspection and enforcement.
(7) The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for
submitting a biennial report to FEMA concerning community
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(8) The responsibility, authority and means to implement the
commitments of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated
from the person identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies
with the person identified in the Floodplain Ordinance as the
Floodplain Administrator/Manager.
(9) The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of
the 34 Pa. Code and the 2009 International Building Code and the
2009 International Residential Code or latest revisions thereof.
162. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1.
163. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
164. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 27-171 RESERVED § 27-171
25:1117
D. Application procedures and requirements.
(1) Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by Whitehall Township.
Such application shall contain the following:
(a) Name and address of the applicant.
(b) Name and address of the owner of the land on which the
proposed construction is to occur.
(c) Name and address of the contractor.
(d) Site location, including address.
(e) Listing of other permits required.
(f) Brief description of the proposed work and estimated cost,
including a breakout of flood-related cost and the market value
of the building before the flood damage occurred where
appropriate.
(g) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
(2) If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient
detail and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to
determine that:
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage and conform to the requirements of this article
and all other applicable codes and ordinances;
(b) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage;
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards;
(d) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement;
(e) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(f) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been
used; and
(g) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
§ 27-171 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-171
25:1118
(3) Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any
other pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(a) A completed permit application form.
(b) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
[1] North arrow, scale, and date;
[2] Topographic contour lines, if available;
[3] The location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, and other improvements, including the location
of any existing or proposed subdivision and development;
[4] The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
[5] The location of any existing bodies of water or
watercourses, identified floodplain areas, and, if available,
information pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of
water, including direction and velocities.
(c) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
[1] The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed
building based upon North American Vertical Datum of
1988;
[2] The elevation of the base flood;
[3] Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34
Pa. Code, the 2009 International Building Code or the
2009 International Residential Code.
(d) The following data and documentation:
[1] Detailed information concerning any proposed
floodproofing measures and corresponding elevations.
[2] If available, information concerning flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other
factors associated with a base flood; and Floodway Area
[See § 27-172B(1).] when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the base
flood elevation at any point.
[3] Documentation, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of
any proposed development within an AE Area/District
without floodway [See § 27-172B(2).] when combined with
§ 27-171 RESERVED § 27-171
25:1119
all other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any
point within the community.
[4] A document, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, which states that the proposed
construction or development has been adequately
designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces associated with the base flood. Such
statement shall include a description of the type and
extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
[5] Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 27-173C(6), Storage, and § 27-173D, Development which
may endanger human life, including:
[a] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in § 27-173C(6) and D which
are intended to be used, produced, stored or
otherwise maintained on site.
[b] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or
spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed
in § 27-173D during a base flood.
[6] The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Planning Module for Land
Development.
[7] Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan
meeting the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Protection to implement and maintain
erosion and sedimentation control.
(4) Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to
the municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
E. Review of application by others. A copy of all plans and applications for
any proposed construction or development in any identified floodplain
area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Floodplain
Administrator to any other appropriate agencies and/or individuals
(e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal Engineer, etc.) for review and
comment.
F. Changes. After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain
Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application,
permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted
with the application without the written consent or approval of the
§ 27-171 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-171
25:1120
Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any such change shall be in
writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain
Administrator for consideration.
G. Placards. In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
issue a placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the
time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of
the permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain
Administrator.
H. Start of construction.
(1) Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin
within 180 days after the date of issuance of the development
permit. Work shall also be completed within 12 months after the
date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a
time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The issuance of a development permit does not refer
to the zoning approval.
(2) The actual start of construction means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it
include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages
or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
(3) Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is
submitted by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and
reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such
a request and the original permit is compliant with the ordinance
and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the extension is granted.
I. Enforcement.
(1) Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized municipal representative determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this article, or of any regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall give notice of such
alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
§ 27-171 RESERVED § 27-171
25:1121
(a) Be in writing.
(b) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
(c) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for
the performance of any act it requires.
(d) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case
may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall
be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by
any other method authorized or required by the laws of this
state.
(e) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will
effect compliance with the provisions of this article.
(2) Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this article or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a
fine to Whitehall Township of not less than $25 nor more than $600,
plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all
other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for
the proper enforcement of this article. The imposition of a fine or
penalty for any violation of or noncompliance with this article shall
not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue.
All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any
development initiated or any structure or building constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated in noncompliance
with this article may be declared by the Board of Commissioners to
be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
J. Appeals.
(1) Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of
this article, may appeal to the Whitehall Township Zoning Hearing
Board. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after
the decision, determination or action of the Floodplain
Administrator.
(2) Upon receipt of such appeal the Whitehall Township Zoning
Hearing Board shall consider the appeal in accordance with the
Municipal Planning Code and any other local ordinance.
(3) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Whitehall Township
Zoning Hearing Board may seek relief therefrom by appeal to
court, as provided by the laws of this state, including the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.165
§ 27-171 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-172
25:1122
§ 27-172. Identification of floodplain areas.
A. Identification.
(1) The identified floodplain area shall be:
(a) Any areas of Whitehall Township classified as Special Flood
Hazard Areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and
the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), dated
July 16, 2004, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision
thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the
Flood Insurance Study; and
(b) Any community identified flood hazard areas.
(2) The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent
revisions and amendments, are hereby adopted by Whitehall
Township and declared to be a part of this article.
B. Description and special requirements of identified floodplain areas. The
identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
(1) The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and
the FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water
surface elevation by more than one foot at any point. This term
shall also include Floodway Areas which have been identified in
other available studies or sources of information for those special
flood hazard areas where no floodway has been identified in the FIS
and FIRM.
(a) Within any Floodway Area, no encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development shall be permitted unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b) Within any Floodway Area, no new construction or
development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base
flood elevations have been provided.
165. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 27-172 RESERVED § 27-172
25:1123
(a) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS
prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been
provided and a floodway has been delineated.
(b) AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an
AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA
for which base flood elevations have been provided, but no
floodway has been determined.
[1] No permit shall be granted for any construction,
development, use, or activity within any AE Area/District
without floodway unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development would not,
together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any
point.
[2] No new construction or development shall be located
within the area measured 50 feet landward from the topof-
bank of any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit
is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
(3) A Area/District.
(a) The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for
which no base flood elevations have been provided. For these
areas, elevation and floodway information from other federal,
state, or other acceptable sources shall be used when
available. Where other acceptable information is not available,
the base flood elevation shall be determined by using the
elevation of a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain
area which is nearest the construction site.
(b) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant
to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall
be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
(4) The AO and AH Area/District shall be those areas identified as
Zones AO and AH on the FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are
subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance shallow
flooding where average depths are between one and three feet. In
Zones AO and AH, drainage paths shall be established to guide
floodwaters around and away from structures on slopes.
§ 27-172 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-172
25:1124
§ 27-173. Technical provisions.
(5) Community identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas
where Whitehall Township has identified local flood hazard or
ponding areas, as delineated and adopted on a Local Flood Hazard
Map using best available topographic data and locally derived
information such as flood of record, historic high water marks, soils
or approximate study methodologies.
C. Changes in identification of area. The identified floodplain area may be
revised or modified by the Whitehall Township Board of Commissioners
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained
from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such information becomes available, a community
shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by
submitting technical or scientific data. See § 27-173B for situations
where FEMA notification is required.
D. Boundary disputes. Should a dispute concerning any identified
floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be made by
Whitehall Township and any party aggrieved by this decision or
determination may appeal to the Whitehall Township Zoning Hearing
Board. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
E. Jurisdictional boundary changes. Prior to development occurring in
areas where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are
proposed or have occurred, the community shall review flood hazard
data affecting the lands subject to boundary changes. The community
shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to
annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those
in 44 CFR 60.3.
A. General.
(1) Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(a) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities
which may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have
first been obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
(b) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the
activity will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
(c) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development shall be notified by the
§ 27-172 RESERVED § 27-173
25:1125
applicant prior to any alteration or relocation of any
watercourse.
(2) If the Township proposes to permit the following encroachments:
any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones A1-30
and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise
of more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or
relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing
culverts and bridges), the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12)
apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur. Upon receipt of the
Administrator's conditional approval of map change and prior to
approving the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide
evidence to FEMA of the adoption of floodplain management
ordinances incorporating the increased base flood elevations and/
or revised floodway reflecting the post-project condition. Upon
completion of the proposed encroachments, a community shall
provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR 67.
(3) Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed
within any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict
compliance with the provisions contained in this article and any
other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
B. Elevation and floodproofing requirements. Within any identified
floodplain area any new construction or substantial improvements shall
be prohibited. If a variance is obtained for new construction or
substantial improvements in the identified floodplain area in
accordance with the criteria contained herein, then the following
provisions apply:
(1) Residential structures.
(a) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or
substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated up to or above the regulatory flood
elevation.
(b) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified
on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to
or above the regulatory flood elevation determined in
accordance with this article.
(c) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
§ 27-173 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-173
25:1126
(d) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in
the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most
recent revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized
where they are more restrictive.
(2) Nonresidential structures.
(a) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or
substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to or
above the regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and
constructed so that the space enclosed below the regulatory
flood elevation:
[1] Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
and
[2] Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy.
(b) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified
on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
completely floodproofed up to or above the regulatory flood
elevation determined in accordance with § 27-172B(3) of this
article.
(c) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the
depth number specified on the FIRM.
(d) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the WI or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" published by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some
other equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect which states
that the proposed design and methods of construction are in
conformance with the above-referenced standards.
(e) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in
the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most
recent revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code
§ 27-173 RESERVED § 27-173
25:1127
(Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized
where they are more restrictive.
(3) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) which will be used solely for the parking of a
vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other
than a basement shall be designed and constructed to allow for
the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "fully
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
(b) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this article, must comply with all ordinance
requirements that do not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure. Documentation that a specific
ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of
Historic places must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior
or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from
ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
(5) Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building
need not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall
comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
(a) The structure shall not be designed or used for human
habitation, but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to
the storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the
principal use or activity.
(b) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(c) The structure will have a low damage potential.
§ 27-173 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-173
25:1128
(d) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(e) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the
regulatory flood elevation.
(f) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(g) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(h) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed
to automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for
the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. Design and construction standards. The following minimum standards
shall apply for all construction and development proposed within any
identified floodplain area:
(1) Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(d) Be no steeper than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal
unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are
submitted to and approved by the Floodplain Administrator;
and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
§ 27-173 RESERVED § 27-173
25:1129
(2) Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner.
The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
(3) Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(a) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer
facilities and systems shall be located, designed and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the
infiltration of floodwaters.
(b) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(c) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located
within any identified floodplain area except in strict
compliance with all state and local regulations for such
systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be located so
as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a
flood.
(d) The design and construction provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code and FEMA No. 348, Protecting Building
Utilities from Flood Damages and the International Private
Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
(4) Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
(5) Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
(6) Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life,
and not listed in § 27-173D, Development which may endanger
human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood
elevation or floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
(7) Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
(8) Anchoring.
(a) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
§ 27-173 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-173
25:1130
(b) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
(9) Floors, walls and ceilings.
(a) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the
flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing
structural damage to the building.
(b) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(c) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed of materials that are waterresistant
and will withstand inundation.
(d) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other
water-resistant material.
(10) Paints and adhesives.
(a) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(b) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(c) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a
marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
(11) Electrical components.
(a) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the base flood elevation.
(b) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
(12) Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and
ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility
equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory
flood elevation.
(13) Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
§ 27-173 RESERVED § 27-173
25:1131
(14) Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through
405), as amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall
apply to the above and other sections and subsections of this
article, to the extent that they are more restrictive and supplement
the requirements of this article.
(a) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402,
and Appendix G.
(b) International Residential Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and
Appendix J.
D. Development which may endanger human life.
(1) In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management
Act,166 and the regulations adopted by the Department of
Community and Economic Development as required by the Act, any
new or substantially improved structure which: will be used for the
production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials
or substances; or will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other
comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances on the premises; or will involve the production, storage,
or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject to
the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following is a list of materials and substances that
are considered dangerous to human life:
(a) Acetone.
(b) Ammonia.
(c) Benzene.
(d) Calcium carbide.
(e) Carbon disulfide.
(f) Celluloid.
(g) Chlorine.
(h) Hydrochloric acid.
(i) Hydrocyanic acid.
(j) Magnesium.
(k) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
166. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 27-173 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-173
25:1132
(l) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(m) Phosphorus.
(n) Potassium.
(o) Sodium.
(p) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(q) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides).
(r) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
(2) Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in Subsection D(1),
above, shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
(3) Within any Floodway Area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection D(1), above, shall be prohibited. Where permitted
within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved residential structure of the kind described in Subsection
D(1), above, shall be elevated to remain completely dry up to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation and built in accordance
with §§ 27-173A, B and C.
(4) Nonresidential structures.
(a) Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind
described in Subsection D(1), above, shall be built in
accordance with § 27-173A, B and C, including:
[1] Elevated or designed and constructed to remain
completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation; and
[2] Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or
activity during the course of a base flood.
(b) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry
floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing
Regulations (United States Army Corps of Engineers, June
1972, as amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent
watertight standard.
E. Special requirements for subdivisions and development. All subdivision
proposals and development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at
least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain areas
§ 27-173 RESERVED § 27-173
25:1133
where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base
flood elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be
prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format required by
FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision and Letter of Map
Revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
F. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
(1) Within any identified floodplain area manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria
in § 27-176, then the following provisions apply:
(2) Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all
manufactured homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(a) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(b) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(c) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
(d) Have all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump,
elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
(3) Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance
with the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009
International Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for
Manufactured Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision
thereto and 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405 shall apply.
(4) Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 International Building Code, and the 2009 International
Residential Code or the most recent revisions thereto and 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot be
provided or were not established for the proposed unit(s)
installation.
G. Special requirements for recreational vehicles. Within any identified
floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be prohibited. If a variance
is obtained in accordance with the criteria in § 27-176, then the
following provisions apply:
(1) Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
§ 27-173 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-173
25:1134
§ 27-174. Prohibited activities.
General. In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by
the Department of Community and Economic Development to implement
the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,167 the following activities
shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
§ 27-175. Existing structures in identified floodplain areas.
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in this
article.
A. The commencement of any of the following activities or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used or
intended to be used for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of or any construction of a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. Existing structures. The provisions of this article do not require any
changes or improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures.
However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the
provisions of Subsection B shall apply.
B. Improvements. The following provisions shall apply whenever any
improvement is made to an existing structure located within any
identified floodplain area:
(1) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any
increase in BFE.
(2) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within an AE Area/District without floodway that would,
together with all other existing and anticipated development,
increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
(3) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more
of its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and
167. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 27-173 RESERVED § 27-175
25:1135
§ 27-176. Variances.
shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of
this article.
(4) The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 International Building Code and
the 2009 International Residential Code.
(5) Within any Floodway Area/District, no new construction or
development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(6) Within any AE Area/District without floodway, no new construction
or development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
A. General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this article
would result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder,
developer or landowner, the Whitehall Township Zoning Hearing Board
may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the
requirements.
B. Variance procedures and conditions. Requests for variances shall be
considered by the Whitehall Township Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the procedures contained herein and the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any Floodway Area/District that would cause
any increase in the BFE.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that
would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
(3) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated as prohibited activities or to development which may
endanger human life.
(4) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(5) In granting any variance, the Whitehall Township Zoning Hearing
Board shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards
it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this article.
§ 27-175 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-176
25:1136
§ 27-177. Definitions.
(6) Whenever a variance is granted, the Whitehall Township Zoning
Hearing Board shall notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(7) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Whitehall Township
Zoning Hearing Board shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(8) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Township. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual
report to the FEMA.
C. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
A. General. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in
this article shall be interpreted so as to give this article its most
reasonable application.
B. Specific definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundredyear
flood" or one-percent-annual-chance flood).
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a
base flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually
expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).
§ 27-176 RESERVED § 27-177
25:1137
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground
level on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to the construction,
reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings
or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets
and other paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining;
dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and
the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles,
the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map,
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject
to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream,
river or watercourse and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
§ 27-177 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-177
25:1138
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — An umbrella term that includes
all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study, but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See § 27-172A and B for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the
lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and
built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this article.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation that have been certified
either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 27-177 RESERVED § 27-177
25:1139
and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but
not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof,
the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement
of parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall
minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader,
gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or
other work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective start date of this floodplain
management ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures. Any construction started after February 13, 1978, and
before the effective start date of this floodplain management ordinance
is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued,
provided that the start of construction was within 180 days of permit
issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or
after the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated
February 13, 1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required
to be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance
Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974,
or before the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
dated February 13, 1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would not
be required to be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
§ 27-177 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-177
25:1140
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure
on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails and new manufactured home parks/subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all, or a designated portion of a floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
other proposed new development and means the date the permit was
issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days after the date of the permit and
shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the
permit unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns,
or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
(1) Built on a single chassis.
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections.
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck.
(3)
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
(4)
§ 27-177 RESERVED § 27-177
25:1141
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs, or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any
project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building
code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable
to new construction in all municipalities whether administered by the
municipality, a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry.
Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted
the International Residential Building Code (IRC) and the International
Building Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction standard
applicable with the state floodplain construction. For coordination
purposes, references to the above are made specifically to various
sections of the International Residential Code and the International
Building Code.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4)
or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
§ 27-177 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-178
25:1142
§ 27-178. through § 27-181. (Reserved)
§ 27-178 RESERVED § 27-178
25:1143

ARTICLE XV
Airport Districts
§ 27-182. Purpose. [Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
This article is enacted to insure and promote the health, safety and welfare
of the general public and property in and about the Lehigh Valley
International Airport, to protect the users, facilities and services of the
airport, to prevent hazardous conditions to the users, facilities or services
of the airport and to eliminate, remove, mitigate, mark or light any existing
hazard which cannot be completely abated.
§ 27-183. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all lands within the Township
that are shown on the Official Zoning Map as being located within the
boundaries of any airport zone.
§ 27-184. Airport zones, general.
Airport zones shall be overlays to the existing zoning districts as shown
on the Official Zoning Map and, as such, the provisions of this section
shall supplement any and all provisions of any zoning district of which an
airport zone is a part. If there is any conflict between the provisions or
requirements of this article or those of any other zoning district, the more
restrictive provision shall be applied.
§ 27-185. Airport zones, specific.
The airport zones as shown on the Official Zoning Map are:
§ 27-186. Height limitations.
A. Conical Surface Zone.
B. Horizontal Surface Zone. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
C. Precision Instrument Runway Approach Surface Zone.
D. Runway Larger Than Utility Visual Approach Surface Zone.
E. Runway Larger Than Utility With a Visibility Minimum As Low As 3/4
Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone.
F. Runway Larger Than Utility With a Visibility Minimum Greater Than
Three-quarters of a Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface
Zone.
G. Transitional Surface Zone.
H. Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone.
I. Utility Runway Visual Approach Surface Zone.
§ 27-182 RESERVED § 27-186
25:1145
A. No building, structure or portion thereof or any other obstruction shall
be erected, altered or maintained to enter into or interfere with the
airport zones and their associated height designations. [Amended
12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
B. The height designations for each zone are as follows:
(1) Conical Surface Zone. One hundred fifty feet above the airport
elevation at the intersection with the horizontal zone and extending
thereafter 20 feet horizontal for each foot of vertical elevation
extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation.
(2) Horizontal Surface Zone. One hundred fifty feet above the airport
elevation.
(3) Precision Instrument Runway Approach Surface Zone. Beginning
at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and
extending 50 feet horizontal for each one foot vertical for a
distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway center line and
thereafter 40 feet horizontal for each foot vertical to a horizontal
distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
(4) Runway Larger Than Utility Visual Approach Surface Zone.
Beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary
surface and extending 20 feet horizontally for each foot vertical to a
distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
(5) Runway Larger Than Utility With a Visibility as Low as Three-
Quarters of a Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface
Zone. Beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and extending 34 feet horizontally for each one
foot vertical extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along
the extended runway center line. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord.
No. 1657]
(6) Runway Larger Than Utility With a Visibility Minimum Greater
Than Three-Quarters of a Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach
Surface Zone. Beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as
the primary surface and extending 34 feet horizontally for each one
foot vertical extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along
the extended runway center line. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord.
No. 1657]
(7) Transitional Surface Zone. Beginning at the sides of and at the
same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface
extending seven feet horizontal for each foot vertical and extending
to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to
the intersection with the conical surface. In addition to the
foregoing, when an airport has a precision instrument runway
approach zone, there are established height limits sloping seven
feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at
the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to
§ 27-186 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-186
25:1146
§ 27-187. Exceptions.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as to prohibit the construction or
maintenance of any building, structure or part thereof or obstruction at a
maximum height of 35 feet.
§ 27-188. Use restrictions.
No use may be made of land, buildings, structures, objects or water within
any zone so as to:
§ 27-189. Nonconforming uses.
where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision
instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical
zone, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward
for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same
elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal
distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90° angles to the extended
runway center line. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
(8) Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone.
Beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary
surface and extending 20 feet horizontal for each foot vertical a
distance of 5,000 along the extended runway center line.
(9) Utility Runway Visual Approach Surface Zone. Beginning at the end
of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending
20 feet horizontal for each foot vertical a distance of 5,000 along
the extended runway center line.
C. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond
the conical zone, the height limit shall begin at the side of and at the
same elevation as the approach surface extending seven feet horizontal
for each foot vertical extending a distance of 5,000 feet horizontal
measured at 90° angles to the extended runway center line.
A. Create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft.
B. Make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and
others.
C. Result in glare to pilots using the airport.
D. Impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport.
E. Create bird strike hazards.
F. Endanger or interfere with the landing and taking off or maneuvering of
aircraft.
§ 27-186 RESERVED § 27-189
25:1147
§ 27-190. Airport zone permits.
A. Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the removal,
alteration or change of any existing building, structure or part thereof
or obstruction not conforming to the regulations as herein set forth.
B. In the event any building, structure or part thereof or obstruction shall
violate and/or exceed the limitations as hereinbefore set forth and is
deemed to be a nonconforming use, the owner or lessee thereof shall
permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of any
marker or light that shall be deemed necessary by the airport authority
to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the presence of
such building, structure, part thereof or obstruction.
C. Whenever a nonconforming use, building, structure or obstruction has
been abandoned or voluntarily razed, legally condemned, structurally
changed, damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, flood or other
phenomenon, it may not be restored, reconstructed or used as before,
except in strict compliance with the provisions of this section, provided
that such restoration; reconstruction or use be started within a six
month period of the initial damage and is completed within a
reasonable period of time thereafter. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord.
No. 1657]
A. No land, building, structure, part thereof, or obstruction shall be
established or changed in any of the airport zones unless a permit
therefor has been obtained from the Zoning Officer.
B. Within the horizontal and conical zones, a permit shall not be required
for any building, structure, part thereof or obstruction less than 75 feet
in height, provided that such building, structure, part thereof or
obstruction does not exceed the height limitations as prescribed
hereinbefore.
C. Within the approach zones, and at a horizontal distance not less than
4,200 feet from each end of a runway, a permit shall not be required for
any building, structure, part thereof or obstruction less than 75 feet in
height, provided that such building, structure, part thereof or
obstruction does not exceed the height limitations as prescribed
hereinbefore.
D. Within the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone,
a permit shall not be required for any building, structure, part thereof
or obstruction less than 75 feet in height, provided that such building,
structure, part thereof or obstruction does not exceed above the height
limitations as prescribed hereinbefore.
E. Permits shall be issued by the Zoning Officer under the same terms and
conditions as found in Article IV, Permits.
§ 27-189 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-191
25:1148
§ 27-191. Existing uses.
No use, building, structure, part thereof or obstruction shall be permitted
to be altered or changed to become nonconforming or more nonconforming
in height.
§ 27-192. Variances.
Variances to the provisions of this section may be granted by the Zoning
Hearing Board. The Board may attach reasonable conditions and safeguards
as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter, the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Federal government.
In addition to the requirements as established by this chapter and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, the following shall also be
considered and required:
§ 27-193. Notice to Department of Transportation.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, the Zoning Officer or Zoning
Hearing Board which decides to grant a permit or variance under this
section shall notify the Department of Transportation of the decision. Said
notice shall be in writing and shall be sent so as to reach the Department at
least 10 days before the date upon which the decision is to issue. A Zoning
Hearing Board Opinion (written decision) shall be mailed to the Department
10 days prior to being mailed to the applicant, but in no case shall the
appropriate notice be sent to the applicant later than 45 days from the last
hearing.
A. A determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the
effect of the proposal on the operation of their navigation facilities and
the safe efficient use of navigable air space.
B. Comments of the Airport Manager. A copy of the application shall be
furnished to the airport manager for advice as to the aeronautical
effects of the proposal. The airport manager shall respond within 15
days after receipt of the application. Failure of the manager to respond
shall create a presumption that the airport manager has approved the
proposal. An unfavorable report by the airport manager or failure to
respond shall not bind the Board, but may be a factor in its decision.
§ 27-191 RESERVED § 27-193
25:1149

ARTICLE XVI
Definitions of Words
§ 27-194. Definitions. [Amended 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1657;
4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1729; 10-13-1997 by Ord. No. 2045; 2-9-1998
by Ord. No. 2074; 2-8-1999 by Ord. No. 2141; 3-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2219; 3-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2220; 3-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2222;
10-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2264; 5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 2310; 6-11-2001
by Ord. No. 2322; 9-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2333; 9-10-2002 by Ord.
No. 2377]
A. The following words and phrases shall have the meanings hereinafter
indicated, unless the text clearly states an alternative or different
meaning.
ACCESS POINT — One combined ingress/egress point, or one clearly
defined ingress point and one clearly defined egress point, separated
by an appropriate distance.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure
detached from and subordinate to the main building situate on the same
lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to the main building.
The term "accessory building or structure" shall include private
garages, garden sheds, barns, playhouses, greenhouses, swimming
pools and tennis courts.
ACCESSORY USE — A use separated from, subordinate to and
customarily incidental to the use of the main building and situate
on the same lot, including, but not limited to garages, sheds, pools,
dog houses, satellite dishes, noncommercial greenhouses, home
occupations and other similar uses. 168
ADULT BOOK STORE — An establishment which has a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade, books, magazines, photographs,
pamphlets, newspapers, storypapers, comic books, writings or other
materials which emphasize matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas as described
hereinafter.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY — An establishment including, but
not limited to, a book or video store, massage parlor, retail or wholesale
facility, eating or drinking facility, whether commercial or nonprofit,
which provides entertainment primarily exhibiting or dealing with, but
not limited to specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual
activities.
ADULT MOVIE/PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building or outdoor
theater used for the presentation of motion pictures, slides or video
tapes, disks or other similarly reproduced images distinguished or
168. Editor's Note: The former definition of "active adult residential community," added
12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 2656, which immediately followed, was repealed 12-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 2701.
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1151
characterized by an emphasis on matter which depicts, describes or
relates to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas,"
as hereinafter defined, for observation by patrons.
ADULT RESIDENCES ACCESSORY TO AN EXISTING ASSISTED
LIVING FACILITY — A residential development that is age-qualified in
accordance with federal regulations as provided in § 27-141, and which
involves a unified development operated under common rules, with
or without private internal streets, and landscaped areas along public
streets.[Added 8-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2692]
ADVERTISING SIGN — See "billboard."
AGRICULTURE — The use of a lot, parcel or tract of land for the raising
or storage of field and tree crops. The term "agriculture" does not
include animal husbandry, riding academies, liveries, boarding stables,
commercial forestry, dog kennels or the raising of fur-bearing animals.
AIRPORT OR AIRSTRIP — A lot, parcel or tract of land used for the
taking off and landing of airplanes, jets, ultra-light aircraft or other
similar aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are designed,
maintained or used for airplane support facilities such as maintenance,
refueling and parking facilities.
AIRPORT ELEVATION — An elevation established at 403 feet above the
mean sea level.
ALLEY — A public or private thoroughfare, with a right-of-way of 24
feet or less which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting
property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
ALLUVIAL SOILS — Water deposited soils including:
PRIVATE USE AIRPORT OR AIRSTRIP — An airport or airstrip that
restricts usage to the owner, operator or persons authorized by the
owner or operator.
(1)
PUBLIC USE AIRPORT OR AIRSTRIP — An airport or airstrip open
to the general public and not requiring prior permission of the
owner and/or operator to land or take off.
(2)
(1) Atkins Silt Loam (W).
(2) Atkins Silt Loam, Local Alluvial (AKA).
(3) Huntington Silt Loam (Hn).
(4) Lindside Silt Loam (Ln).
(5) Melvin Silt Loam (Mh).
(6) Melvin Silt Loam, Local Alluvial (MkA).
(7) Philo Silt Loam (Ph).
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1152
ALTERATION — A change or rearrangement in any structural part of
an existing facility, building or structure or in an exit or entrance, or an
enlargement thereof, whether by extension of a side or by an increase
in height or by a movement of any or all of a structure from one location
or orientation to another.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Includes, but is not limited to,
man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar
alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the
presence of antennas or towers.
AMUSEMENT — All manner and form of entertainment, all forms of
rides and entertainment at fairgrounds and amusement parks, athletic
contests, all other forms of diversion, sport, recreation, pastime, shows,
exhibitions, contests, displays and games.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — A device, other than a jukebox, that is used or
designed to be used to provide amusement or entertainment to the user
for a fee, and shall include but shall not be limited to pinball machines,
video display games, billiard tables, simulated sport machines and
biorhythm machines.
AMUSEMENT FACILITY — A business enterprise providing all manner
and form of amusement, except adult entertainment facilities and offtrack
betting facilities.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — Any building used for the treatment, housing or
boarding of animals such as dogs, cats, goats, rabbits and birds or fowl
by a veterinarian.
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY — The raising and keeping of livestock, poultry
or other animals.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electro-magnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications
signals or other communications signals.
ANTENNA HEIGHT — The measurement of the overall vertical length
of the antenna and its support structure above the average finished
grade. If such system is located on a building or other structure, the
overall vertical length shall be measured and shall include the height of
the building upon which the antenna and its structure is situate.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES — Any structure, mast, pole,
tripod or tower, including all guy wires and braces utilized for the
purpose of supporting an antenna or antennas.
ANTENNA/TOWER HEIGHT — When referring to a tower, antenna or
other structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the
parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including
the base pad and any antenna.
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1153
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit, building or group of buildings
containing therein one or more dwelling units designed as an
integrated development with the dwelling units therein leased to the
occupants for a definite period of time of at least 30 days.
APPROACH SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on the
runway center line, extending outward and upward from the end of the
primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height
limitation slope. The perimeter of the approach surface shall coincide
with the perimeter of the approach zone.
APPROACH SURFACE ZONE — That area of land and air in and about
the approach surface.
ASPHALT PLANT — A building, structure or part thereof, used for the
manufacture, distribution and sale of asphalt or bituminous concrete.
AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLE, MOBILE HOME, BOAT OR RECREATIONAL
VEHICLE SALES — A lot, parcel, tract, building or structure, other
than a street, used for the display, sale or rental or new or used
motor vehicles, recreation vehicles, boat trailers, farm equipment,
motorcycles, trucks, utility trailers, boats or transportable mobile or
manufactured homes in operable condition. Repair work shall be
considered as a separate accessory or principal use. The term
"automobile and other motor vehicle, mobile home, boat or recreational
vehicle sales" shall not include a mobile home or manufactured home
park or a junkyard. Outside storage and display of motor vehicles, boats
or manufactured homes shall be permitted as an accessory use in zones
where such sales are permitted.
AUTOMOTIVE AND OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR GARAGE — A
lot, parcel, tract, building or structure where repairs of motor vehicles
are conducted. The term "automotive and other motor vehicle repair
garages" includes retail sales of gasoline and auto parts and the storage
of vehicles being serviced. The term "automotive and other motor
vehicle repair garages" includes a lot, parcel, tract, building or
structure where repairs, including mechanical and body work,
straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles
not in operating condition or other work involving noise, glare, fumes,
smoke or other similar characteristics are performed. For the purposes
of this chapter, this term shall also include facilities engaged in closely
similar repairs of boats.
AUTOMOTIVE FUELING STATION — Any lot, parcel, tract, building
or structure where gasoline or other automotive fuel, oil, grease,
batteries, tires and automobile accessories, or any combination thereof,
are stored and sold at retail. An automotive fueling station does not
include mechanical service repairs, body work, painting, spraying or
welding or storage of automobiles and other motor vehicles not in
operating condition.
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1154
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/
cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices and/or long
distance providers or the public switched telephone network.
BAR — See "tavern."
BARBER SHOP — A business enterprise licensed by the Department
of State of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania acting through the
Commissioner of Professional and Occupational Affairs designed to
shave or trim the beard; to cut, shape, trim or blend the hair with
the proper tools or instruments designed for said purpose; to shape
the eyebrows, to give facial and scalp massaging, facial and scalp
treatment, with any preparations made for said purpose, either by hand
or by mechanical or electrical appliances; to singe and shampoo the
hair or apply any makes of hair cream, hair lotions or hair tonics to
dye, color or bleach the hair and to perform any service on a wig or
hair piece; to style and to render hair straightening, hair processing,
hair weaving, hair waving and curling, with such methods as: manual,
mechanical, chemical or electrical, with the proper devices or proper
chemical compounds developed and designed for said purpose. The
term "barber shop" shall not include any or all of the above services
when performed by a member of one's immediate household for a
member or relative of the household.
BASEMENT — A story of a building or structure having 1/2 or more of
its height (measured from floor to ceiling) below the average elevation
of the finished grade. A basement shall be counted as a story for the
purpose of height measurements or determining square footage, only if
the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average elevation of
the finished grade is more than five feet, or if the basement is used for
a business or as a dwelling unit. For purposes of Article XIV, Floodplain
Districts and Flood Prone Areas, the terms means any area of the
building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BEAUTY SHOP — See "barber shop."
BED-AND-BREAKFAST FACILITY — A single-family detached dwelling
where individuals may, for consideration, use sleeping accommodations
and obtain a morning meal served in the guest's room or a dining room
or rooms, which may include a kitchen, apart from the dining room or
rooms in which food is regularly prepared.
BETTING PARLOR — An indoor establishment in which legal betting
activities are conducted, including parimutual wagering activities, but
excluding "games of chance", under the Local Option Small Games of
Chance Act, 10 P.S. § 311, et seq. The term shall specifically include
"nonprimary locations" as defined in the Race Horse Industry Reform
Act, as amended, 35 P.S. § 325.101 et seq.
BILLBOARD — A panel type sign having a sign display area advertising
goods, persons, products, services or ideas which are not sold,
manufactured, distributed or provided on the premises where the sign
is situate.
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1155
BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of the Township of Whitehall;
anybody granted jurisdiction under this chapter or the Municipalities
Planning Code to render final adjudications.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of the
Township of Whitehall.
BOARDING, ROOMING or LODGING HOUSE — A building or structure
used to shelter or feed two or more individuals not members of the
operator's family, by prearrangement, for compensation, and for
definite periods of time, with locked access to specific living or sleeping
areas.[Amended 1-11-2016 by Ord. No. 3039]
BRING YOUR OWN BOTTLE ESTABLISHMENT (BYOB) — A place
of assembly or any other use defined in this chapter, other than a
dwelling unit including, but not limited to restaurants, taverns, clubs
and social buildings, that is not licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board, in which no intoxicating beverages are sold, but where
patrons are permitted to bring intoxicating beverages upon the
premises for their own use and consumption. This shall not include
"juice bars," "speakeasies" or any other similarly intended
establishments where any structure is used for the consumption of
intoxicating beverages. If a primary or substantial portion of this total
trade is in admission charges for entertainment and the use has a
capacity of 100 persons for such entertainment, the requirements of a
nightclub shall also be met.
BUFFER YARD — A continuous strip of land, either landscaped or
green space, clear of all buildings, structures, parking areas, outdoor
storage areas and detention ponds. A buffer yard may include a street
or driveway connecting an access point with the interior side of a buffer
yard by the most direct route but shall not include any recreation area
or a private street or an existing or future public street right-of-way.
BUILDING — Any structure, either open or enclosed, having a roof
supported by columns, piers or walls, intended for the shelter, housing
enclosure of persons, animals or chattel. The term "building" shall at
all times, unless otherwise indicated, be interpreted as including the
words "or a part thereof."
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate area of any and all floor area of
enclosed or roofed principal and accessory buildings or structures.
Such area shall be computed by using outside building or structure
dimensions of the ground floor measured on a horizontal plane.
BUILDING CODE — The term "building code" when used in this chapter
shall refer to any and all building codes adopted by Whitehall Township,
included in Chapter 5, Code Enforcement, or similar codes.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by buildings.
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF — A line drawn parallel to the front line of
the lot at that portion of the building or structure, including sun parlors,
covered porches (but not steps) closest to the front lot line.
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1156
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical dimension of a building measured
from the average elevation of the finished grade at the perimeter of
the building to the highest point of the building, excluding chimneys,
spires, tanks, equipment screens, elevators and equipment penthouses,
architectural features such as towers, domes, atria, parapets, turrets,
stairwells and other similar structures not designed for human
habitation.
BUILDING RESTRICTION LINE — A line which designates the
minimum distance between any building and the adjacent street rightof-
way or property line. This line shall be measured from a point or
points formed by the intersection of a vertical building wall with the
ground (or in the case of a cantilevered building, at the vertical plane
which coincides with the most projected surface), to the street right-ofway
or property line.
BUILDING SETBACK LINES —
BUSINESS — Any enterprise, occupation, trade or profession engaged
in, either continuously or temporarily, for remuneration or gain or the
occupancy or use of a building or premise or any portion thereof for
the transaction of business or the rendering or receiving of professional
services.
BUSINESS OFFICE — See "office."
CAMP — A parcel used for the erection of temporary shelters (such
as tents), or grounds for the parking of recreational vehicles and
recreational trailers, which may include permanent water and sewage
facilities, including a parcel with non-movable cabins, auditoriums,
stages or other permanent buildings used on a seasonal basis for
recreational purposes, but not including correctional work-release or
migrant farm labor camps.
CAPACITY — Capacity shall be defined and interpreted as "occupant
load," pursuant to the BOCA National Building Code or International
Building Code, as amended.
CAR WASH — A building or portion thereof used for the manual or
mechanical washing or automobiles and other similar vehicles.
FRONT YARD BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line parallel to the
public right-of-way line at a distance equal to the minimum depth of
the front yard designated for each district in this chapter. All yards
adjacent to a public street right-of-way shall be considered front
yards.
(1)
REAR YARD BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line parallel to the
rear lot line and equal to the minimum depth of the rear yard
designated for each district in this chapter.
(2)
SIDE YARD BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line parallel to the
side lot line and equal to the minimum depth of the side yard
designated for each district in this chapter.
(3)
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1157
CARTWAY — That portion of a street, alley or highway used for
vehicular traffic.
CELLAR — See "basement."
CELLULAR TELEPHONE — A system providing portable telephone
service to specific subscribers. A cellular telephone may also be
referred to as a wireless telephone.
CEMETERY — A place owned and operated by a licensed cemetery
company, for the disposal or burial of deceased human beings, by
cremation or in a grave, mausoleum, vault, columbarium or other
receptacle. The term "cemetery" does not include pet cemeteries or
private family cemeteries.
CENTER LINE OF STREET, ROAD, ALLEY OR HIGHWAY — A line
equidistant from and parallel to the street, road, alley or highway rightof-
way lines.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — See "permit, occupancy."
CHURCH — A building or group of buildings, including customary
accessory buildings thereto, designed, intended or used for public
worship. The term "church" shall include chapels, cathedrals, temples
and similar designations, parish houses, convents and other similar
accessory uses.
CHURCHES OR RELATED FACILITIES — A place of worship for
recognized religious organizations, or a certified or accredited
parochial school, academy or college. The phrase "churches or related
facilities" shall include nursery schools or day-care centers which are
certified or licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The phrase
"related facilities" shall include play fields and areas, fellowship parks,
outdoor service areas and similar uses by the church.
CLEAR SITE TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by the center lines of the streets and by a line of
sight between points on their center lines at a predetermined distance
from the intersection of the center lines.
CLUB, LODGE OR SOCIAL BUILDING — A building, structure, or part
thereof, used to house a club or social organization not conducted for
profit and which is not an adjunct to, operated by or in connection with
a tavern, cafe or other public place.
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS TOWER —
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Includes, but is not limited
to, man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and
similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or
conceal the presence of antennae or towers.
(1)
ANTENNA/TOWER HEIGHT — The overall height of the tower from
the base of the tower to the highest point of the tower including,
but not limited to, antennas, transmitters, satellite dishes or any
(2)
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1158
other structures affixed to or otherwise placed on the tower. If the
base of the tower is not on ground level, the height of the tower
shall include the base of the building or structure to which the
tower is attached.
AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE — A national
organization which formulates guidelines and standards. ANSI
standards are recognized as authoritative by the FCC.
(3)
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's
towers/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching
offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched
telephone network.
(4)
CELLULAR TELEPHONE — A system providing portable telephone
service to specific subscribers. A cellular telephone may also be
referred to as a wireless telephone.
(5)
CHANNEL — A segment of a frequency band assigned to a specific
user.
(6.1) CO-LOCATION — Equipment affixed to or erected upon
existing wireless communication facilities or other
communications towers, utility structures, antennae and
related appurtenances, all of which have been previously
approved by the Township under these regulations to exist.
[Added 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 2748]
(6)
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure,
partially or wholly exterior to a building, used for mounting
antennas which transmit or retransmit radio signals.
(7)
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — A document issued by the FCC to a
broadcast applicant giving permission to construct a radio or TV
broadcast station. It is not the same as a station license.
(8)
ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION (EMR) — A technical term for
the nature of energy emitted by a transmitting antenna.
(9)
EQUIPMENT SHELTER/BUILDING — An unmanned building,
cabinet or shelter containing communications equipment and other
related contents required for the operation of communication
towers or antennae.
(10)
FALL ZONE — The area on the ground that is within a distance
equal to 125% of the height of a tower.
(11)
INTERMODULATION — A technical term referring to the possible
mixing of two transmitted signals which creates unwanted and
potentially interfering signals.
(12)
REINTERFERENCE — Disturbances in reception caused by
intruding signals or electrical current.
(13)
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1159
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any and all vehicles, machinery or
equipment which has a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 12,000
pounds and is used for commercial or business purposes including, but
not limited to, construction equipment, bulldozers, trailers, back hoes,
compressors, front end loaders, trucks, storage trailers or part thereof,
etc.
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Township of
Whitehall.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry
during flooding; a structure providing an area that is designed and
constructed to prevent the passage of water and water vapor.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The official comprehensive plan for the
Township of Whitehall.
CONDITIONAL USE — The use of a lot, parcel, tract, building or
structure which requires the review thereof by the Planning
Commission, the submission of the Planning Commission's
recommendations to the Board of Commissioners and final approval by
the Board of Commissioners.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership for residential purposes and the remainder of
which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of
those portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided
interests in the common elements (portions of a condominium other
than the residential units) are vested in the unit owners.
CONFINED ANIMAL FEED OPERATION — The confined feeding
animals (including fowl) for food, fur or pleasure in lots, pens, ponds,
sheds, barn buildings or any other structure where food is supplied to
the animal by means other than grazing. Pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Nutrient Management Act, a confined animal feeding operation is that
which exceeds two animals equivalent units per acre. An animal
equivalent unit 1,000 pounds of live weight of any animal. Also known
as concentrated animal feeding operations.
CONICAL SURFACE — The surface extending outward and upward
from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for
a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
CONICAL SURFACE ZONE — That area located at 150 feet above
the airport elevation at the intersection with the horizontal zone and
extending thereafter 20 feet horizontal for each foot of vertical
elevation extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation.
The conical zone extends outward from the periphery of the horizontal
surface zone a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
STRUCTURAL CAPACITY — A term describing the physical ability
of a tower and associated antennas to withstand design loading
without collapsing.
(14)
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1160
CONSERVATION AREAS — A parcel of land used for the care,
management, nurturing or conservation of plant life, environmentally
sensitive zones, the protection of soil from erosion, the fostering of
wildlife for noncommercial purposes (not including animal husbandry),
the planting and care of trees not to be used for commercial purposes
and the establishment of trails or observations points for the enjoyment
of same.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or
structure, including the placement of mobile homes.
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — A lot, parcel or tract of land, or part thereof,
used to store materials used by a contractor in the construction of a
road, highway, structure or building, landscaping or utilities.
CONVENIENCE STORE — See "grocery store."
DAY-CARE CENTER — A state licensed establishment for the daytime
care of children or a facility designed, maintained and used for the
daytime care of adults who cannot care for themselves due to age or
physical or mental disability. The term "day-care center" shall include
nursery schools.
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or this act to do so, either
by reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals
from determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the Court
of common please of the County and judicial district wherein the
municipality lies.
DECK — A platform which is not covered by a roof or permanent awning
and is designed, intended or used for outdoor living purposes as an
accessory use to a structure.
DENSITY, GROSS — A number determined by dividing the total number
of dwelling units by the base site area (total amount of land in the
lot, parcel or tract to be developed minus all of that land within the
existing or future street right-of-way, utility rights-of-way, easements or
land used for storage drainage facilities). Density requirements shall be
determined in direct proportion to lot size, i.e., maximum eight units
per acre, four units per 1/2 acre, two units per quarter acre.
DETENTION POND — A basin designed, intended or used to retain
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff in the basin and
releasing it at a predetermined rate.
DETERMINATION —
Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with the
administration of any land use ordinance or applications
thereunder, except the following:
(a) The Commissioners.
(1)
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1161
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to buildings or other structures,
the placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities,
filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling operations, the
storage of equipment or materials and the subdivision of land.
DISTRIBUTION FACILITY — A building, structure or part thereof, used
for the temporary storage of products, merchandise, goods, materials,
food stuffs or manufactured parts, which are intended to be
repackaged, relabeled, assembled or removed from the premises soon
thereafter.
DORMITORY — A building, structure or portion thereof containing
living quarters for students, staff or members of a college, university,
boarding school, theological school, hospital, religious order or
comparable organization and is either owned or managed by said
organization and contains not more than one cooking facility and eating
area.
DRIVE-IN SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS — An establishment or activity
where patrons are provided with professional or personal services for
consumption of use outside of the confines of the principal building
or in vehicles parked upon the premises, regardless of whether seats
or similar accommodations are otherwise provided. The term "drive-in
service establishments" shall not include private theaters.
DRIVEWAY — A designated accessway from a road, street, highway or
alley to a home, occupation, building or structure.
DWELLING — Any building that is designed, maintained or used, in
whole or in part, for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms located within a
residential building and forming a single habitable unit with facilities
which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and
eating by one family.
EASEMENTS — A liberty, privilege or advantage which one has in the
lands of another for a precise and definite purposes, subordinate to but
not inconsistent with the owner's general property rights.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION — A public, private or parochial school,
academy or college certified or accredited. The term "educational
institution" shall not include nursery schools or day-care centers.
ELECTRICAL SUBSTATION — An assemblage of equipment for
transferring electric power rather than for its generation or utilization.
EQUIPMENT BUILDING — An unmanned building, cabinet or shelter
containing communications equipment and other related contents
(b) The Zoning Hearing Board.
Determinations shall be appealable only to the boards designated
as having jurisdiction for such appeal.
(2)
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1162
required for the operation of communication towers or
antennae.[Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
ESSENTIAL UTILITIES — Utilities such as sewage, water, gas and
electric lines and related appurtenances as required and necessary to
serve property owners in the municipality are essential utilities. The
term "essential utilities" shall not include cross-country transmission
lines or other utilities not required or necessary to serve the
municipality.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage;
the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
EXCAVATION — The removal of topsoil, clay, overburden, rock or
similar material for the purposes of construction, quarrying and surface
mining and land contouring. Where excavation does not take place in
conformity with an approved land development plan and is permanent
in nature for purposes of removing minerals, clay, sand or similar
material from the earth for use on another property, such excavation
shall be deemed to be a quarrying and surface mining activity.
EXTENDED STAY HOTEL — Any building containing six or more guest
rooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented, or
hired out to be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes
for guests for a period of one week or more, but not more than 180
days; and which contain kitchen facilities for food preparation,
including but not limited to such facilities as refrigerators, stoves, and
ovens.[Added 1-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2530]
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FALL ZONE — The area on the ground that is within a distance equal
to 125% of the height of the tower.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit,
provided that unless all members are related by blood, marriage or
legal adoption, no such family contain more than five nontransient
unrelated persons, except where disability requires that more than
five unrelated persons reside together; in such cases there shall be
no requirement for persons with disabilities to petition, apply or
experience a process to obtain approval to live in any zoning district
in the Township. The term "family" shall not include the occupants
of a clubhouse, hotel, motel, fraternity house, dormitory, boarding or
rooming house.[Amended 1-11-2016 by Ord. No. 3039]
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FENCE — A man-made barrier placed or arranged as a line of
demarcation between lots or used to enclose a lot, parcel, tract or
portion thereof. The term "fence" does not include barriers of
landscaped materials such as trees, bushes or hedges.
FINISHED GRADE — See "grade, finished."
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1163
FISH AND WILDLIFE REFUGES — A parcel of land operated and
managed for the fostering of the growth and propagation of wildlife,
fish, game and the provision of vegetation, cover and nesting areas for
noncommercial purposes, but not including areas for animal husbandry
or stocked commercial hunting grounds.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation by surface water of land areas not
continually inundated.
FLOOD-FRINGE AREA — The remaining portions of the 100-year
floodplain in the Flood Insurance Study, where a floodway has been
delineated and 100-year flood elevations have been determined.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river,
stream or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete
inundation during a one-hundred-year design frequency storm or an
area subject to the accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOODPRONE AREA — Those areas which are subject to the unusual
and rapid accumulation of surface water from any source not identified
on flood maps, but which frequently become inundated with surface
water. Also those areas in excess of a 100 acre tributary watershed.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to buildings or structures which
reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water, sanitary and other utility facilities, structures and their
contents.
FLOODWAY AREA — The areas identified as "floodway" in the Flood
Insurance Study provided by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. This term shall also include floodway areas which have been
identified in other available studies or sources of information for those
floodplain areas where no floodway has been identified in the Flood
Insurance Study.
FLOOR AREA OR SPACE — The aggregate area of all floor areas in a
building or structure. Floor area shall be determined by measuring the
horizontal plain from interior wall to interior wall at floor level.
FLORIST SHOP — A building, structure or part thereof, used in whole
or in part for the retail sale of real or artificial flowers, arrangements or
plants and related items.
FOREST — Those areas, groves or stands of mature or mostly mature
trees covering an area greater than 1/4 of an acre; or groves of mature
trees consisting of more than 10 individual trees. For the purposes of
this definition, "mature trees" shall be defined as those trees having a
width of six inches caliper at a height of 14 inches above the ground.
FORESTRY — The act, process or business of removing trees from a
lot, parcel or tract of land; developing, caring for or cultivating mature
forests; the management of growing timber for lumber or commercial
wood by-products.
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1164
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign which is supported by one or more
columns, uprights, braces or similar structures which are affixed to or
are situated upon the ground.
FRONTAGE — That part of a lot abutting a street right-of-way,
commonly referred to in terms of "feet of frontage."
FUEL — Any substance that is burned, consumed or otherwise used for
the production of light, heat, power or energy.
FUNERAL HOME — A building, structure, or part thereof, approved
by the State Board of Funeral Directors wherein a licensed funeral
director conducts the professional practice of funeral directing,
including the preparation, care and funeral services for the human
dead.
GAME ROOM — A place where amusement devices are provided and
utilized as the principal use of the premises.
GARAGE —
CLEAR CUTTING — A logging or land-clearing method whereby all
trees from a tract of land or a portion thereof are removed.
(1)
FORESTER — A person with a degree in forestry from a college or
university accredited by the Society of American Foresters.
(2)
LOGGING OR LUMBERING — The cutting down of trees in or for
any type of business or commercial purpose.
(3)
SELECTION METHOD LOGGING — A method of selectively
removing trees from a wooded area, either singly or in small
groups, according to age and size, with a provision being made for
natural or artificial revegetation.
(4)
SPLASH — All debris resulting from logging operations, including
stems, limbs or parts thereof.
(5)
TONS — That part of the felled tree which is left above the part of
the tree to be utilized as the lumbering log.
(6)
TREE BUFFER ZONE — Land surrounding the immediate
perimeter of a wooded area or logging operation in which no
cutting of trees or other vegetation shall occur, except for the
isolated cutting of individual trees which are dead, damaged, sick,
infected or constitute a danger to neighboring property, the public
generally, or other trees in the area.
(7)
COMMERCIAL GARAGE — A building or part thereof used for
the storage of one or more vehicles for remuneration which may
include facilities and equipment for servicing, repairing, washing
or reconditioning vehicles, as well as any and all services or
equipment provided by or at a motor vehicle service station.
(1)
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1165
GARBAGE — See "solid waste."
GENERAL FLOODPLAIN AREA — The areas identified as Zone A in
the Flood Insurance Study for which no 100-year flood elevations have
been provided. When available, information from other Federal, State
and other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the 100-year
evaluation, as well as a floodway area, if possible.
GLARE, DIRECT — Illumination beyond property lines caused by direct
or specularly reflected rays from incandescent, fluorescent, or arc
lighting, or from such high temperature processes as welding or
petroleum or metallurgical refining.
GLARE, INDIRECT — Illumination beyond property lines caused by
defuse reflection from a surface such as a wall or roof of a structure or
a billboard.
GOLF COURSE — A parcel, lot or tract of land designed, intended or
used for the purpose of engaging in the sport or activity of golf. The
term "golf course" shall include all golf holes, practice tees, ranges
and clubhouses when designed, intended or used in connection with an
established golf course, but shall not include driving ranges, practice
tees, miniature golf or chip-and-putt areas when such establishments
are not designed, intended, used or operated in connection with an
established golf course.
GRADE — The surface of the ground, lawns, walks or streets adjoining
the exterior walls of any building or structure.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surface of the ground, lawns,
walks or streets adjoining the exterior walls of any building or
structure.
GREENHOUSE (COMMERCIAL) — A building or structure in which
trees, shrubs, brambles, woody vines, roots, cuttings, flowers, bulbs,
grass, buds, fruit pits, plants and other seeds and parts thereof are
situate for propagation or growth for sale.
GREENHOUSE (NONCOMMERCIAL) — A building or structure in
which trees, shrubs, brambles, woody vines, roots, cuttings, flowers,
bulbs, grass, buds, fruit pits, plants and other seeds and parts thereof
are situate for propagation or growth for use of the owner or lessee of
the lot upon which the greenhouse is situate, and not for sale.
PARKING GARAGE — A garage for the convenience of the general
public in which no servicing, repairs, washing or reconditioning of
motor vehicles occurs.
(2)
PRIVATE GARAGE — A building or part thereof, whether or not
enclosed, used for the storage of vehicles or used for the
convenience of the owner or occupants of the main building and
in which no business, use or service is rendered, provided or
conducted for the benefit of the general public.
(3)
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1166
GROCERY STORE — A building, structure or part thereof primarily
used for the retail sale of food stuffs.
GUEST — Any person hiring or occupying a room for living or sleeping
purposes.[Added 1-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2530]
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — The floor area within a building which is
maintained for year-round human occupancy. The term "habitable floor
area" shall not include basements, garages or accessory building space.
HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION — A building, structure, part thereof or
obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe
and efficient use of the navigable airspace.
HAZARDOUS WASTE —
HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE — The vertical distance derived from the
average finished grade at the foundation corners of the building or
structure to the highest point of the building or structure, excluding a
chimney or other similar structure.
HELIPORT — A lot, parcel or tract of land, water or a structural surface
which is designed, intended or used primarily for the landing and
taking off of helicopters and any appurtenant areas which are designed,
Any garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial or other wastewater
treatment plant, sludge from a water supply treatment plant, or
air pollution control facility and other discarded material including
solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting
from municipal, commercial industrial, institutional, mining or
agricultural operations, and from community activities, or any
combination of the above (but does not include solid or dissolved
material in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved materials in
irrigation return flows or industrial discharges which are point
sources subject to permits under the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as
defined by the U.S. Atomic Energy Act of 1954, which because
of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics may:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality
or an increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total
population; or
(a)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed or of otherwise managed.
(b)
(1)
The term "hazardous waste" shall not include coal refuse as defined
in the "Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act" and shall not include
treatment sludges from coal mine drainage treatment plants, the
disposal of which is being carried on pursuant to and in compliance
with a valid permit issued pursuant to the "Clean Streams Law."
(2)
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1167
intended or used for helicopter support facilities, including but not
limited to maintenance, fueling and parking.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use conducted entirely within a dwelling
unit by members of the family residing therein, which is clearly
incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling, does
not change the residential character thereof, does not emit any sound
or noise discernible outside of the dwelling unit and does not occupy
more than 250 square feet of the total aboveground floor area of the
building or structure in which the home occupation is situated. The
term "home occupation" shall include, but shall not be limited to, hand
crafts, cooking, individual music instruction, tutoring, dressmaking,
laundering, millinery, photography studio and office or studio in the
residence of an artist, lawyer, architect, engineer, teacher, accountant,
musician or other similar professional. The term "home occupation"
shall specifically not include a photography processing laboratory,
music school, dance school, business school or school of any kind with
organized classes, or the office of a physician, surgeon, dentist or
veterinarian.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE — A horizontal plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which coincides with the
perimeter of the conical zone.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE ZONE — That area 150 feet above the airport
elevation established by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii for all
runways designated utility or visual and 10,000 feet radii for all other
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1168
runways from the center of each end of the primary surface of each
runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to
those arcs. This zone specifically does not include the approach and
transitional zones.
HOSPITAL — An institution licensed or regulated as a hospital by
the Department of Health or the Department of Public Welfare or a
facility owned or operated by the Federal government and accredited
by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals as a hospital
and has an organized medical staff which is primarily engaged in
providing to in-patients, by or under the supervision of physicians,
diagnostic or therapeutic services for the care of injured, disabled,
pregnant, diseased or sick or mentally ill persons, or rehabilitation
services for the rehabilitation of injured, disabled, pregnant, diseased
or sick or mentally ill persons. The term "hospital" includes facilities for
the diagnosis and treatment of disorders within the scope of specific
medical specialties but does not include facilities caring exclusively for
the mentally ill. The term "hospital" shall not include any facility in
which is conducted the housing of the criminally insane or provides
treatment for persons actively charged with or serving a sentence after
being convicted of a felony.
HOTEL — An establishment in which lodging is provided and offered
to the public where transient guests may, for consideration, obtain
sleeping accommodations and meals. Such establishments shall have
at least 10 permanent bedrooms for the use of guests, a public dining
room or rooms operated by the same management, and a kitchen, apart
from the dining room or rooms in which food is regularly prepared.
A hotel is not a boarding, rooming or lodging house as defined
herein.[Amended 1-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2530]
HOUSEHOLD PETS — Domestic animals normally considered to be
kept in or in conjunction with a dwelling unit for the pleasure of the
resident family and shall include animals such as dogs, cats, gerbils
and other similar pets normally sold by retail pet stores. The term
"household pets" shall not include any dangerous or endangered
species or any farm animals, such as horses, pigs, goats, sheep,
chickens or ducks.
HUB HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the tower
foundation to the height of the wind turbine hub to which the blade is
attached.[Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
HUNTING AND FISHING CLUBS — A parcel of land used for the
propagation of fish, wildlife and game animals, together with such
organizational buildings, for the purpose of meetings and social
functions, but not including animal husbandry and not including rifle,
shooting or target ranges.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which does not absorb moisture,
water or rain and includes, but is not limited to, roofs, buildings,
parking areas, driveways, streets, roads and any areas covered by
concrete or asphalt and stormwater detention and retention basins.
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1169
INCINERATION — The process of burning combustible solid waste.
INCINERATOR — Any device which can be used for the burning of
combustible solid waste.
INDOOR RECREATION FACILITY — A commercial activity conducted
completely within a building or structure which is designed to amuse,
entertain or otherwise provide for the recreation of persons, other
than the conductors of the activity, and which requires a fee, charge,
admission or recommendation in order for a person to partake in the
activity, and includes, but is not limited to, health clubs, gyms,
swimming pools, indoor running tracks, bowling alleys, ice skating
rinks, swimming pools, batting cages, etc. The phrase "indoor
recreation facility" shall specifically not be construed to include
amusement parks, off-track betting parlors, adult bookstores, adult
entertainment facilities or theaters.
INDOOR THEATERS — An establishment in which feature motion
pictures are exhibited regularly and completely within the building in
which the establishment is situate to the public for a charge. The term
"theaters" shall not include adult entertainment facilities.
INFANT — Any child less than 18 months of age.
INN — See "hotel."
JUICE BAR — Any structure, whether residential or commercial, where
patrons are invited to bring intoxicating beverages or consume same
on the premises; where a cover charge may be imposed which includes
"free" alcoholic beverages. This term shall also include "speakeasies"
and any other similarly used establishments.
JUNKED VEHICLE — Any vehicle, including a trailer, which does not
bear current license and inspection stickers or is incapable of being
moved under its own power, and presents a hazard or danger to the
public by virtue of its state or condition of disrepair. The following
conditions, which are not exclusive, are examples of what may
constitute a state or condition of disrepair:
JUNKYARD — A lot, parcel, tract, building, structure or part thereof,
which is used to collect or store wastepaper, rags, scrap material or
discarded material, or which is used to collect, dismantle, store or
Rusted and/or jagged metal on or protruding from the body of the
vehicle.
(1)
(2) Broken glass or windows on or in the vehicle.
(3) Leaking of any fluids from the vehicle.
(4) Unsecured and/or unlocked doors, hood or trunk.
Storage or placement of the vehicle in an unbalanced condition,
such as on concrete blocks.
(5)
(6) Harboring of rodents, insects or other pests.
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1170
salvage machinery or vehicles not in operating condition, and shall
also include the sale, resale, salvage or conversion to some other use,
of the parts of machinery or vehicles. Any lot, parcel, tract, building,
structure or part thereof, which is used to collect, store or transfer any
garbage, solid waste, refuse, toxic or hazardous substances shall not be
considered a junkyard.
KENNEL — A lot, parcel, tract, building, structure or part thereof
designed, maintained and used for boarding, breeding, training or
raising animals for compensation.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for
and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than
12,500 pounds gross weight and by jet-powered aircraft.
LEWD MATERIAL OR ENTERTAINMENT — Material or entertainment
that features topless or bottomless dancers, entertainers, employees
or strippers; that shows simulated sex acts or live or actual sex acts;
that shows or suggests human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation
or arousal; that shows or suggests the act of masturbation, sexual
intercourse or sodomy; that shows or suggests the fondling or erotic
touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast; that
shows human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast below the
top of the areola; or that shows human male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street area used for loading and unloading
of goods and having a direct access to a public street or alley.
LODGE — See "private club."
LOT — A designated lot, parcel, tract or acre of land established by a
plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation or land or space, whether initially
or cumulative, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Development, except that in accordance with § 503.1.1 of the
Municipalities Planning Code, found at 53 P.S. § 10503.1.1.
(3)
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1171
LOT AREA — An area of land which is determined by the limits of the
property lines bounding that area and expressed in terms of square feet
or acres. Any portion of a lot included in a street right-of-way shall not
be included in determining lot area.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by impervious
surfaces.
LOT DEPTH — The level distance between the mid point of the front lot
line to the mid point of the rear lot line.
LOT LINE — A line forming the front, rear or sides of lots, commonly
referred to as front, rear or side property lines.
LOT WIDTH — The width of a lot measured at the front building line.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood resistant partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the
lowest floor of a building; provided, that such space is not designed and
built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation
design requirements of this chapter.
MAIN BUILDING — See "principal building."
MANUFACTURED HOUSE — A dwelling unit fabricated at an offsite
manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site
bearing a label certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards and which
has been attached to a permanent foundation.
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which partners in
a dispute mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly
exploring and settling their differences, culminating in a written
agreement which the parties themselves create and consider
acceptable.
CORNER LOT — A lot fronting on two or more streets at their
intersection.
(1)
INTERIOR LOT — A lot fronting on a street but having all side lot
lines in common with adjacent lots.
(2)
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line along a public or private street.
In the event that a lot has more than one such lot line, all shall be
deemed front lot lines.
(1)
LOT LINE, REAR — Any lot line which is parallel to or within 45°
of being parallel to the front lot line. In the event that a lot has no
street frontage or is a corner lot or a lot of an odd shape, the lot
line farthest from any street shall be considered the rear lot line.
(2)
(3) LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line.
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1172
MEDICAL CENTER — A building or part thereof used for medical,
psychiatric, obstetrical or surgical care. The term "medical center"
shall include facilities similar to general hospitals, mental hospitals,
tuberculosis hospitals, children's hospitals and any other such facility
which provides care, whether or not on a 24-hour basis, but does not
provide services or care for overnight stays.
MEDICAL OFFICE — A building or portion thereof used exclusively
by physicians, psychologists, chiropractors, dentists and other similar
professionals for treatment and examination of patients. Any facility
which provides overnight care or treatment for patients shall not be
considered a medical office.
MINI MART — A retail store which sells both convenience food items
and gasoline, and may provide certain services as an accessory use,
which may include drive-through service. A mini mart is not a
convenience store.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable single unit usable as a permanent
dwelling, office or place of assembly, or multiple units designed to be
joined into one integral unit capable of being separated for repeated
towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy
except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations,
and constructed so that it may be used with or without a permanent
foundation or attachment to essential utilities. The term does not
include recreational vehicles or travel trailers or modular structures
which are removed from a permanent foundation which otherwise
complies with all building codes in effect which apply to residential
dwellings. However, for floodplain management purposes, the terms
shall include recreational vehicles which are placed on a site for more
than 180 consecutive days.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park used for
the siting of a single mobile home and improved with utility connections
and other necessary appurtenances.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which
has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MOTEL — An establishment where the public may, for consideration,
obtain sleeping accommodations, having at least 10 permanent
bedrooms for the use of guests.
MUNICIPAL USE — Local governmental uses including, but not limited
to, recreation, government, stormwater management, provision of
utilities and other governmental related services.
NAME PLATE — A sign displaying only the name and occupation of the
occupant of a building, which shall not exceed two square feet in size.
NATURE PRESERVE — A lot, parcel or tract of land used to conserve
natural or scenic resources, including but not limited to soils, beaches,
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1173
streams, wetlands, or marshes, to conserve or protect forests, wildlife,
historic, geologic, botanic or other similar interests.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after
February 13, 1978, and includes any subsequent improvements thereto.
NIGHTCLUB — A tavern or restaurant that has a primary or substantial
portion of the total trade in the sale of alcoholic beverages, which
frequently charges admission or cover charges for entertainment or
music for dancing and which has a capacity or more than 100 persons
for such entertainment or dancing.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial
activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly
secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no
customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian,
pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess
of those normally associated with residential use. The business or
commercial activity must satisfy the requirements as set forth in
§ 27-102C of this chapter.[Amended 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 2571;
8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURES — A building,
structure or portion thereof which, in its design or location upon a
lot, parcel or tract, does not conform to the zoning regulations for
the district in which it is situate. To be considered nonconforming,
the building, structure or part thereof shall also have predated the
implementation of zoning the Township of Whitehall or was lawfully
conforming prior to the enactment of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, parcel, or tract of land legally
existing at the date of the passage of this chapter which does not
conform to the minimum lot area and dimension requirements of the
zoning district in which it is situate. To be considered nonconforming,
the lot, parcel or tract of land shall also have predated the
implementation of zoning in the Township of Whitehall or was lawfully
conforming prior to the enactment of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign or sign display area that does not
conform to the sign or sign display area requirements as established
by this chapter. To be considered nonconforming, the sign or sign
display area shall also have predated the implementation of zoning
in the Township of Whitehall or was lawfully conforming prior to the
enactment of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any use of a lot, parcel, tract, building,
structure or part thereof which does not conform to the use or extent
of use requirements of the zoning district in which said lot, parcel,
tract, building, structure or part thereof is situate. To be considered
nonconforming, the use shall also have predated the implementation of
zoning in the Township of Whitehall or was lawfully conforming prior to
the enactment of this chapter.
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1174
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT APPROACH — An approach and
landing of an aircraft using air navigation facilities with only horizontal
guidance or area type navigation equipment.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway used by aircraft
utilizing a nonprecision instrument approach.
NURSERY SCHOOL — See "day-care center."
NURSING HOME — A building or part thereof used for the lodging,
boarding and nursing care, on a 24-hour basis, of four or more persons.
The term "nursing home" shall only include those nursing and
convalescent homes, skilled nursing facilities, intermediate care
facilities, and infirmaries contained within homes for the aged which
are licensed by the Commonwealth.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth or object, whether or not
fixed to the ground, which exceeds the maximum height prescribed by
the regulations of a particular zoning district. For the purposes of the
floodplain regulations, the term "obstruction" shall mean any wall, dam,
wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile abutment, projection, excavation,
channel, rectification, culvert, building, fenced stockpile, refuse, fill,
structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel,
watercourse, or floodprone area, which may impede, retard, or change
the direction of the flow of water either in itself or by catching or
collecting debris carried by such water or is placed where the flow of
the water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or
property.
OCCUPANCY — Use of a building or lot for a specific purpose.
OFFICE — A commercial establishment or use involving clerical,
professional or administrative work, which may include the provision
of customer services but not on-premise sales of a product or
merchandise. The term "office" shall not include retail or industrial
uses.
OFFICE PARK — A lot, parcel or tract of land used for the construction,
operation and maintenance of office buildings.
OFFICIAL STREET CLASSIFICATION MAP — A map adopted by the
Township showing the location of the lines of existing and proposed
public streets, watercourses and public grounds, including widenings,
narrowings, extensions, diminutions, openings, closings or vacations of
the same for the whole of the Township.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP — The Zoning Map as adopted by the Board
of Commissioners which designates the location and boundaries of all
zoning districts situate within the Township of Whitehall.
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — An area on private property
designed and used for the parking or storage of one or more passenger
vehicles as an accessory use. Private off-street parking areas shall
include private garages, carports and improved accessory parking
spaces.
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1175
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — An open space, other than a
street or other public right-of-way, designed, maintained and used by
the general public for the parking of vehicles.
OFF-TRACK BETTING PARLOR — A building, structure or part thereof
used by a licensed corporation to conduct the parimutual system of
wagering by its patrons on the results of horse races held at horse
race tracks televised to the building by simulcasting. The licensed
corporation shall comply and conform to all requirements as set forth
in the Race Horse Industry Reform Act found at 4 P.S. § 325.101 et seq.
OPEN SPACE — That part of a lot, parcel or tract which is unoccupied
and unobstructed by any structure, growth or object. The term "open
space" shall not include any area designed, maintained or used for
streets, roads, highways, driveways or parking areas.
OUTDOOR MOVIE THEATER — A theater which shows movies, motion
pictures, videos or other similar reproduced entertainment on a screen
located out of doors.
OUTDOOR RECREATION FACILITY — A commercial activity conducted
entirely outside which is designed to amuse, entertain or otherwise
provide for the recreation of persons, other than the conductors of
the activity, and which requires a fee, charge, admission or
recommendation in order for a person to partake in the activity and
includes, but is not limited to, hiking, jogging, tennis, swimming,
baseball, basketball, etc. The phrase "outdoor recreation facility" shall
specifically be construed to indicate that all activity (recreation) shall
occur out of doors. The term "recreation facility" shall not be construed
to include amusement parks or off-track betting parlors, adult
bookstores, adult entertainment facilities or theaters.
PARKING SPACE — An area designed and used for the parking of a
motor vehicle, exclusive of passageways, driveways and accessways
appurtenant thereto.
PATIO — An area or courtyard which is not covered by a roof or
permanent awning and is designated for outdoor living purposes as an
accessory use to a structure.
PERMIT, BUILDING — A certificate issued by the Zoning Officer for
the construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or repair of a
building, structure or part thereof.
PERMIT, OCCUPANCY — A permit issued upon completion of the
construction of a building, or change in use of a building or a lot,
indicating that the building complies with all applicable ordinances
and that the building or lot may be used as set forth on the permit
application.
PERMIT, TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY — A permit issued upon
substantial completion of the construction of a building, or change in
use of a building or a lot, indicating that the building substantially
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1176
complies with all applicable ordinances and that the building or lot may
be used as set forth on the permit application.
PERMIT, TEMPORARY USE — A certificate issued by the Zoning
Officer, after approval by the Zoning Hearing Board, for the conduct
of a use for a limited time period indicating the duration of the permit
and indicating that all special requirements governing such use and all
other applicable zoning requirements have been met.
PERMIT, USE — A certificate issued by the Zoning Officer stating that
the purpose for which a building or land is to be used is in conformity
with all requirements of the zoning ordinance for the zoning district in
which the use is situate.
PERMITTED USE — A use of a lot, parcel, tract, building, structure,
sign or part thereof which is permitted as of right in a particular zoning
district.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
federal government or agency, state institution or agency or any other
legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties. In any provisions of this chapter prescribing a fine,
imprisonment or penalty or any combination of the foregoing, the term
"person" shall include the officers and directors of any corporation or
other legal entity having officers and directors.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — See "church."
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land,
controlled by a landowner, developed as a single entity pursuant to the
provisions of § 27-1401.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT APPROACH — An approach and landing
of an aircraft using an Instrument Landing System (ILS) or Precision
Approach Radar (PAR).
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway which requires or
will require the use of an Instrument Landing System (ILS) or Precision
Approach Radar (PAR).
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY APPROACH SURFACE ZONE —
That area established immediately beneath the precision instrument
runway approach surface with the inner edge coinciding with the width
of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide expanding outward
uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000
feet from the primary surface. The center line of the precision
instrument runway approach surface zone is a continuation of the
center line of the runway.
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND PREEXISTING ANTENNAE — Any tower
or antenna for which a building permit or special exception use permit
has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this chapter,
including permitted towers or antennae that have not yet been
constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired.
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1177
PRIMARY SURFACE — A specially prepared hard surface longitudinally
centered on a runway extending 200 feet beyond the end of the runway,
having a width of _____ and an elevation equal to the elevation of the
runway center line.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The building in which the principal or main
use of a lot is conducted.
PRINCIPAL USE — The single, primary use of a lot, parcel or tract of
land or building, structure or part thereof. The phrase "principal use"
shall refer to particular types of uses such as gas station, grocery store,
tailor shop, rather than general classifications of uses such as retail,
service or commercial.
PRIVATE CLUBS — Any building which serves as a meeting place for a
selected membership together with any recreation and dining facilities
located therein.
PUBLIC BUILDING OR FACILITY — Municipal, County, State or Federal
government buildings or facilities designed, maintained or used by the
government or designed, maintained or used for public use which is
sponsored by such governments, except landfills and waste disposal
areas and facilities.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the Board of Commissioners or Planning Commission, intended to
inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and any amendments hereto.
PUBLIC NOTICE — A notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing
and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.
QUARRYING AND SURFACE MINING — The activity whereby any coal
or metallic or nonmetallic minerals are mined by the surface mining
method. This definition shall include the extraction of minerals from the
earth or from waste or stockpiles or from pits or banks by removing
the strata or material which overlies or is above or between them or
otherwise exposing and retrieving them from the surface including, but
not limited to, strip, auger mining, dredging, quarrying and leaching
and all surface activity connected with surface or underground mining
which take place above the surface of the earth. This definition shall not
include:
The extraction of minerals (other than anthracite and bituminous
coal) by a landowner for his own noncommercial use from land
owned or leased by him, but shall include the extraction of sand,
gravel, rock, stone, earth, fill or similar material from borrow pits
unless such extraction is for highway construction purposes and
(1)
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1178
RECREATION LAND — Land dedicated to the Township or other entity
approved by the Township for the use of the Township's residents which
is suitable for active uses such as playing fields. The term "recreation
land" shall not include areas within the 500 year floodplain, power
line or pipeline rights-of-way, quarries, road rights-of-way, buffer zones,
stormwater management facilities areas characterized by wetlands,
hydric soils, slopes in excess of 5% or woodlands.
RECREATION, PRIVATE OR COMMERCIAL — Leisure time activities
that are only open to members, guests or some specific groups or that
are principally operated for commercial purposes.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR UNIT — A vehicle or piece of equipment,
whether self-powered or designed to be pulled or carried, intended
primarily for leisure time or recreational use. Recreational vehicles
include travel trailers, truck-mounted campers, motor homes, folding
tent campers and automobiles, buses or trucks adapted for vacation
use, snowmobiles, mini-bikes, all-terrain vehicles, go-cart, boat trailers,
and other vehicles not suitable for daily conventional family
transportation on Township roads, streets and highways.
RECYCLING COLLECTION OR TRANSFER CENTER — A lot, parcel,
tract, building, structure or part thereof designed, maintained and used
for the collection, separation and transfer of recyclable items.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood
elevation, plus a freeboard safety factor of 2 1/2 feet.
REPAIR SHOP — A business enterprise which primarily engages in
the repair of consumer goods such as televisions, radios, refrigerators,
washers, dryers, watches, etc.
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar
writing mad by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a
solicitor to any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose
of assisting the recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision
or determination. All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and
advisory only and shall not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer,
body or agency, nor shall any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used,
received or considered by the body, board, officer or agency rendering
a determination or decision shall be made available for inspection to
the applicant and all other parties to any proceeding upon request, and
copies thereof shall be provided at cost of reproduction.
RESEARCH FACILITY — A facility designed, maintained and used for
the discovery of new and the refinement of known substances,
processes, products, theories and ideas.
is performed under a bond, contract and specifications which
substantially provide for and require reclamation of the area
affected in the manner provided by the Noncoal Surface Mining
Conservation and Reclamation Act of 1984, 52 P.S., § 3301 et seq.,
as subsequently amended from time to time.
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1179
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD —
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — An establishment where patrons are served
food, soft drinks, ice cream and similar confections for consumption off
the premises or in automobiles parked upon the premises regardless
of whether or not in addition thereto seats or accommodations are
provided for the patrons.
RESTAURANT, STANDARD —
RETAIL STORE — A business enterprise which primarily engages in
the retail sale of consumer goods such as wearing apparel, antiques,
books, beverages, confections, drugs, dry goods, flowers, food stuffs,
gifts, garden supplies, groceries, hardware supplies, household goods,
jewelry, paint, periodicals, tobacco, etc.
RIFLE, SHOOTING AND TARGET RANGES — A parcel of land used for
the purpose of discharging firearms at fixed targets, moving targets or
flying targets (i.e., clay pigeons) which conforms to the construction
requirements set forth in Article XI.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land condemned or dedicated to and accepted by
a municipality for street or roadway purposes and for the installation
An establishment that sells ready-to-consume food or drink that
routinely involves the consumption of at least a portion of such
food on the premises and that does not meet the definition of
a "standard restaurant." This term shall also include a use that
primarily involves off-premises delivery of ready-to-eat food, other
than a catering business.
(1)
A fast food restaurant may include the accessory sale of alcoholic
beverages; however, if such sale is a primary or substantial portion
of the total trade, the requirements of a "tavern" must be met.
(2)
If a primary or substantial portion of the total trade is in admission
charges for entertainment and the use has a capacity of more
than 250 persons for such entertainment, the requirements for a
"nightclub" shall be met.
(3)
An establishment that serves ready-to-consume food or drink for
compensation in which the clear majority of sales involve the
following: the customers order their food while seated inside a
building from a server and then the food is delivered to their table
for consumption.
(1)
A standard restaurant may include the accessory sale of alcoholic
beverages; however, is such sale is a primary or substantial portion
of the total trade, the requirements of a "tavern" must be met.
(2)
If a primary or substantial portion of the total trade is in admission
charges for entertainment and the use has a capacity of more
than 250 persons for such entertainment, the requirements for a
"nightclub" shall be met.
(3)
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1180
of public utilities. The term "right-of-way" shall include the ultimate or
future right-of-way.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, EXISTING — The line separating a lot from the area
designated for a street right-of-way.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, ULTIMATE — The line separating a lot from the area
designed for the ultimate proposed or future right-of-way.
RUNWAY — An area designed, maintained and used for the landing and
taking off of airplanes, jets and similar aircraft.
RUNWAY LARGER THAN UTILITY VISUAL APPROACH SURFACE
ZONE — That area established beneath the visual approach surface
with the inner edge thereof coinciding with the width of the primary
surface and is 500 feet wide, expanding outward uniformly to a width
of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary
surface. The center line of the runway larger than utility visual
approach surface zone is the continuation of the center line of the
runway.
RUNWAY LARGER THAN UTILITY WITH A VISIBILITY MINIMUM AS
LOW AS 3/4 OF A MILE NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT APPROACH
SURFACE ZONE — That area established beneath the nonprecision
instrument approach surface with the inner edge thereof coinciding
with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide expanding
outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of
10,000 feet from the primary surface. The center line of the runway
larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as 3/4 of a mile
nonprecision instrument approach surface zone is the continuation of
the center line of the runway.
RUNWAY LARGER THAN UTILITY WITH A VISIBILITY MINIMUM
GREATER THAN 3/4 OF A MILE NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT
APPROACH SURFACE ZONE — That area established beneath the
nonprecision instrument approach surface with the inner edge thereof
coinciding with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide,
expanding outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal
distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. The center line of the
runway larger than utility with a visibility greater than 3/4 of a mile
nonprecision instrument approach surface zone is the continuation of
the center line of the runway.
SALVAGE YARD — See "junkyard."
SANITARY LANDFILL — A tract, parcel or lot used for the disposal
of garbage, refuse or ashes by depositing them in layers of controlled
depth and width in trenches or depressions and covering each layer
promptly on all sides with a compact layer of clear earth and other
inorganic material of sufficient thickness to exclude rodents and to
prevent the escape of odors or outbreak of fires.
SATELLITE EARTH STATION DISH — A device incorporating a
reflective surface that is solid, open mesh or bar configured, as in the
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1181
shape of a shallow dish cone, horn or cornucopia and is used to transmit
or receive radio or other electro-magnetic waves between terrestrially
and orbitally based systems. The definition "satellite dish antenna" shall
include, but shall not be limited to, satellite earth stations, television
receives only (TVROS) and satellite microwave antennas.
SCHOOL — A building or part thereof maintained for the purpose of
offering instruction, or in which classes are conducted, whether or not
for a consideration or tuition, to five or more pupils at one and the same
time, or to 25 or more pupils during any school year, the purpose of
which is to educate an individual generally or specially or to prepare
an individual for more advanced study, and shall include all schools
engaged in such education, whether private, public or parochial. The
term "school" shall not include any private trade schools, private
business schools, private correspondence schools, private music
schools, private dance schools, private art schools, private dramatic
art schools, private schools of charm or poise, private driver training
schools or any type of private school which is nonacademic in character.
SCREENING — The formation of a visual or acoustical barrier using
such materials as dense evergreen shrubbery or solid fencing of
durable wood or masonry construction.
SERVICE STORE — A business enterprise which primarily engages in
the provision of services such as sewing, tailoring, dry cleaning, etc.
SETBACK — The distance between a use, building or structure and a
lot boundary or right-of-way line, whichever is less.
SETBACK LINE — A line designating the minimum setback from a
particular lot line.
SEWER — A public or private utility system designed to collect,
centrally treat and dispose of sewage from customers in compliance
with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
Regulations or regulations of the Township, whichever is more
stringent.[Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
SHOPPING CENTER — A land development situate on a parcel or
parcels which contain retail stores and associated uses.
CENTRALIZED SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A public or private
utility system designed to collect, centrally treat and dispose of
sewage from more than one customer in compliance with
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Regulations
or regulations of the Township, whichever is more stringent.
(1)
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — An onlot septic tank
disposal system generally providing for the disposal of effluent
for only one building or a group of buildings on a single lot and
provided in compliance with the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection Regulations or regulations of the
Township, whichever is more stringent.
(2)
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1182
SHOPPING MALL — See "shopping center."
SIGHT TRIANGLE — See "clear sight triangle."
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof, or any
device attached, painted or represented directly or indirectly on or
in a structure or other outdoor surface that shall display or include
any letter, word, insignia or representation used as, or which is in
the nature of, an advertisement, announcement, visual communication,
direction, or is designed to bring the subject to the attention of the
public. The term "sign" shall not include the flag of any public, quasipublic,
civic, charitable or religious group, and shall not include
cornerstones which contain historical data, such as year of
construction.
SIGN DISPLAY AREA — The two-dimensional area included on one
side of a sign, which includes the frame or edge of the sign, if any.
For measurement purposes, the sign display area shall be deemed
the smallest two-dimensional square, rectangle, triangle, circle or
combination thereof which will encompass the entire side of the sign.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING — A building or structure
having only one dwelling unit from ground to roof, two points of
independent outside access, at least two other dwelling units built in
conjunction therewith and any portion of one or two unpierced party
walls adjoining an adjacent dwelling. The term "single-family attached
dwelling" shall include row homes and townhouses.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling unit on a
permanent foundation occupied as a residence for one family, which
does not have a vertical wall in common with another building.
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMI-DETACHED DWELLING — A building or
structure having only one dwelling unit from ground to roof and only
one wall in common with another dwelling unit.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste including, but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous waste, including solid liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous materials. The term "solid waste" does not include
coal ash or drill cuttings.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection,
dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of solid wastes into or on the land
or water in a manner that the solid waste or constituent of the solid
waste enters the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged
to the waters of the municipality.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AREA OR FACILITY — A lot, parcel or tract of
land including but not limited to a sanitary landfill where garbage, trash
or junk is disposed of or is processed or recycled for disposal or reuse.
Such use shall not include the disposal or processing of hazardous or
radioactive materials.
SOLID WASTE STORAGE — The containment of any waste on a
temporary basis in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1183
waste. The containment of any waste in excess of one year constitutes
disposal.
SOLID WASTE TRANSFER AREA — A place where solid waste is
transferred from one vehicle to another vehicle or to a rail car for the
purpose of transport to a solid waste disposal area or facility.
SOLID WASTE TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process,
including neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical,
biological, character or composition of any waste so as to neutralize
such waste or so as to render such waste nonhazardous, safer for
transport, suitable for recovery, suitable for storage, or reduced in
volume. The term "solid waste treatment" includes any activity or
processing designed to change the physical form or chemical
composition of waste so as to render it neutral or nonhazardous.
SPECIAL CARE RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY — A residential facility
designed, maintained and used for congregate housing, independent
dwelling units, skilled care facilities, or personal care facilities which
serves qualified persons. These facilities may be designed to be
maintained and used for the twenty-four-hour provision of care and
treatment by a supervisory staff to residents who are physically or
mentally disabled, infirm or of old age, or who are experiencing family
problems, provided that said facility is affiliated with a health care
provider or a nonprofit entity licensed or certified by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the faculty serves six or more
residents at any one time.[Amended 7-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2494;
1-11-2016 by Ord. No. 3039]
CONGREGATE HOUSING — Detached, semi detached, attached
and multifamily dwellings in which each group of personal living
units is associated with one or more common units designed for the
exclusive benefit of the group.
(1)
INDEPENDENT DWELLING UNITS — Single-family detached
dwellings, single-family semidetached dwellings, single-family
attached dwellings, and single-family units in multifamily
dwellings. Each individual dwelling unit shall contain complete
kitchen, toilet, and bathing facilities, and shall have at least one
outside window.
(2)
PERSONAL CARE FACILITIES — Premises, or a portion thereof,
in which food, shelter and personal assistance or supervision are
provided for a period exceeding 24 consecutive hours, for residents
requiring supervision and assistance in such manners as dressing,
bathing, diet or medication prescribed for self-administration, but
not requiring hospitalization or skilled nursing care.
(3)
QUALIFIED PERSON —
(a) A person 55 years of age or older.
(b) A mentally or physically disabled or handicapped person.
(4)
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1184
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
requiring prior approval and determination by the Zoning Hearing
Board that the use complies with the standards as set forth in the
zoning ordinance.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
STADIUM — A building, structure or part thereof, whether or not
completely enclosed, primarily used for the viewing and playing of
sporting events or public assemblies.
STORAGE YARDS AND BUILDINGS — A building or yard used for the
storing of goods or materials.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Drainage runoff from the surface of the
land resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORY — The part of a structure included between any floor and the
floor or roof immediately above it.
A member of the administrative staff of the elderly or
handicapped community.
(c)
The spouse of any one of the above persons if living with such
person.
(d)
(e) The adult sibling of any person defined in sections above.
The spouse widow(er) or adult-sibling of a person who formerly
resided in the community as a qualified person under
definitions for "congregate housing" or "independent dwelling
units" of this subsection, provided that such spouse, widow(er)
or sibling resided with the former elderly or handicapped
resident of the community immediately before the time they
ceased to reside in the community.
(f)
SKILLED CARE FACILITIES — Premises, or a portion thereof, used
to house and care for residents or former residents requiring
hospitalization, skilled or continuous nursing care, or any
combination thereof, for periods exceeding seven consecutive days.
(5)
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast below the top of the areola.
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely or opaquely covered.
(2)
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitalia, pubic region,
buttock or female breast(s).
(3)
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1185
STREET — A public thoroughfare which, throughout its entire length,
has been or will be dedicated or added to the public for public uses
and includes but is not limited to roads, alleys, avenues, boulevards,
lanes, courts and highways and all ultimate rights-of-way having a
width greater than 24 feet.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — A line which marks the existing or
ultimate street right-of-way.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object, including a building,
constructed or erected on or in the ground or water or upon another
structure or building and having an ascertainable stationary location.
The term "structure" shall not include walks, sidewalks or driveways,
but shall include signs.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or
lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of
any land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
ARTERIAL STREET — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
definition and methods of determination shall be used when
defining or identifying an arterial street.
(1)
COLLECTOR STREET — Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation definition and methods of determination shall be
used when defining or identifying a collector street.
(2)
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of State or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1186
SUPPORT INFRASTRUCTURE — A building, structure or part thereof,
or a lot, parcel or tract of land used for local government services
and services provided by PUC (Public Utility Commission) regulated
entities. The phrase "support infrastructure" includes, but is not limited
to sewers, water lines, bus stops, bus shelters with or without
advertising signs as approved individually by the Board of
Commissioners, train stops, stormwater sewer facilities, etc.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — Any artificially constructed body of
water and any lake or pond maintained by an individual for bathing
by the members of the household and guests, located on a lot as an
accessory use to the residence. A wading pool, with a depth of less
than 18 inches shall not be deemed as a swimming pool. A portable
pool, located above ground level, with an area of less than 125 square
feet and a water depth of less than three feet, temporary in character
and constructed of a material other than concrete or masonry, capable
of being moved from one place to another, shall not be deemed a
swimming pool.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC OR COMMERCIAL — Any artificially
constructed pool or any lake or pond maintained by an association or
public agency for the use of association members and guests or the
general public either for a fee or for free. A wading pool owned by
the association or public agency, with a depth of less than 18 inches
shall not be deemed as a swimming pool. A portable pool owned by
the association or public agency, located above ground level, with an
area of less than 125 square feet and a water depth of less than three
feet, temporary in character and constructed of a material other than
concrete or masonry, capable of being moved from one place to another,
shall not be deemed a swimming pool.
TAVERN — A commercial establishment or premises, whether or not
licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which regularly serves
alcohol, potable distilled spirits, liquor, denatured alcohol, wine, malt
or brewed beverages or whiskey, and where the sale of such alcoholic
beverages is a primary or substantial portion of the total trade. The sale
of food may also occur.
TEMPORARY JOB SITE OFFICE/SALES TRAILER — Any portable
structure, whether built on a chassis used or suitable for temporary
construction storage and/or sales office or not, remaining in the same
location for a period of more than 21 calendar days.
TEMPORARY/SEASONAL/STORABLE ABOVEGROUND POOLS —
Those pools regulated under the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code, as amended, which are aboveground, nonpermanent pools,
inflatable or otherwise, that are constructed to be disassembled and
reassembled to their original integrity on a seasonal (five months or
less) basis.[Added 4-11-2011 by Ord. No. 2857]
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure."
(2)
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1187
TEMPORARY UTILITY TRAILER/STORAGE CONTAINER — Any
portable structure whether built on a chassis used or suitable for
storage purposes or not, which remains in the same location for a
period of more than 21 calendar days.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily
for the purpose of supporting one or ore antennae for telephone, radio
and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guyed towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio
and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier
towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures and
the like. The term includes the structure and any support
thereto.[Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
TOWNHOUSES — See "single-family attached dwelling."
TRADE SHOP — A building, structure or part thereof used for the
exchange of chattels for specified consideration or other chattels of
equal value.
TRANSIENT — Any visitor or person who owns, rents, or uses a lodging
or dwelling unit, or portion thereof, for less than 30 days and whose
permanent address for legal purposes is not the lodging or dwelling
unit occupied by the visitor. This definition shall not apply to nonpaying
guests of the family occupying the unit.[Added 1-10-2005 by Ord. No.
2530]
TRANSITIONAL SURFACE — A surface extending outward at a 90°
angle to the runway center line with the runway center line extended
at a slope of seven feet horizontal for each foot vertical from the
sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect
the horizontal and conical surfaces. With respect to precision approach
surfaces, transition surfaces project through (and beyond) the limits
of the conical surface, extending a distance of 5,000 feet measured
horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at 90° angles to
the extended runway center line.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACE ZONE — A zone consisting of the areas
beneath the transitional surfaces. This zone beings at the sides of and
at the same elevation as the primary surface and approach surface
extending seven feet horizontal for each foot vertical and extending to
a height of 100 feet above the airport elevation and extending to the
intersection with the conical surface.
TURBINE HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the
tower foundation to the highest point of the turbine rotor plane.[Added
9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
USE — Includes the phrases "arranged", "designed" and "intended to
be used" and shall mean a specific purpose for which land, buildings or
structures are designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained or
any activity, occupation, business or operation which may be conducted
at a given location.
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1188
UTILITY — Equipment or facilities for producing, generating,
transmitting, distributing or furnishing natural or artificial gas,
electricity or steam for the production of light, heat or power to or for
the public for compensation; diverting, developing, pumping, pounding
and distributing or furnishing water to or for the public for
compensation; transporting passengers or property as a common
carrier; equipment or facilities for use as a canal, turnpike, tunnel,
bridge, wharf and the like for the public for compensation; transporting
or conveying natural of artificial gas, crude oil, gasoline or petroleum
products, materials for refrigeration or oxygen or nitrogen or other
fluid substance by pipeline or conduit for the public for compensation;
conveying or transmitting messages or communications by telephone
or telegraph or domestic public land mobile radio service including,
but not limited to, point-to-point microwave radio service for the public
for compensation; and sewage collection treatment or disposal for the
public for compensation.
UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway designed and used by propeller-driven
aircraft of 12,500 pounds gross weight or less.
UTILITY RUNWAY NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT APPROACH
SURFACE ZONE — That area established beneath the nonprecision
instrument approach surface with the inner edge thereof coinciding
with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide, expanding
outward uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance
of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. The center line of the utility
runway nonprecision instrument approach surface zone is the
continuation of the center line of the runway.
UTILITY RUNWAY VISUAL APPROACH SURFACE ZONE — That area
established beneath visual approach surface with the inner edge
thereof coinciding with the width of the primary surface and is 2,500
feet wide, expanding outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. The center
line of the utility runway visual approach surface zone is the
continuation of the center line of the runway.
VARIANCE — An authorization, from the Zoning Hearing Board to
a legal or equitable property owner, to depart from the literal
requirements of applicable zoning regulations.
VETERINARY OFFICE — Any building or structure or part thereof
used for the medical treatment of animals such as dogs, cat, goats,
rabbits and birds or fowl by a licensed veterinarian, provided that such
building, structure or part thereof does not include outside kennels or
provide accommodations for overnight housing of the animals.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway designed, maintained and used for the
operation of airplanes, jets and similar aircraft using visual approach
procedures.
WALL — A man-made structure, usually of masonry construction, which
permanently or temporarily prohibits or inhibits travel between
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1189
properties or portions of properties or between the street or public
right-of-way and a property.
WALL SIGN — A sign painted upon or attached to a wall. If the sign is
attached to the wall, the sign display area of such sign shall be parallel
to and shall not project more than 15 inches from the wall. A sign on a
window or awning shall also be considered a wall sign.
WAREHOUSE — A building, or any part thereof, used for the storage
of products, merchandise, goods, materials, food stuffs, manufactured
parts or documents for a charge.
WATER[Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578] —
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use
of groundwater and surface water resources within the Township.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and
that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas.169
WIND ROTOR — The blades, plus the hub to which the blades are
attached, that are used to capture wind for the purpose of energy
conversion. The wind rotor is mounted on a pole or tower or other
suitable structure along with other electrical equipment to form a wind
turbine.[Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
WIND TURBINE/WINDMILL — A wind energy conversion system that
converts wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine
generator, and includes the nacelle, wind rotor, tower, and pad
transformer, if any.[Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791]
YARD — A required open space unoccupied and unobstructed by any
structure or portion of a structure from 30 inches above the average
elevation of the final grade upward, provided, however, that fences and
walls may be permitted in any yard subject to height limitations as
hereinafter specified in this chapter.
CENTRAL WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A public or private utility
system designed to transmit potable water from a common source
to customers in compliance with Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection Regulations or the Township regulations,
whichever is more stringent.
(1)
PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY — An onlot water supply system
generally providing for an adequate supply of potable water from
one building or a group of buildings on a single lot and in
compliance with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection Regulations or the Township regulations, whichever is
more stringent.
(2)
169. Editor's Note: The definition of "windmill," which immediately followed this definition, was
repealed 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2791.
§ 27-194 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-194
25:1190
YARD, FRONT — A space between the building line or front main wall
of a building and the front street right-of-way.
YARD, REAR — The space between the rear building restriction line and
the closer of any street, alley, right-of-way or property line.
YARD, SIDE — The space between the side lot line and the nearest side
of a building or nearest side building restriction line of the lot.
ZONING MAP — The official zoning map of Whitehall Township, as
amended.
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer charged with the duty
of enforcing the provision of the zoning ordinance.
ZONING ORDINANCE — Whitehall Township Zoning Ordinance of
1989, as amended [this chapter].
B. Words in the present tense shall include the future tense.
C. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and those in the
plural shall include the singular.
D. Any word, term or phrase used in this chapter, but not specifically
defined herein, shall be given its normal and customary meaning as
found in the most recent edition of Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary.
§ 27-194 RESERVED § 27-194
25:1191

ARTICLE XVII
Adaptive Reuse
[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 3061]
§ 27-195. through § 27-199. (Reserved)
§ 27-199.1. Affordable housing and multifamily housing.
A. Adaptive reuse for affordable housing and multifamily housing shall be
permitted by right in all residential zoning districts. Adaptive reuse is
the process of reusing an old site or building for a purpose other than
that for which it was built or designed. It is the conversion of a principal
building that was originally constructed and used for principal
commercial, institutional, or industrial uses, which may or may not be
considered or designated as blighted pursuant to the Whitehall
Township blight certification provisions, into dwelling units. Adaptive
reuse is not the razing and redeveloping of an entire structure;
however, it may include selective demolition of up to 50% of the existing
structure and reconstruction of these demolished areas and minor
additions, said additions keeping in nature and character with the
original structure. Adaptive reuse shall be limited to a principal
building over 5,000 square feet, in size, the original structure having
existed for a period of 50 years prior to the adoption of this article, or
predating the enactment of the original Whitehall Township Zoning
Ordinance and Map; and that has been vacant, partially vacant or
underutilized in that at least 50% of the structure has remained vacant
for a minimum period of three consecutive years.
B. "Affordable housing" shall be defined as housing that is targeted to
households earning at or below 60% of the Area Median Income (AMI)
for Lehigh County, and with rent and income limits established through
a regulatory agreement with a duration of at least 15 years, which is
recorded in the Lehigh County Recorder of Deed's office. Rent and
income restrictions for households at 60% AMI shall be defined
according to the guidelines of the Federal Low Income Housing Tax
Credit Program, as may be amended. A copy of the regulatory
agreement containing such restrictions shall be submitted to the
Township at the time of application. In the event that the regulatory
agreement is not recorded until construction is complete, a copy of the
recorded document shall be submitted to the Township within 90 days
of issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
C. "Multifamily housing" shall be defined as a group of dwelling units in
one or more buildings that are located on one lot containing separate
living quarters that is designed for occupancy by more than one family
living independently of one another, and containing two or more
dwelling units, with or without independent outside access. Multifamily
housing includes, but is not limited to, townhouses, condominiums and
apartments.
§ 27-195 RESERVED § 27-199.1
25:1193
D. Exterior changes to the building shall be compatible with the current
design of the building and neighborhood. The applicant shall be
required to present artist and/or architectural renderings of the
proposed exterior changes to the structure for review by the Township.
E. The maximum density shall be limited by the existing square footage of
the structures and any allowable additional square footage proposed
and permitted under § 27-199.1, provided that all units meet the
following minimum square footages and provided that all applicable
building codes and standards are met with respect to occupancy and
sleeping areas.
Unit Type
Single Level Units
(square feet) Multilevel Units
1-bedroom 550 650
2-bedroom 700 850
3-bedroom 950 1,000
4-bedroom 1,100 1,200
5-bedroom 1,300 1,400
F. Residential parking. The following parking is permitted in an adaptive
reuse for affordable housing and multifamily housing:
(1) Parking stall width may be reduced to nine feet by 18 feet in size for
on-site parking.
(2) Parking area setbacks from on-site buildings and from surrounding
streets may be reduced, and screening requirements may be
reduced if providing screening is impracticable due to site
configuration and existing nonconformities.
(3) Parking requirements shall be 1.2 parking spaces per unit for
affordable housing and 2.0 parking spaces per unit for multifamily
housing, and each unit shall be assigned a designated parking
space.
(4) The property owner shall use all commercially reasonable efforts to
remove snow from on-site parking spaces within 48 hours of a
snowstorm.
G. An increase in lot coverage and impervious surfaces of up to 10% of
what is existing at time of application on site may be permitted, up to a
maximum total of 80% impervious surface. Existing uses exceeding this
amount will be permitted to remain but shall not increase beyond what
is existing.
H. The application for adaptive re-use for affordable housing and
multifamily housing shall include a site plan prepared by a registered
design professional indicating the lot area, parking proposed, the
§ 27-199.1 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-199.1
25:1194
division of the structure, if proposed, and surrounding uses; and an
elevation drawing.
I. The adaptive reuse of the building must comply with current building
codes and must be reviewed by the Fire Code Official and Township
Engineer for compliance and compatibility.
J. Structure setbacks will be permitted as they currently exist. Any rebuilt
areas shall be rebuilt in the same location or in keeping with existing
setbacks of the existing structure, or in a manner that reduces existing
nonconformities.
K. Building and/or structure height and other existing nonconformities
will be permitted as they currently exist. Any proposed additions shall
not exceed the maximum height of existing remaining buildings.
L. The property owner shall ensure that the leases contain a provision
prohibiting an impact based home occupation.
§ 27-199.1 RESERVED § 27-199.1
25:1195
Appendix
Chapter A28
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 27-199.1 WHITEHALL CODE § 27-199.1
25:1196
ARTICLE I
Adoption of 2005 Code
[Adopted 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2578]
§ A28-1. Adoption.
The "Code of Ordinances, Township of Whitehall," as prepared and
published for the said Township, is hereby adopted as a consolidation,
codification and revision of the ordinances of the Township. Chapters 1
through 27 thereof contain the text of the body of all general administrative
and regulatory ordinances of the Township.
§ A28-2. Citation and effective date.
The codification referred to in § A28-1 of this ordinance shall be known
and cited officially as the "Township of Whitehall Code of Ordinances," and
all future ordinances shall make reference thereto. This ordinance shall
become effective immediately upon publication of notice of final enactment
as required by law.
§ A28-3. Saving clause.
The provisions of the Township of Whitehall Code of Ordinances, so far as
they are the same as those ordinances and regulations in force immediately
prior to the adoption of said Code, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and regulations and not as a new enactment. The provisions
of the Township of Whitehall Code of Ordinances shall not affect any suit
or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any of the prior
ordinances or regulations.
§ A28-4. Consolidation and revision.
As a necessary part of codification, the following provisions are hereby
consolidated and revised as indicated.170
§ A28-5. New enactments, amendments and repeals.
As a necessary part of codification, the following ordinances are hereby
enacted, amended and repealed as summarized by short title.171
§ A28-6. Adoption of standard codes by reference.
As a necessary part of codification, the following ordinances are hereby
enacted by reference as standard codes summarized by short title.172
170. Editor's Note: The complete list of consolidations and revisions is on file in the Township
offices.
171. Editor's Note: The complete list of new enactments, amendments and repeals is on file in
the Township offices.
172. Editor's Note: The complete list of standard codes adopted by reference is on file in the
Township offices.
§ A28-1 RESERVED § A28-7
25:1197
§ A28-7. Land use amendments.
The Township of Whitehall Code of Ordinances is hereby amended as is
more fully shown in the complete text of Chapters 22 and 27 thereof which
is attached hereto and made part hereof by reference hereto as if fully set
out at length herein, all of which is briefly summarized hereinafter.173
§ A28-8. Procedural changes.
The following minor procedural changes have been made to existing
Township ordinances:
§ A28-9. Amending Code of Ordinances.
The procedure for amending the Code of Ordinances shall include the
citation of the chapter, part, section and subsection to be amended, revised,
repealed or added as follows:
§ A28-10. Responsibility for Code of Ordinances.
It shall be the responsibility of the Township Secretary to maintain an up-todate
certified copy of the Code of Ordinances. This copy shall be the official
copy of the Township of Whitehall Code of Ordinances and shall be available
for public inspection.
§ A28-11. Violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to change, alter or tamper with the Code
of Ordinances in any manner which will intentionally misrepresent the laws
of the Township. Whosoever shall violate this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs or, in
default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 30 days.
A. Grammatical and spelling errors have been corrected where necessary.
B. Minor changes have been made to correct obsolete terms and usages.
C. The penalty provisions have been revised where necessary to comply
with the Pennsylvania Township Code, Vehicle Code, Municipalities
Planning Code and the Local Tax Enabling Act.
A. Amendment or revision — "Chapter _____, Part _____, Section _____,
Subsection _____ is hereby amended [revised] to read as follows . . ."
B. Additions — "Chapter _____, Part _____, Section _____, Subsection _____
is hereby amended by the addition of the following . . ."
C. Repeal — "Chapter _____, Part _____, Section _____, Subsection _____ is
hereby repealed in its entirety."
173. Editor's Note: The complete list of new, revised and repealed provisions is on file in the
Township offices.
§ A28-7 WHITEHALL CODE § A28-12
25:1198
§ A28-12. Severability of parts of codification.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Commissioners that the
chapters, parts, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of
this codification are severable. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase of this Code is declared unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise
invalid by the judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, that
invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining chapters, parts, sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this codification.
§ A28-12 RESERVED § A28-12
25:1199

ARTICLE II
Adoption of 2006 Code
[Adopted 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2780]
§ A28-13. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1502, Clause I, II (53 P.S. § 56502) of the First Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Whitehall, County of Lehigh, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections
by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through
27, together with a Charter and an Appendix, is hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Whitehall,
which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the
Township of Whitehall," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ A28-14. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Board of Commissioners of the Township of Whitehall, and it is the intention
of said Board of Commissioners that each such provision contained within
the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code.
Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code
shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § A28-15 below,
and only new or changed provisions, as described in § A28-18 below, shall
be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided
in § A28-27 below.
§ A28-15. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of Whitehall and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § A28-27 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ A28-16. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by
repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ A28-15 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § A28-15 or the saving
from repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so
§ A28-13 RESERVED § A28-16
25:1201
as to revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of
any effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 12-8-2008.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result there from.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
§ A28-16 WHITEHALL CODE § A28-16
25:1202
§ A28-17. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to
the date given in § A28-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ A28-18. Nonsubstantive changes in previously adopted
ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the legislation and the 2005 Code for
publication as the 2006 Code of Township of Whitehall, no changes in
the meaning or intent of such ordinances have been made. Certain
nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were made in one or more
of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the intention of the Board of
Commissioners that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as
if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
§ A28-19. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ A28-20. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Township.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
§ A28-16 RESERVED § A28-20
25:1203
§ A28-21. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ A28-22. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Commissioners to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to
be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ A28-23. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
legislation adopted by the Board of Commissioners subsequent to the
effective date of this codification which the Board of Commissioners shall
adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be
included therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are
printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements
shall be inserted therein.
§ A28-24. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ A28-20 WHITEHALL CODE § A28-24
25:1204
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ A28-25. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ A28-26. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Commissioners that
this ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ A28-27. Effective Date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after July 13, 2009.
§ A28-24 RESERVED § A28-27
25:1205
Chapter A29
FEES
Legislative Enactments
Chapter A
LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ A28-27 WHITEHALL CODE § A28-27
A29:1206